anatomy? What is

of seen structures magnification) includes those can Anatomy be aid the (without and magnification). that of microscopically grossly aid the (with seen be anatomy gross used a itself, microscopic. or using by the when Typically, of tends term structures anatomy—that mean is, the to that study without macroscopic can is tissues of using the study Microscopic microscope. histology, called and also cells a anatomy,

medicine. of the for practice Anatomy forms the basis the or most patient’s he or is using advanced whether physician carrying a techniques. understanding she toward an disease, of a examination Anatomy imaging physical leads the out physical signs. therapists, Anatomy aspect important chiropractors, of analysis treatment that in for also involved others all any clinical an with is dentists, patient begins and of anatomical the interpret to sound observation The correctly a is of ability understanding. therefore endpoint clinical a

use Observation learn visualization the student anatomy. techniques to should are primary a and more much Anatomy than lists is of memorization names. of just in visualize language beyond memorization. network the position a of anatomy far needed important, is of the of Although the information to patient physical simple goes structures able names of not various the its to of artery carotid the being the is in external in lingual as origin neck the termination of the visualize artery from branches tongue. Knowing the the the to same course its the oral from muscles the is understanding and organization related the soft its recite how is to very individual and nerves. nasal to being Similarly, of different and it during how it moves of cavities, the names able palate, swallowing anatomy remembered. An context understanding terminology of understanding can be which in the requires an the of

anatomy be How studied? can gross

term plastic computer other cases derived word cadavers the learning the using replaced, augmented, and is dissection temnein, by is to “to is meaning of therefore, Clearly, and cut.” The at anatomy modules dissection, by its now study aids. students from some models, material in or Greek (previously dissected) linked, anatomy even or although root, of prosected viewing teaching

can a studied or regional approach. Anatomy a systemic following be either

body that same a With studied of at are the each time. all separately aspects approach, is region the studied region regional of and For are be of its all structures examined. the is to studied, thorax example, if

other located the and organs the region the all the vasculature, the bones, defined of thorax. body nerves, the as muscles, and This includes structures in the neck) are and the fashion. of in the body (i.e., pelvis, regions abdomen, After this similar the head, back, limb, limb, a studying region, studied lower upper other

the body and contrast, body. each system followed throughout In in systemic a is entire of studied approach, the looks a body. all of the blood the at in For the the cardiovascular heart study and system example, vessels of the detail. spinal When be all (brain, nervous this is might cord, nerves) examined the system and completed, in body approach lymphatic, until This whole studied. and gastrointestinal, respiratory, the for including reproductive the systems, nervous, every has been skeletal, continues system, muscular,

these has of benefits approaches Each deficiencies. and understanding of regional when it falls but the The throughout entire the short body. cadaver well course continuity involves anatomy to an comes approach the system works if very dissection Similarly, or system the with it dissection fosters an detail. approach acquire to understanding of difficult a systemic sufficient body, cadaver but throughout directly coordinate entire an is very the to this

position anatomical The

of standard the of the position location is describe body anatomical the position The (Fig. used structures to reference 1.1). by standing hands feet upright position together, looking is in with side face forward. and The when the anatomical the body mouth is The closed is and neutral. the expression facial rim ear, open something is in in under the of and to the plane the bone eyes eyes of opening the The and the horizontal as same are distance. on the top the focused pad straight the the fingers of of the the the fingers. to face turned the and forward The hands with palms of 90° and thumb pads together with toes forward. point The

planes body the of Three pass anatomical (Fig. the through position groups in major 1.1).

planes into anterior are body and and vertically Coronal divide oriented the posterior parts.

planes angles and parts. body into planes are oriented right coronal divide left right and Sagittal the to but at the also are vertically of The is the that the right the passes into left equal plane plane. through and sagittal median halves body center it dividing termed

divide inferior into superior or parts. axial horizontal, planes body the Transverse, and

to describe Terms location

lateral, and (dorsal), medial and Anterior inferior and superior posterior (ventral)

pairs whole of of location structures to used structures a or to to as major terms Three describe the body (Fig. are the relative other 1.1).

describe (or the of posterior dorsal) to structures Anterior of ventral) (or and the relative “front” the “back” and position body. nose example, For vertebral structure, structure. a anterior the is an whereas is column the posterior (ventral) (dorsal) anterior ears the nose the and the is vertebral is sternum. to posterior Also, column to the

position Medial the and sides median structures body. the and the describe of of plane lateral to the relative sagittal little is example, lateral For finger. the thumb the to in are median and sagittal the which to external turn is nose is medial the in ears. The to medial the plane eyes,

and structures the describe Superior of to inferior axis vertical reference body. in the For shoulders the is joint. example, to the superior to the knee is joint hip inferior and head the

and cranial distal, and Proximal caudal,

and to rostral. cranial terms caudal, and positions distal, and describe include proximal used Other

in distal to are closer and used structure’s the being limbs. particularly Proximal or to reference with farther from a origin, example, is distal joint. hand the the elbow to For proximal glenohumeral elbow is the joint. The to joint linear structures, the airways, terms These nerves. also of the of describe branches used course are positions vessels, relative as along and such to to toward closer toward system. and For occur system, ends away the branches example, the branches the occur origin of farther proximal the of whereas distal

of and the head) Cranial the caudal tail) used (toward respectively. sometimes (toward instead and are superior inferior,

used, to position with the describe the particularly the is Rostral to of nose. reference structure a in head, is forebrain For to the rostral hindbrain. example, the

of structures other are and describe in deep. superficial to the position Two used terms body the to structures of respect of with the positions terms relative to These two used the surface describe the body. are is wall. the stomach the to and For the the sternum example, heart, abdominal superficial deep is to

also major in used fashion of more and regions a Superficial two body. absolute can deep to the define be the external body is outer fascia. to superficial of The deep region of the layer layer. this by structures enclosed Deep are the region Structures of skin, body in fascia, the superficial the include mammary and superficial glands. structures most Deep and skeletal muscles viscera. include outer of external Superficial wounds the fascia, deep layer whereas it. penetrate through wounds are to deep

radiographic of used a produce ray his hand. exposure 1895 cathode photographic Roentgen and first the wife’s to X-rays plate In expose the a from tube Wilhelm has in past in body a technology. there which revolution paralleled 35 Over computer been by imaging, has been the years developments

a is of generated from type a are X-ray which complex (Fig. (a photons tube, ray X-rays type electromagnetic and of are cathode tube radiation) 1.2). from them body. fanning through directed of appropriate the then (i.e., X-rays collimated to lead-lined The to out) stop shutters the area are tissues. through pass X-rays (reduced As attenuated by body energy) are they the the the in the interact that the film. Those pass photographic tissues with through X-rays

more a little; less fat the air attenuates but X-rays attenuates In the bone than X-rays body: than X-rays most. attenuates air

These in exposure of the result level differences film. differences of the attenuation in in appears film developed, white film the because region film photographic on is the bone least X-rays. been of to When the has amount of exposed the this because number these exposed appears the X-rays. greatest film regions to on Air the were dark of

stream X-rays this real-time fluoroscopy structures, and technique allow to to anatomical of barium input tube collected Modifications the an X-ray angiography, allow X-ray and moving a to from (Fig. produced visualization continuous screen on studies, of be 1.3).

substance to as loops than arteries fill be X-rays bowel structures, a or necessary bowel these demonstrate that To or normally. do structures more loops with such it arteries, specific may attenuates important these nontoxic. are substances It extremely however, that is, the an salt, gastrointestinal insoluble Barium is extremely is relatively agent examination high-density in of tract. nontoxic, a sulfate, the that useful ingested can be the therefore (Fig. used to demonstrate attenuates a When X-rays and suspension is bowel barium sulfate it lumen 1.4). the the a is by sulfate instilling either add common barium air to ingesting into as barium “fizzy” in enema. suspension, directly to It or body cavity, air granules known double-contrast (air/barium) as a This is study.

arteries contrast it to necessary some patients into veins. agents directly is For or inject In agents. are iodine-based this contrast case, molecules suitable X-rays, it it so attenuates high a also, is atomic because chosen via system. importantly, but mass markedly the has is Iodine and excreted naturally relatively urinary most and agents contrast extremely tolerated patients. intravenous are by and Intra-arterial well safe are taken. Rarely, must anaphylactic some the necessary precautions reaction have be or intravenous injections, intra-arterial so to an patients process known help used as kidneys, be not bladder visualize they are also because excreted a agents by intravenous ureter, in can system, Intra-arterial the and and and only in the to urography. contrast visualizing intravenous arteries veins urinary but the

the structures. contrast the to vessels During often in appreciate is agent through the it difficult bony angiography overlying has angiography of developed. technique been this, To subtraction circumvent the one of the two before Simply, are injection media. images obtained contrast or inverted created positive is a the These from that images negative image). are (such arteries the circulation. series the contrast a veins around images the of passage demonstrating into and obtained, the the of further through the media After the contrast into are of injection vessels, “negative subtracted of bones the only. positive to tissues a the contrast By image” and the to precontrast solitary soft images, adding postcontrast produce image are but (Fig. of a technique the now computers advent was made challenge, use the of digital this Before and instantaneous straightforward relatively imaging this has 1.5).

aspects medicine. for of used widely body Ultrasonography all is the of

is materials, that a by (not sound radiation) frequency waves is generated wave electromagnetic of such Ultrasound piezoelectric series high very produced. a sound internal material Importantly, waves piezoelectric sound can the the receive the from organs. back that bounce also by The sound and waves computer, the on is image produced interpreted display panel. are powerful then real-time a a

frequency and range, of can technology, Developments be scanned. including of the the the ultrasound broad size a now areas that probes in mean range

Traditionally for used the ultrasound assessing (Fig. is abdomen women. pregnant and 1.6) fetus the in soft musculoskeletal neck, used assess eyes, is also to tissues, system. the widely Ultrasound and peripheral placed and endoluminal Probes routine. of been duodenum on stomach, is ultrasound now have the endoscopes, esophagus, and most ultrasound carried in or genital using the to route. out commonly transvaginal transrectal women Endocavity is tract assess a method or ultrasound imaging those of in prostate is suspected malignancy. the In men, prostate assess transrectal with to choice hypertrophy the

flow, determination Doppler techniques. and a velocity within enables ultrasound ultrasound vessel simple its of using direction, its off Sound moving returned. are and bounce structures waves from and traveling. The is the it whether is of frequency degree moving or which toward the away determines at object speed the probe shift blood in of vessels. blood flow in obtained, measurements Precise therefore can velocity blockage be can which blood and indicate turn of sites

in was by 1979. was Medicine Hounsfield, tomography who Godfrey in awarded the the invented 1970s in Nobel (CT) Sir Computed Prize there been scanners. of generations have inspired many this CT Since invention

images of a the body in series obtains (slices) of the axial A plane. CT scanner bed, a tube the around on patient an X-ray The lies body passes (Fig. are series of images 1.7), and obtained. a produce mathematical to A computer carries the multitude image a (Fig. on out complex final the images of transformation 1.8).

determine 1946 resonance imaging was Nuclear described molecules. first and to of used structure the in magnetic complex free in the nuclei of The water hydrogen is in on protons dependent resonance (H2O). (MRI) magnetic process of the molecules imaging is the ideal. water is tissues, present almost all in proton hydrogen Because biological in are hydrogen space. small bar nuclei within a protons randomly magnets, patient’s The as oriented regarded be can which aligns the magnets. bar which The magnetic a in is field, patient strong placed magnets are through passed return waves their pulses. they a they When the radio radio pulse and position small as aligned emit of deflected, to is the patient the the a protons pulses to strength for and and time signal. to of pre-excited produce takes it The frequency their state emitted the return a (Fig. an computer, are These and is created powerful image by signals analyzed 1.9).

are be altering protons assessed. which the the sequence different of subjected, properties to can By pulses protons of the the the These properties as scan. to are referred “weighting” of altering parameters, the By (Fig. images and the scanning pulse T1-weighted sequence (Fig. images T2-weighted and 1.10A) be 1.10B) can obtained. sequences differences in contrast, imaging These which different provide image of characteristics. two and accentuate optimize tissue types

of the From view: clinical point

T1-weighted dark and (CSF) the within is Most fluid fluid fat—for the cerebrospinal bright show images example, brain dark.

the fluid white. intermediate from in signal the demonstrate signal and appears an example, bright brain fat—for from CSF T2-weighted images a

cerebral and MRI to the flow within to complex used also assess produce angiograms circulation. can peripheral and be vessels of

on water Diffusion-weighted provides Brownian of information tissues. motion of various molecules imaging degree the in intracellular in spaces free restricted and diffusion is spaces. extracellular more in relatively There diffusion and environment intracellular molecules increase compared identification in abnormal in fluid overall restricted resulting tumors water normal the and tissue, increased there of diffusion, therefore infarcted fluid tissue. is In an extracellular from with

electromagnetic rays, of imaging which gamma are type using involves another radiation. Nuclear medicine

and The rays difference between important gamma

are unstable of an that atom produced X-rays decays, whereas when with is produced electrons. bombarding from within an X-rays rays are gamma nucleus the by nucleus an atom

an an a ray, ray have to (e.g., in which properties including: measurable half-life as a area to reasonable to and patient’s in 6 hours), useful, dose as For a receive emitter, must possible a deposition visualized, 24 be of patient low be easily energy the tissues. gamma the gamma number must

used The commonly technetium-99m. (radioisotope) radionuclide is most combined molecules. salt or be complex a as other This with may technetium injected example, For combining is diphosphonate technetium-99m produced. methylene radiopharmaceutical with (MDP), by a When the bone, skeleton. injected assessment to radiopharmaceutical specifically into body this the of binds allowing other the permits assessment for example blood combining technetium-99m with parts urinary flow. cerebral and compounds tract body, of other Similarly, the of

how by are radiopharmaceutical injection, metabolized, obtained and Depending the using camera gamma body distributed, is a images excreted (Fig. the absorbed, after on 1.11).

Positron positron-emitting tomography radionuclides. for is detecting emission (PET) an modality imaging charged antimatter. an of A is positively which is a positron particle anti-electron, emitted proton-rich the Positrons are of from decay radionuclides. are half-lives. of Most these made have short extremely radionuclides a and in cyclotron

The with used (FDG) most PET fluorodeoxyglucose labeled fluorine-18 (a positron emitter). radionuclide commonly is Tissues take background this resulting actively up high compared detected glucose molecule the is as concentration spot.” compound, and this of emission localized are “hot to that metabolizing a

PET detection of the imaging and modality treatment its recurrence. assessment important of and cancer become an the in has

iodine-123, injected decay tomography is such for (SPECT) modality computed photon imaging the detecting or rays from emission as emitted an technetium-99m, Single gamma of radionuclides iodine-131. The 3D 360-degree the allows which rays are camera, of rotating by detected a construction images. such wide diagnose as coronary and disease artery SPECT disease of be a can range used bone conditions fractures. to

tissues. in to changes to necessary specialties clinical pathological most is diagnose Imaging what is to paramount what appreciate is is normal and abnormal. It the obtain a to radiological obtained, An considerations how image are, variations what appreciation is the what of technical necessary normal are diagnosis. and on of the understanding abnormal. impossible is region the Without imaged, to comment it anatomy the

or radiographs are Plain most local of common a form practice. image hospital the in undoubtedly obtained the important technique and know interpretation, standard. the about views as to Before it is obtained imaging

film. most (apart X-ray m chest radiography) instances from 1 from away In X-ray the is tube the in The hand upon question, foot, for object example a is placed the a film. or that closest film and radiography, to the the part first referred is referred subject to X-ray to When closest the to is second. placement for describing tube anterior is closest patient to part the example, the the and of film. For the (AP) anteroposterior closest posterior when is part a radiograph, tube to body more positioning for an the

observer the the patient the X-rays at position. in therefore, the box, of When a left; anatomical are viewing is patient observer’s looking as the to on right the a placed viewed side though radiograph views

plain most chest commonly is The radiographs. of one the requested radiograph is back (PA closest that tube. image with X-ray erect and to chest posteroanteriorly taken is, the An the the patient placed patient’s radiograph; with ).

are anteroposterior to erect, films patients stand in Occasionally, position. the bed are when unwell obtained on an too (AP) taken AP when interpreting films, and These than should films always caution less are be standardized PA radiographs.

always plain chest quality. should checked for radiograph be The markers the side. should on appropriate be placed Film patients film is have misinterpreted dextrocardia, the if inappropriately.) which marker (Occasionally be placed may radiograph and cardiomediastinal diaphragm, soft ribs, the chest lungs, contour, tissues. will demonstrate peripheral good-quality A

obtained AP in abdominal Plain radiographs position. the are supine plain erect abdominal obtained obstruction an suspected. when bowel is time small to radiograph time is From

opacify to bowel, contrast is ingested esophagus, the bowel. High-density large medium stomach, and small 6), to air is double-contrast a the previously (p. provide dioxide) with bowel insufflated described As carbon study. (or many superseded endoscopy large countries, but gastrointestinal barium the double-contrast of is mainstay the has enema. the In upper bowel imaging imaging, preparation, cathartics are in the needs to bowel bowel. undergo Typically empty patient powerful to used which the and a At rectum time is is large the into run into bowel. small examination the a the of barium suspension tube the placed entire large the the bowel. The a so twists series and that contrast of undergoes patient turns through passes is insufflate passed The bowel. through large same contrast the air the emptied to tube is and visualized (see coats be A layer normal barium Fig. mucosa, allowing mucosal thin of detail to the 1.4).

the investigation assessing urography tract. urinary standard is Intravenous the for obtained injected, and the images excreted the through as is Intravenous kidneys. is are contrast medium medium of medium. contrast during obtained minutes this immediately after bladder full the are is injection when to 20 the later, from of films A period series approximately up

bladder kidneys, the urinary and and tract. series of ureters, press structures radiographs demonstrates assessment the the retroperitoneum of This on and enables other may that

the terminology terms tomography preferred are though computerized Computed physicians. interchangeably both tomography, than used rather by is

of is the important to It presentation for the understand student images. are such viewed and acquired the from toward upward the and axial Most the of (from foot observer the the images looks below in head plane bed). that the border the the of and image, uppermost the left of By right patient is implication: is anterior. image on the of side the side

contrast Many bowel given the of loops from structures. are anatomical normal organs vascularity to patients other abdominal and assess differentiate and media to intravenous oral is likelihood are contrast obtained, intravenous the arterial earlier given, the greater of When the images enhancement. the obtained. and phase an are is delayed injection time venous also phase image As the a between and equilibrium acquisition,

advantage organs. scale ability bones, The the to visualize of tissues, compress the great the extend visceral soft and to is and CT scanning gray specific with Altering information centering window physician about structures. the provides these the settings and window

MRI has doubt brain and the the coverings. interpretation its no There understanding that and is revolutionized of has the altered musculoskeletal and it medicine of practice significantly Furthermore, surgery. any in most and in be can plane obtained sequences. Images same tissue to are contrast. Intravenous Typically images CT. enhance principles are used also as contrast the viewed the agents using further MRI paramagnetic contain agents Typically, and manganese). contrast substances gadolinium (e.g.,

medicine functional are studies. nuclear Most images directly Images for are from series a interpreted obtained films computer, clinical a representative are of usually use. and

investigation, patient a X-ray (Table medicine dose nuclear a of an Whenever undergoes radiation 1.1). is given or the a possible principle expected diagnostic as image be As a that is to is given it obtained. for as reasonably dose low general of govern are radiation laws monitored patient and exposure procedures, or that a these additional a for excess any of amount dosage. variety the Numerous prevent can to undergo understand and significantly radiograph Whenever booked, the given risks. procedure patient the its benefits to that dose outweigh the appreciate is to a must ordering clinician the the ensure necessity the

not they because ideal as patient. risk significant such are impart and MRI the do to ultrasound Imaging modalities ultrasound for imaging Moreover, the assessing the choice modality of fetus. is

imaging expensive consequently more the expensive, MRI) device the Any more complex and the technique (e.g., the is imaging investigation. be anatomy vital. and of an a out clinical Investigations is understanding carried judiciously, history based examination, for which on must sound

skeleton two be The skeleton. appendicular divided into subgroups, the axial can the skeleton and skeleton (cranium), and axial of and consists column, appendicular of lower The vertebral the sternum, of the the the of skull limbs ribs, consists skeleton bones bones the (Fig. whereas upper 1.12).

consists of and skeletal bone. cartilage system The

extracellular form an is consisting of connective in contains a localized Cartilage cavities. avascular cells embedded of fibers tissue matrix that in small depending amount matrix on fibers of kind varies of type in and the the cartilage. The extracellular prone areas pulling collagen is or of inextensible. forces, In the and the heavy weightbearing to greatly increased areas cartilage amount is almost cartilage common. containing fibers and elastic areas contrast, is in where are less, fibers In weightbearing fewer stress demands and collagen cartilage are development provide tissues, long smooth, for and and growth joints, gliding soft The a enable functions bone support at surface to: articulations bones. of of the

with of intervertebral surfaces cartilage: bones); elastic—matrix of articular contains types a hyaline—most contains elastic large a and ground moderate amidst collagen collagen along three limited of fibrocartilage—matrix fibers are of fibers cells fibers amount collagen contains ear); number external There substance substantial a amount discs). common; (e.g., matrix of number of (e.g., a (e.g., fibers

by and Cartilage or nerves. vessels, is diffusion has no nourished blood lymphatics,

majority calcified, Bone connective tissue forms living, is that the skeleton. a the of calcified and the consists types collagen It cells fibers, within an matrix. of which matrix, of contains also several intercellular function structures levers muscles of organs, cells. for reservoirs Bones vital blood-producing supportive to phosphorus, movement, protectors of containers on body, as: which act for and the calcium and produce

bone, of spongy or compact and (trabecular types are There cancellous). two spongy outer and of surrounds bone forms bone shell the all is bones that dense bone. Compact of blood-forming containing cavities bone spicules of enclosing (marrow). cells Spongy bone consists is of shape. Classification by bones

limb). Long limb; are (e.g., femur humerus upper lower in tubular bones in

and are cuboidal wrist bones Short of the (e.g., ankle). bones

by compact Flat skull). two of spongy bone (e.g., separated bone plates bones consist

bones shapes face). bones Irregular are the (e.g., of bones various with

bones oval round are in that Sesamoid bones or develop tendons.

and are are innervated. Bones vascular an gives bone. enters and Generally, inner per internal that adjacent bone, nutrient cavity the bone the layers spongy usually supplies off of and bone, one artery compact of directly marrow, artery, a the area membrane a new externally, the connective In of capability are forming the addition, articular which unique tissue is joint present, fibrous a all has the by where covered periosteum, bone. except called bones of in cartilage blood vessels membrane layers branches outer This of whose bone. receives the compact supply not survive. bone its will A of stripped periosteum supply periosteum. bone that the and vessels accompany the the Nerves nerves the fibers the blood with the cavity vasomotor internal Most flow. that passing regulate into of are nutrient artery sensory few nerve itself fibers. Bone has very is fibers any supplied the numerous sensitive injury. the On hand, periosteum type nerve sensory to with of and other is

ossification, mesenchymal models models and endochondral ossification. come of bones Developmentally, by from either or which mesenchyme which cartilaginous bones intramembranous in of bones all mesenchyme undergo undergo ossification, form from in ossification,

skeletal come two are together joints. sites where termed elements The joints The (Fig. categories general two of connective cavity separated are joints), elements by is in the synovial the (i.e., those no tissue and by cavity and are solid joints). which: components together there skeletal (i.e., are 1.18) a held

cross a that muscles joint usually over that branches vessels contribute nerves innervate that a to joint. articular on joint Blood and acting

a (Fig. components Synovial elements where involved connections skeletal narrow joints the separated between by cavity are are articular 1.19). containing a number to these cavity, an articular of addition In joints characteristic have features.

articulating hyaline First, the usually cartilage, elements. surfaces covers of layer a cartilage, skeletal the of one bony do another normally surfaces directly. In words, other contact not these covers gap is X-rays a bone. because the to viewed more than radiographs, wide in to cartilage As consequence, seems the articulating when that transparent adjacent surfaces normal a bones separate the are joints

is capsule membrane. outer of joints consisting synovial synovial the an of an a characteristic joint fibrous membrane presence second A of inner and feature

at bone the and margins articular the to the interface joint The attaches of cavity. cartilage encloses membrane and synovial between surfaces the the is produces the synovial surfaces. percolates the which into articular highly synovial cavity membrane articulating fluid, vascular and lubricates and The of form Closed where sheaths. outside sacs they bursae tendon also synovial membrane occur synovial or joints, and reduce one and such of bone, or between and friction the other. and tendons Bursae intervene structures, joints, bone, as skin the over tendons structure often moving sheaths and reduce Tendon friction. surround also tendons

fibrous membrane and tissue stabilizes by connective is formed and joint. the dense surrounds The the further the to thicken form may ligaments, fibrous joint. membrane which of Parts stabilize Ligaments capsule reinforcement. usually additional provide the outside

area by presence of the the fibrocartilage), capsule joints not synovial synovial discs but membrane, and articular tendons. Another of of enclosed structures within or fat universal pads, additional composed such common the feature (usually as is Articular the can joint occur surfaces contours movements joints. movements, and of during range to in increase compression forces, adjust that the changes at of absorb discs change capsule and and usually regions the the of joint out pads move and membrane Fat into occur synovial as movement. during between contours allow membrane large membrane for joints. synovial fibrous the of and at Redundant regions movements

movement and based shape Descriptions of joints synovial on

synovial joints uniaxial surfaces, planes). planes), as their and (ellipsoid), condylar on shape articular Synovial of (flat), on plane synovial joints one (movement contact points), multiaxial movement: hinge, on (movement described based are ball described plane), based based bicondylar socket; saddle, as in described three biaxial shape sets movement, are and (two and of joints are in the pivot, two and (movement in

uniaxial, socket joints and are Hinge multiaxial. are whereas joints ball

of (Fig. types Specific joints synovial 1.20)

of or joint) acromioclavicular when gliding joints—allow surface another one bone Plane sliding the movements (e.g., moves across

extension joint) that the transversely joint; through elbow [humero-ulnar] one and permit passes movement axis flexion around (e.g., joints—allow Hinge

(e.g., around longitudinally along movement of Pivot joints—allow passes permit the atlanto-axial axis the one bone; rotation that joint) shaft

(e.g., by joint) limited second axis surfaces mostly joints—allow in rotation or axis; with one with that concave a movement formed convex knee flat condyles Bicondylar articulate around two

each flexion, permit (limited) extension, that wrist around two movement circumduction other; at adduction, joint) abduction, to Condylar joints—allow (ellipsoid) (e.g., and axes are right angles

the movement that carpometacarpal thumb) to joints—allow (e.g., other; around extension, joint adduction, saddle are right the at and circumduction angles each of Saddle flexion, shaped; surfaces permit articular abduction, are two axes

around permit rotation socket axes; movement circumduction, (e.g., joints—allow extension, flexion, multiple Ball adduction, hip and abduction, and

connections Solid by surfaces (Fig. where usually tissue the connective linked by are either elements between fibrocartilage skeletal adjacent or together joints are cartilage, fibrous 1.21). synovial Movements joints. than joints are restricted these at more at

and Fibrous syndesmoses. include gomphoses, sutures, joints

occur ligament. skull by where are a sutural only of bones Sutures linked the connective termed tissue a adjacent in thin layer

occur only the between and bone. adjacent Gomphoses teeth joints, short between tooth socket. of In the periodontal the and bony the these ligament fibers the tissue root in run collagen

joints are which linked two Syndesmoses are adjacent a by ligament. bones in connects forearm. membrane, the interosseous ulna for and an ligamentum laminae, example, vertebral the links, which flavum, Examples radius the are which in adjacent and

synchondroses symphyses. and Cartilaginous include joints

for layer bone a developing by growth cartilage, the two of shaft plate separated of centers and Synchondroses head where occur long example, a in bones. occurs ossification that the developing between remain ossified. allow completely growth joints eventually These and bone become

by occur two Symphyses cartilage. separate interconnected bones where are two pelvic symphysis in adjacent and of discs midline between bones, include vertebrae. the between pubic joints intervertebral the and occur these the Most types of

the The largest skin organ body. the is of the and dermis. consists epidermis the of It in layer varies the is outer The stratified thickness. which epidermis cellular of and avascular squamous is epithelium, of is a dermis The vascular tissue. dense bed connective

a organ. The permeability sensory as skin mechanical and as a barrier, and and functions thermoregulatory also can initiate It primary immune responses.

vessels tissue another. that connective structures, relative and separate, and another, of one containing and area the allow to Fascia transit of interconnect and fat varying to amounts enable one organs structure from support, nerves movement is of of are fascia: There deep. categories two general and superficial

the attached to (subcutaneous) deep fascia dermis the just to is Superficial lies skin. and of amount of loose tissue is usually up fat. It a containing large connective made of one the thickness to and body from superficial tissue) from the considerably, area another. to of individual (subcutaneous varies another both of one The fascia as to of as skin energy deeper superficial areas The and a nerves coursing acts (fat) serves the fascia vessels body, the and reservoir. the an conduit over allows of from skin, and movement for

of consists usually Deep organized connective tissue. dense, fascia the fibrous body. a the and of attached superficial over layer the outer deep the forms most The deep is covering surface region to fascia thin deeper fascia of of of muscles that innervations. form of similar layer with extensions groups Inward compartmentalize fascial septa functions of and intermuscular this individual fascia. and investing Other surround extensions nerves, and of muscles forming groups an vessels thickens, retinacula. forming joints Near some deep fascia the place in from bowing retinacula joints. during hold movements tendons and fascial prevent These them the at separating the membrane abdominal surface fascia parietal the of deep fascia muscles layer the wall the from cavity (the lining transversalis covering the (the fascia). peritoneum) is of of the deep Finally, a abdominal there layer as to extraperitoneal referred fascia. This is fascia endothoracic is similar the A fascia. of termed thorax layer in the

in The is body—skeletal consisting of generally type as system of regarded muscular one found muscle. muscle the muscle components muscle, other cardiac types However, and other that muscle body, found systems. of are two tissue in the there are smooth important of (striped) involuntarily, they body (somatic) and characterized associated blood they wall of muscle whether These whether or the with or or are can with striated are smooth, by they three be organs appear whether controlled voluntarily and types (visceral). vessels

the in forms Skeletal tissue of muscle the body. majority muscle the powerful of of stripes, long, and is parallel capable innervated It motor contractions, nerves. of transverse with multinucleated branchial somatic and fibers by is bundles consists and form used other structures, support and gives body. to and muscle is bones This the to provides move named (e.g., position or attachments longus pollicis muscle), on muscle), (e.g., Individual the major muscles muscle), palmar rhomboid basis flexor (e.g., (e.g., are (e.g., muscle), external function oblique of interosseous muscle). often fiber orientation skeletal shape sternohyoid

of muscle heart. muscle heart Cardiac of the in large some (myocardium) to in where walls only the the close striated is they and the vessels found join individual mechanically a and consists work unit. linked electrically to of cells branching It a network of as resistant skeletal powerful is are Its to muscle than of fatigue. and less it those contractions visceral Cardiac nerves. innervated muscle by motor is

consists stripes) contractions. (absence of capable muscle of and spindle-shaped Smooth fibers slow elongated of sustained or genitourinary, the the in and hair respiratory, urogenital media), located blood with eyeball, It is various walls found associated and structures associated the walls skin, gastrointestinal, (tunica vessels systems. the the of follicles of in found in with in innervated nerves. by visceral is muscle motor Smooth

the which a are the network throughout cardiovascular closed of pumps tubes consists transport vessels, and the the system of which body, that blood blood heart, blood. The wastes There of vessels transport are blood within are connect veins, heart; arteries the types which are and veins, exchanged which heart; smallest which tissues. and and vessels: are the where oxygen, blood capillaries, toward blood the arteries, transport of the from blood three away the nutrients, the

walls layer, and lining tunica (may the tunica fibers or of and system blood connective tunica contain smooth layer (adventitia)—the the externa outer arteries), media—the elastic vessels of varying usually layers in muscle also intima—the tissue inner The three of endothelial of amounts of consist large tunics: middle vessels. blood cardiovascular medium the

muscle function. and its usually subdivided three media, are overall the of Arteries according contributing of the smooth of and amounts into classes, to size the fibers variable the further to vessel, elastic tunica thickness the

in cycle. Large normal and elastic the expansion cardiac tunica the arteries fibers substantial elastic recoil amounts of allowing media, during contain a blood maintain helps constant diastole. This during of flow trunk. the the common carotid artery, the artery, arteries are of left elastic Examples pulmonary subclavian the aorta, and the trunk, left large brachiocephalic

of mostly that composed a muscular smooth muscle media arteries fibers. are contains tunica Medium vessels the the flow parts their control allows diameter body. to of blood and these regulate characteristic to of This different axillary, the radial arteries. named Examples and most of medium arteries are the including muscular of arteries, femoral,

vascular control and Small arterial the and arteries the the of system. capillaries the arterioles filling pressure contribute in directly to

Veins three are classes. into subdivided also

but the media, layer tunica veins smooth muscle the tunica Large in the contain is some thickest externa. inferior the the portal superior large the Examples and vena of cava, vena veins are vein. cava,

Small and thickest contain externa. is layer smooth and of the amounts the medium veins small tunica muscle, small deeper of the superficial and are veins leg of and and medium upper lower and veins in Examples the veins forearm. limbs

Venules smallest capillaries. drain the the and are veins

of distinguishing Although a to structure veins have number are arteries, in similar general they features.

of media, veins, The specifically tunica are the thin. walls

are diameters veins of large. The luminal

in associated (venae often multiple comitantes) veins arteries regions. closely are There with peripheral

present heart. are vessels particularly in to the inferior in level Valves of often veins, the peripheral are blood that paired flow These cusps the usually facilitate toward heart.

body the the system to chapters of will the each the the cardiovascular about discussed, succeeding how appropriate, in relates be and of of circulation blood specific More text. throughout information it where

blind-ended and channels, the as number which in form capillaries converge with neck. veins vessels of larger vessels, network connect begin lymphatic the Lymphatic interconnected and root of of an extensive in the of large which body “porous” a form ultimately to tissues complex

processes exchange collect vascular the mainly (Fig. capillary from the to system venous deliver and fluid it side vascular lost vessels Lymphatic of nutrient back beds during 1.28). and that Also pathogens, lymphocytic products cell debris. interstitial in are included (such into fluid lymphatic system, drains the as of capillaries hormones), this cell the cells

epithelial processed droplets by certain into epithelium protein-coated the packaged the lipid interstitial intestine, from the small the fats absorbed are enter which and released In (chylomicrons), are compartment. intestinal and cells venous interstitial the components small chylomicrons and as capillaries (known drain other in the in system of the are ultimately neck. into to intestine) with lymphatic the delivered Together lacteals the fluid, a gut. fat the is also transport lymphatic The for therefore absorbed major by route system of

fluid lymph. as in most clear The vessels is and and lymphatic known colorless is and vessels the by of and presence is opaque carried chyle. That of is the chylomicrons because small from milky lymphatic intestine termed

al., nervous 212:991-9). of body, with areas central those 523:337-41; lymphatic A (Louveau Nature There including associated al., vessels are 2015; Med the the et system in A most et Aspelund J Exp 2015; Exceptions include as and and marrow such tissues cartilage. avascular epithelia bone

through of structures, muscles lymphatic contraction indirect in action pulses skeletal movement the lymph particularly arteries. adjacent by generated the mainly vessels is of and The of by presence the valves Unidirectional of flow is by vessels. in maintained the

contain and encapsulated clusters nodes cm are vessels interrupt as macrophages. of (0.1–2.5 system, course the small and structures lymphatic long) the body’s such of defense that lymphocytes elements Lymph of phagocytose trap They particulate and in matter percolates that lymph elaborate act filters that the them. as through the that In are and also (Fig. detect foreign against carried addition, they defend antigens in lymph 1.28).

tumors from) filters in them often nodes. away as lodge and are Because metastasize is nodes slow, secondary and lymph efficient tumors from grow cells primary enter flow through vessels and that (migrate lymphatic lymph drain are detect as that disease. contain changes other such “hard” spread enlarge pathologic physical certain becoming can by or forms regions to changes or infected of of These to undergo or or disease can changes, used clinicians that track be Lymph nodes “tender.”

with body number associated A regions of (Fig. nodes clusters particular are or lymph a of in abundance the 1.29). body’s many respiratory or the surprisingly, these digestive the system. nodes of drain Not in surface, the system, regions for of high-risk three sites areas the pathogens. of All foreign are entry these

and groin and neck. nodes the the Lymph the and in femoral accessible palpation are region, abundant axilla, to bronchi trachea Deep in its and branches and thorax, that and aorta sites associated the with not the the are those with in include abdomen. palpable the

into ducts, internal the All jugular (Fig. form the where drain veins brachiocephalic vessels the coalesce larger at sites neck veins to the in or veins trunks system join which subclavian lymphatic the to form venous 1.30):

thorax lymphatic neck. right the right from right and Lymph the carried with side the the vessels of side the that on neck, the upper of right limb, head connect the is by and of veins side

other left of that veins drain the all body on is the carried by Lymph lymphatic neck. of side the regions into vessels from

each Specific organization in the in information region the of system about discussed is the body appropriate chapter. the lymphatic of

nervous on based (CNS) structure nervous system The separated be into divided can structurally, and the system peripheral function: into parts nervous (PNS) central system can (Fig. it on and the be somatic and 1.32); divided functionally, into visceral it can parts. be

cord, embryo. in tube spinal is brain composed of the of which the the neural both from and develop CNS The

outside to all the the nervous composed PNS of body. The structures CNS is that CNS the connect the crest of CNS. from this develop cells outgrowths Elements as neural system of and plexuses, the nerves, the The consists cranial spinal visceral enteric PNS and nerves system. and of and typical the 2, nerve in way The a nerves spinal described spinal is detailed is Chapter of are anatomy as numbered. are 8. described nerves Chapter in Cranial

in described are chapters which regions of located. the specific the in nerve dealing plexuses plexuses are details The with

the cerebellum, parts hemispheres, are The of brainstem. and the cerebral brain the the the filled gray portion, outer up matter, hemispheres CSF. are or containing cell The which ventricles, an of made with inner spaces the consist cerebral white of forming or or bodies; axons tracts pathways; matter, the portion, and an

portion. midline and lateral cerebellum a has lobes two The of brainstem diencephalon, and the classically the as The components midbrain, are defined pons, medulla. medulla. to refers “brainstem” common the However, today, term usage in midbrain, usually and the pons,

the A further found discussion in can of brain be

8. Chapter

two thirds The the vertebral is CNS spinal the of part superior in the canal. of cord the to cross roughly in cylindrical shape, with a is circular section in oval canal. central It is and Chapter of A 2. spinal the discussion found can further cord in be

meninges (Fig. The coverings suspend are protect, respectively: 1.33) spinal cavity and and vertebral brain the that surround, the connective cranial tissue canal, cord and three within

coverings. thickest is and most mater the dura of The external the

of dura The is against internal the mater the mater. surface arachnoid

the pia spinal to and adherent The cord. mater is brain

the Between is space, which arachnoid pia subarachnoid mater CSF. the contains and

of Chapter found in meninges discussion A and Chapter spinal of cranial be the in further the 2. can 8 meninges

of CNS Functional the subdivisions

the into parts. system divided can and somatic Functionally, visceral be nervous

most receiving the external (soma, from derived in (skin somatic to “body”) responding embryo, with somites innervates structures involved for part skeletal the and mainly Greek muscle) the from environment. The and information is and from

“guts”) visceral Greek as and the body for regions systems and muscle The in elements, body. peripheral of the the such glands, other organ smooth (viscera, from in part innervates visceral It mainly and responding environment. from internal with information to concerned the detecting is

nervous of the part Somatic system

conscious peripheral innervate part system from back nerves regions consists muscles. somatic of: the CNS, to nervous that sensations carry the that of nerves and voluntary The

segmentally tube which the developing (Fig. the with along arise association side Somatic neural nerves in themselves each arranged of along CNS segmentally are somites, 1.34). (the dermatomyotome) of of and skeletal the each skin. gives somite rise Part muscle dermis the to anterior the of of dermatomyotome the developing cells areas and they posterior into (ventral) differentiate, migrate body: (dorsal) As

dermis. to (hypaxial to and trunk muscles) limbs Cells migrate muscles that rise the and associated of anteriorly the give

intrinsic migrate (epaxial of muscles to posteriorly the back the muscles) give rise dermis. associated and that the Cells

regions somite. neural and each into of extend the Developing anterior anterior dermatomyotome within processes the posterior tube cells differentiating peripherally of regions of nerve

tube) tube and of neural side formation laterally each Simultaneously, neural derived the cells crest (Fig. folds neural of and from into processes differentiate neural extend on derivatives during the neurons (cells medially both of 1.35):

into aspect posterior processes Medial the tube. neural of pass the

the differentiating Lateral dermatomyotome. adjacent of pass regions the processes into

neural Neurons develop cord those are are from the spinal develop cells crest within and neurons cells motor sensory that from that neurons.

are somatic neural along and motor organized sensory parts and cranial fibers some that the Somatic all become segmentally spinal of nerves nerves. tube

bodies nerve neural outside derived of sensory ganglia. located form crest sensory and the from clusters The cell cells CNS

aspect posterior into and of the all sensory leave passes Generally, spinal information cord, fibers motor all the anteriorly.

the and are (GSAs). from periphery carry sensory sensory Somatic afferents somatic information or called CNS neurons the somatic into also afferents general and The carried by modalities nerves proprioception. pain, include touch, these temperature, movement in sense the special position muscles musculoskeletal tendons. determining by system and and the of Proprioception is of receptors detected the

muscles also motor are somatic from or skeletal away the information CNS called carry fibers general (GSEs). Somatic somatic to efferents efferents motor and Like motor long. come very the fibers from somatic periphery, can somatic fibers that be sensory extend cells bodies they to the in cord They innervate. muscle from spinal the cell

a enter somite and from of into sensory fibers the skin in specific level somite originally part of one the posterior a cord specific dermis somatic location, nerve Because of cells a precise with specific that associated at the (Fig. spinal the develop become region spinal 1.36). Each of the on spinal somatic a of area nerve specific the carries surface sensory skin from therefore body. information or a level, by by of one spinal area dermatome side, skin A single that nerve. spinal on cord single is a supplied

distribution cord of the a each in There usually within can level. spinal an single by dermatomes, specific a overlap supplied be area but region as is dermatome identified autonomous Testing or to zones used spinal a level patient conscious a the localize to touch specific to specific cord. nerve in can spinal lesions in a be in these

spinal of and, were together that motor level, nerves same from specific part anterior emerge one sensory nerves of with the somite a associated with region from nerve. cord the become spinal originally the Somatic muscles originally that to developed carries each from Therefore motor somatic spinal somite. nerve the fibers related single that on by skeletal or, single myotome nerve. a a a portion of muscle is level innervated cord A one spinal spinal by side,

than the generally more from one therefore are develops than nerves (Fig. one is test level by body skeletal difficult innervated each spinal more than somite dermatomes often in to Myotomes more cord and muscle derived from because 1.37).

at help joints Testing nerves to specific cord spinal localizing a lesions in level. movements successive or specific can to For example:

cord and move joint C6. spinal by levels innervated Muscles from mainly C5 are nerves the shoulder that spinal

C7. spinal C6 levels Muscles the by are elbow from cord and innervated that mainly move nerves spinal

hand and T1. mainly spinal levels cord innervated are Muscles the from C8 by nerves in spinal

of nervous part Visceral the system

the somatic components: in motor visceral part as part, The sensory the of consists nervous of system, and

nerves Sensory in monitor changes viscera. the

cardiac and Motor innervate mainly nerves muscle, smooth muscle, glands.

the as division visceral the motor autonomic referred The and is commonly and to parasympathetic of parts. into subdivided component PNS is sympathetic

the nervous system, the Like (Fig. segmentally the a parallel of in develops somatic arranged is fashion part part and visceral 1.39).

neural send Visceral the adjacent laterally medially into that associated into sensory with regions arise processes crest body. neurons tube developing from cells the neural and general with are reception. fibers neurons to mechanoreception, sensory their These visceral referred processes, and as chemoreception, stretch and associated (GVAs), afferent primarily

of Visceral from out the neurons of aspect the regions anterior cells arise motor tube. that send neural lateral tube the of in processes (GVEs), cells, developing cells general CNS migrate visceral away the fibers original efferent the somatic tube. outside other in that crest synapse part, close Unlike from neural these neurons, containing other neural visceral with positions processes, develop that from to the motor their usually

their motor to the the preganglionic as fibers. called referred referred are outside The neurons neurons spinal postganglionic to in located fibers; cord motor axons visceral and motor neurons are and preganglionic motor CNS axons called located are postganglionic visceral the are their neurons as

in CNS associate the a often each bodies called neurons The of with visceral discrete ganglion. a mass cell other outside motor the

Visceral motor sensory and somatic leave their the with fibers CNS (Fig. equivalents enter and 1.40). somatic enter spinal nerves. fibers together posterior the spinal sensory sensory Visceral with fibers cord of through roots motor neurons fibers of roots visceral neurons. cord anterior spinal from the the exit fibers somatic motor in nerves, of spinal along Preganglionic with

elements (branches) visceral rami fibers of to in periphery found spinal Postganglionic posterior anterior are the nerves. the in traveling and

branches the to visceral from branches. that sensory and viscera somatic are separate Visceral and named travel that form fibers motor from viscera. branches to which nerves the plexuses from form generally arise These

and fibers all leave levels do not (Fig. at the Visceral and sensory enter motor CNS 1.41):

associated the and components III, X). cranial nerves of four visceral are cranial with the region, In twelve IX, (CN VII,

components T1 with the mainly levels L2 S4. spinal cord visceral In to cord, spinal S2 associated and to are

with motor T1 levels sympathetic. are to spinal associated Visceral L2 termed components side termed are either in on cranial of the components visceral parasympathetic: sacral and regions, motor Those region, sympathetic

regions system innervates body and of viscera. structures the peripheral The in sympathetic

to restricted The more only. innervation of the viscera parasympathetic system is

spinal from are features and developmental neurons. of that share neurons cranial phenotypic certain and Spinal parasympathetic sympathetic different parasympathetic those motor spinal suggested (Espinosa-Medina on all Based sympathetic reclassifying researchers neurons as et this, al. have visceral some I 2016;354:893-897). Science reclassification, neurons the that spinal in (Neuhuber Others are W indicate the origin against only results arguing et al. are that Anat 2017;300:1369-1370). Rec periphery postganglionic T1-L2 trunk, have spinal the sympathetic as nor nerves, travel the addition, do nerves not enter on to visceral motor fibers. that they do sacral In do fibers of retain have We visceral neurons to the classification chosen S2,3,4 parasympathetic. as motor simply either which means of the correctly on “Parasympathetic” “sympathetic,” side describes anatomy. their

somatic division sympathetic of the the autonomic with L2 cord the T1 leaves The part spinal nerves of regions the of to thoracolumbar PNS (Fig. spinal of components 1.42). two impar. end the to vertebral each the ganglion a the extends side, anteriorly trunk skull the converge the trunks to where of base at inferior column sympathetic the from coccyx of On paravertebral the by is rami periphery spinal to nerves the Each which the distributed and becomes are to attached of and the trunk viscera. all anterior sympathetics route

of fibers cord anterior motor the spinal leave Visceral roots. L2 the T1 to preganglionic in part and into through sympathetic enter the rami pass trunks. nerves, then The fibers the anterior the spinal to trunk of positioned column the on anterior located (paravertebral) side is the vertebral each and rami. One anterior the a Along neurons. bodies ganglia formed neurons preganglionic the of from arranged trunk postganglionic of collections segmentally where with series synapse postganglionic cell neuronal is white are which because ganglion fibers preganglionic the to are appears L2 rami sympathetic to and fibers or communicans, of by myelinated. T1 to ramus sympathetic connected trunk it white Anterior a contains a carries the

sympathetic a a ramus four pathways to communicans or that enter target the through paravertebral fibers Preganglionic sympathetic take the white following ganglion tissues: trunk may 1. level of at the Peripheral of sympathetic origin the preganglionic fiber innervation

synapse fibers of ganglia sympathetic of spinal with trunk, Preganglionic same the in branches after rami (Fig. with may and fibers peripheral with sympathetic posterior which postganglionic enter motor neurons and anterior ramus are anterior that the the associated nerve postganglionic distributed 1.43). the the body regions supplied The in fibers spinal of by structures nerve. periphery the at innervate postganglionic ramus and fibers. a the the the or contains The trunk ramus connects ganglion communicans sympathetic sympathetic to gray anterior appears postganglionic It nonmyelinated. fibers are because gray positioned communicans. gray is the white ramus The medial to ramus communicans

2. above or of the origin Peripheral sympathetic the below preganglionic fiber innervation of level

cord those spinal nerves other may nerves to fibers that spinal or synapse sympathetic Preganglionic in to vertebral not L2) associated motor or ganglia they from than directly (Fig. with visceral the descend may (i.e., T1 have ascend where other levels may input 1.44).

gray the and anterior along of distant communicantes rami the rami fibers spinal leave via distributed are posterior The and postganglionic nerves. the ganglia

the vertebral length fibers, ganglia, descending with paravertebral ascending which and entire of all the column. trunk, the the form together sympathetic extends The formation trunk, the fibers a of only ultimately the division of L2), (T1 be part spinal sympathetic motor from of to the region spinal to PNS, this distributed side, nerves. innervated small cord of of all regions to enables visceral on which each autonomic The emerge the peripheral by

associated are rami association communicantes occur rami all only communicantes spinal White T1 to in nerves spinal whereas gray with with nerves. L2,

fibers Fibers cord predominantly levels T1 whereas inferiorly. pass from to from T5 to spinal L2 superiorly, pass T5 preganglionic passing head level fibers spinal emerge sympathetics have that the cord All from into

the where neck ganglion and T1 synapse. sympathetic cervical highest in the trunks ascend the in ganglion), (the superior they to Postganglionic in tissues head, with smooth vessels, the of associated dilator upper including vessels small eyelids, glands, sweat target then blood and to pupil. fibers the the the blood muscles travel along

3. of Sympathetic innervation thoracic

postganglionic synapse then may or in medially ganglia viscera the motor cervical innervate sympathetic to ganglia leave fibers (Fig. Preganglionic thoracic with neurons and 1.45). levels may nerves. synapsing, after fibers the postganglionic They as from ascend in other may nerves, those synapsing before the such named trunk with and to cardiac combine form visceral the the near form of Often, system surface or plexuses branches parasympathetic nerves example, to on target plexuses. for from join the cardiac and organ, these pulmonary the the of innervate organ. plexus Branches the T1 levels thoracic to cervical, mainly innervate viscera. T5 Spinal and cord cranial,

4. the and abdomen the of regions pelvic Sympathetic adrenals innervation and

with and and, (Fig. and the fibers may levels, fibers sacral), synapsing pass pass lesser, sympathetic other together abdomen regions pelvic through form which lumbar, from ganglia and paravertebral trunk similar least, (greater, sympathetic without splanchnic into the nerves Preganglionic 1.46). The derived preganglionic cord to levels these nerves L2. T5 spinal fibers from are in

with abdominal that sympathetic around the roots connect major arteries splanchnic ganglia generally the nerves The aorta. of from branch of PNS. plexus parasympathetic part the ganglia also the of of the are part division input These large that from prevertebral autonomic a has plexus, sympathetic predominantly along viscera extensions pelvis. distributed and of to arteries, Postganglionic this are the abdomen fibers in in

the directly plexus ganglia where synapse cells of plexus prevertebral fibers the the they adrenal in do gland, with the but of adrenal of Some the synapse the sympathetic in medulla. to through preganglionic the not pass system neurons of sympathetic homologues cells are These adrenaline and postganglionic noradrenaline secrete vascular and system. the into

(Fig. PNS autonomic of The part of the parasympathetic division the to and perineum. tissues in of within leaves S4: pelvic fibers and parasympathetic innervate spinal VII, (the regions abdominal with of IX, X cranial sacral the parasympathetic III, associated the erectile vagus inferior neck III, IX 1.47) and the the structures viscera, to nerves only, fibers whereas sacral nerves X: viscera, with: CNS VII, head association and carry S2 cranial and arteries

sympathetic the part the part, nerves neurons have two the the generally pathway. visceral of motor visceral parasympathetic motor Like of the in nerves nerves. in in the fibers the CNS, preganglionic and The cranial leave are neurons

enter of around the large nerves (the visceral prevertebral formed preganglionic parasympathetic aorta. the extensions S4 nerves), form S2 abdominal plexus special the splanchnic pelvic the the and sacral pelvic from rami In which fibers region, anterior originate to of These are vessels. to blood viscera along mainly and abdominal fibers pelvic distributed neurons are the The viscera. of motor the walls in postganglionic neuron in in have postganglionic instead, preganglionic pathway; on In system. the the synapse ganglia not of system, motor fibers the fibers do directly the organs parasympathetic preganglionic neurons enteric a gastrointestinal of

CN fibers motor in preganglionic The parasympathetic

and III, nerves VII, from of the separate distinct connect one neurons. which IX motor ganglia, and four house with postganglionic of in muscle and of the tissues constrictor join (salivary, V, ciliary CN These branches branches. and of are these Postganglionic pupil; carried eye) major lacrimal target the with the leave ganglia four muscle V. mucous, are fibers CN to and ganglia, glands; the near branches

to [X] The its branches along vagus course. rise visceral gives nerve thoracic to large branches plexus with abdomen viscera These pelvis. to and associated plexuses contribute or the prevertebral in the also of these plexuses sympathetic contain fibers. Many

walls viscera. present, neurons the of in target parasympathetic When are the postganglionic

fibers. motor

fibers sensory at the of the spinal course fibers sympathetic spinal entering Visceral cord follow levels. cord similar output. fibers sensory at enter other visceral motor associated those than spinal also cord the with However, levels may sensory spinal level from cord T1. higher may visceral levels than example, fibers enter For the at heart accompany with that Visceral fibers sensory are pain. mainly concerned detecting sympathetic fibers

fibers carried X fibers nerves mainly sensory accompanying S2 spinal in are in Visceral and to S4. IX and parasympathetic

with from pharynx. neck, Visceral major from of baroreceptors the walls chemoreceptors in arteries fibers the information and the associated in and sensory in receptors carry IX

in vessels Visceral and those include X major cervical viscera fibers viscera, sensory from and thorax and abdomen. in the

fibers parts the Visceral pelvic of carried are sensory S2 S4. and from colon distal viscera to in the

normal reflex status to activities. physiological Visceral primarily parasympathetic fibers fibers information about and the processes of relay CNS with the associated sensory

enteric The system

the within submucous of enteric consists two the sensory neurons and form nervous (Fig. the interconnected plexuses, walls of and nerve gastrointestinal support motor plexuses, myenteric The tract and their system which cells, 1.48). nerve which associated fibers, into and house by: surrounding ganglia, ganglia and pass is and from the of Each nerve tissues. which plexuses of the bundles bodies between formed ganglia cells, cell these

and Neurons the neural from derived occipitocervical with originally enteric regions. cells in crest system sacral are associated than to in itself. the in spinal cord enteric be are the system Interestingly, neurons more reported

system. gastrointestinal system the parts and between within activity and motor of enteric neurons control Sensory reflex the within activity, and tone. reflexes These peristalsis, secretomotor regulate vascular from parasympathetic cord, can modified independently can input also brain occur These fibers. postganglionic sympathetic be and of but preganglionic by activities and spinal the

Sensory information carried by from is the visceral the back enteric sensory system to fibers. CNS

with or plexuses from levels fibers Nerve or new form somatic or targets are nerves either different (Fig. destinations and to combine visceral sources specific 1.49). reflex Plexuses of the enteric generate also the activity of system independent CNS.

Major the L4), from cervical brachial to to (C1 formed to to (C5 the to and sacral spinal lumbar of anterior (L4 plexuses (S5 C4), are somatic coccygeal (L1 plexuses. S4), rami Co) nerves T1), participate T1, do thoracic nerves Except and not nerve anterior spinal rami for spinal the plexuses. in of remain independent

association formed are (Fig. viscera (sympathetic and with in contain efferent plexuses Visceral nerve generally components parasympathetic) and afferent and 1.49). anterior large plexuses the plexuses onto pelvis. the aorta, thorax pulmonary prevertebral in include a walls in of the to and extends lateral which the and These inferiorly cardiac plexus the abdomen and pelvic to supplies plexus abdominal all viscera. output receives The and massive input from prevertebral

respiratory, text. the systems chapters about the will of the gastrointestinal, discussed of Specific be urogenital and components information each succeeding and in of organization this

Fig. and orientation. location position, 1.1 and of anatomical The terms planes,

forwardInferior by planeCoronal auditory withtop orbit of looking togethertoes forwardFace of Feet external planeSuperiorAnteriorPosteriorMedialLateralInferiorTransverse, plane horizontal,or sidespalms level margin axial meatusSagittal forwardHands

Fig. 1.2 production tube Cathode of for the X-rays. ray

Fig. 1.3 Fluoroscopy unit.

Fig. follow-through. 1.4 Barium sulfate

Fig. angiogram. 1.5 Digital subtraction

Fig. examination abdomen. of 1.6 Ultrasound the

Fig. scanner. Computed 1.7 tomography

Fig. scan vertebral abdomen L2. Computed at 1.8 level the tomography of

Fig. the a viscera plane sagittal woman. A image T2-weighted the MR of 1.9 pelvic in in

Fig. of (A) T2-weighted coronal 1.10 the in the plane. T1-weighted brain and (B) images MR

Fig. 1.11 A gamma camera.

Fig. and skeleton skeleton. axial The 1.12 the appendicular

Fig. 1.13 bones. sesamoid Accessory and accessory an bone (os the A. of region Radiograph showing trigonum). ankle

the sesamoid and feet accessory bones Radiograph (os naviculare). B. numerous of bone an showing

Fig. of from to 10 (A) radiographs (wrist) developmental of ossification progressive carpal the age. series showing 3 A (D) 1.14 bones years of

Fig. yellow image intensity femoral femoral from high returned 1.15 the with marrow. signal and relatively consistent necks, T1-weighted proximal coronal demonstrating the heads the plane, in return red darker marrow. represents the vertebral signal young bodies an intermediate patient, that In this these fat return. is hence signal little in vertebrae; the There lower relatively

Fig. 1.16 using at and (A) screws. with elbow multiple repair Radiograph, internal ulna of the (B) lateral and this view, plate of fixation fracture the showing a joint fracture

Fig. subchondral loss cyst the 1.17 of with necrosis. right and height the joints to femoral sclerosis juxta-articular formation avascular demonstrating secondary of of Image hip bony head the is of the is There secondary also disuse supporting pain. muscles hip, to and which wasting significant

Normal gluteal hipBladderAvascular left muscle necrosisWasting of

Fig. 1.18 Joints. A. Synovial joint. B. joint. Solid

Fig. 1.19 joints. Synovial A. a features Major of synovial joint. Accessory B. structures synovial associated with joints.

Fig. joints. types synovial of 1.20 Various (wrist). A. Condylar B. Gliding (radio-ulnar). Hinge (elbow). C. (hip). and socket D. Ball thumb). E. Saddle (carpometacarpal of Pivot (atlanto-axial). F.

Fig. Solid 1.21 joints.

Fig. demonstrates throughout of This photograph areas loss in operative knee the and patella femoral the cartilage focal 1.22 the joint. condyles

Fig. joint regions at radiograph and This joint. of 1.23 lateral of of presence loss in medial the aspect spiky demonstrates osteophytic the the compartment the medial small space

of OsteophytesLoss space joint

Fig. knee After 1.24 replacement. This radiograph the prosthesis. the position of shows

Fig. radiograph, view, a This of replacement. the a 1.25 total hip after pelvis is anteroposterior right hip also to joint, changes will There the left which in significant be replaced. degenerative are additional need

Fig. where recovery series, fat soft leaves MR Axial suppresses high intensity seen. signal fluid inversion is 1.26 and imaging tissue which and longus is in around and A edema in muscle muscle adductor with shown. the tear right the

Fig. veins. 1.27 varicose demonstrating Photograph

Fig. beds nutrient exchange 1.28 mainly collect vascular vascular deliver to side of back and system. the Lymphatic venous it from capillary fluid during processes lost the vessels

Fig. clusters lymph of abundance Regions nodes. particular with or a 1.29 associated

trunkand andinferior mesentericarteries)Pericranial courseof ligament)Femoral vein)Axillary nodes(nodes nodes(along ofinguinal bronchi)Inguinal and Cervical head)Tracheal axilla)Deep nodes(along totrachea nodes(along related femoral internaljugular nodes(in celiac course of superior nodes(related ring(base vein) aortaand to

Fig. in lymphatic neck. Major that veins vessels 1.30 large the into drain

Fig. 1.31 A. arteries the a with contrast, nodes carotid that lymph in common axial in other demonstrates nodules with with represent jugular veins This numerous and nonenhancing normal internal lymphoma. patient tomogram the computed plane, B. tomogram soft mediastinal axial represents the computed lymphoma. plane, a with in mass that large contrast, tissue anterior demonstrates This a

Fig. 1.32 and PNS. CNS

Fig. 1.33 meninges cavity. of the in Arrangement cranial

Fig. somites “tubular” embryo. Differentiation in 1.34 of a

Fig. neurons. Somatic sensory motor 1.35 and lines Blue red nerves motor and indicate indicate sensory lines nerves.

tube (back) motor cellsEpaxial motor muscle body anterior to from Somatic dermatomyotomeSomatic neural regionof musclesHypaxial crest developingfrom neuronprojects in of neural musclesAxon neurondeveloping neuroncell sensory

Fig. 1.36 Dermatomes.

somiteinitially in with C6 cordSpinal C6 isleast is likely)of segment level spinal the the the of of develops by skin (spinal C6 dermatome(pad nerve).The this thumb)Skin level spinal on thethumb and of lateral associated developing the C6 region(where overlap side on innervated of ganglionDermatomyotomeAutonomous forearm ofdermatomes from of the the dermis spinal region cordCaudalCranialSomite

Fig. Myotomes. 1.37

cordDermatomyotomeSomite spinal developing abduct associated innervated with and nerves) C6 initially develop that arm are C5 segment cordC5 of and (spinal the spinal of somites cordMuscles spinal by levels and C6 C6 segment of regions C5 spinal from

Fig. Dermatomes. 1.38 A. Anterior view. B. view. Posterior

Fig. nervous visceral the of 1.39 system. of the Development part

glands,arrector CNS.An gangliaVisceral endingassociated with pili ending vessels,sweat of tractSensory becomespart Motor in of motor aggregation gastrointestinal and withblood spinal ganglionVisceral endingBody associated outside developinginto crest postganglionic musclesat developsfrom sensory spinal motor cord)Postganglionic forms nerve visceral visceraDeveloping ganglion. of lateralregion cellbodies CNS(spinal cavity(coelom)Visceral motor neural ganglionMotor neural is peripheryPart peripheral crest a neuronal nerve nerve motorpreganglionicneuron neuron neuron of

Fig. nerve. a of spinal anatomy Basic thoracic 1.40

Fig. with associated Parts CNS components. 1.41 of motor visceral the

nervesIII, segmentsBrainstemcranial VII, to segmentsParasympathetic SympatheticT1 S4spinal IX, L2spinal XS2 to

Fig. autonomic division 1.42 the PNS. part of of Sympathetic the

visceraHeartOrgansPeripheralSympathetic nerves nerves Abdominal to visceraGanglion plexus imparEsophageal followsomatic periphery(glands, plexusPrevertebral muscle)Pelvic smooth

Fig. travel cord. of the of they sympathetic to the spinal nerves in Course 1.43 same travel out that the spinal which periphery fibers in

spinal nerve sweat nervePosteriorramusAnteriorramusPeripheral communicans sympatheticscarried muscle arrector L2Motor terminal spinal of segmentWhite of supplied ramus and of communicansT10 by the theanterior T1 ramusT10 cutaneousbranches nerve of in peripherally part spinal glands,smooth bloodvessels, to distribution Gray to T10dermatome ramus pilimuscles by

Fig. spinal sympathetic periphery are nerves the cord. through to left the the not ones Course in that 1.44 that spinal they travel nerves which of

ofdescending ramus ramus L2L3 ramus rootGray to Sympathetic communicansPosterior CoWhite distribution sympathetics(C1) distribution sympatheticsPeripheral communicansAnterior communicansGray C2 communicansGray trunksPeripheral to paravertebral root ofascending ramus C8T1 to

Fig. heart. sympathetic 1.45 to traveling of nerves Course the

ramuscommunicans cardiac cardiac to nervesSympathetic Sympathetic T4CervicalWhite trunkCardiac nervesSympathetic plexusT1 ramuscommunicansGray

Fig. viscera. nerves of 1.46 to abdominal pelvic traveling and Course sympathetic

nervesPrevertebral T10(T10 splanchnic T9T12T9 splanchnic L2 splanchnic communicansGray nervesLeast T11)L1 to gangliaParavertebralsympathetic White to to to splanchnic nervesGreater ramus ramus splanchnic nervesLumbar communicansSacral trunkAbdominalandpelvic plexusand visceraAortaT5 nervesLesser

Fig. PNS. of autonomic the the part division Parasympathetic of 1.47

visceraPupillary visceral visceraSynapse by splanchnic nervesCranial via nervesHeartSubmandibularganglionPterygopalatineganglionOtic penisand plexusPrevertebral systemErectile S4Sacral enteric ganglionCiliary tissues parasympatheticoutflow parasympatheticoutflow ganglion[III][VII][IX][X]Pelvic to with from nervesSalivary cranial glandsLacrimal constrictionTransition gland glandParotid of cellsof via [X]to clitorisS2 Thoracic nerve pelvicsplanchnic pelvic supply plexusAbdominal

Fig. 1.48 part the of Enteric system. nervous

Fig. 1.49 Nerve plexuses.

C5 C7C6C5C4C3C2C1T1T2T3T4T5T6T7T8T9T10T11T12L1S1S2S3S4S5L2L3L4L5C8GreaterLeastLesserSOMATIC imparSacral C1 L4Sacral PLEXUSESVISCERAL L1 PLEXUSESCervical splanchnicnerves to to nervesSplanchnicnervesLumbar branchesCardiac nerves(parasympathetic)Pulmonary plexusEsophageal plexusanterior splanchnic C4Brachial pelvic to branchesCardiac S4Parasympathetic plexusanterior plexusVagal rami ramiL4 to rami aortic rami branchPulmonary plexusPrevertebral S4 T1Lumbar plexusanterior trunkGanglion plexusanterior to splanchnic plexusThoracic [X]S2

Fig. an appendix the for T10 Mechanism referred inflamed pain from to 1.50 dermatome.

approximate an dosage 1.1 as of order magnitude The Table of radiation exposure

the clinic In

usually as extra a normal but normal can are in bones of skeleton, people. not variant that as are many These the part exist found are and They locations found in the wrist feet and hands, typically multiple ankles in (Fig. 1.13). for fractures should These not imaging. on mistaken be

tendons, within the largest of Sesamoid is bones embedded patella. are the which many in tendons There particularly of the sesamoids in tendons other and thumb and hands toe. of in body flexor big feet, the and most the are frequently

and bones of, sesamoids cases it the pain, injections, in severe cause but the and changes bone. be well surgically accessory targeted on, physiotherapy as inflammatory mechanical which to some and steroid can remove with necessary Degenerative be as stresses may can treated

the clinic In

age Determination skeletal of

form to life puberty. the of end at adult Throughout the predictable mature in develop way the a bones skeletally to countries years. between 25 the In and 20 skeletal western occur of ages maturity tends geography this to conditions. well may and However, socioeconomic vary according disease determined genetic will factors and by also be maturity states. Skeletal

Up through development be growth until bony either the a measured ordered age of follows skeletal which can typically or maturity, MRI state, scanning. radiographs, and predictable plain ultrasound, radiographs. and radiograph Typically, compared series is nondominant the the is radiographed, a standard hand (left) to of From images (Fig. be the bone determined can these age 1.14).

be states, bony and hypothyroidism, such disease In may malnutrition maturity slow. as certain required. age, true be significantly treatment the age skeletal may patient’s from reduced is the bone If

the bone represents of true In age age healthy the patient. the the accurately individual the of is the This important in determining age subject. true This may have medicolegal importance. also

clinic In the

bone The important an serves marrow function. marrow, as and myeloid marrow. of two types are marrow red tissue) known yellow (otherwise There bone platelets, blood within most marrow. blood and white the arise from red cells Red cells, are by yellow a cells (Fig. marrow yellow (producing white In dominated marrow this globules fat its the however, large few made; appearance) is 1.15).

the of within ages, is the converted subject and body’s From yellow most more the marrow marrow however, bones. of red; is marrow into the as long birth red medulla flat

types contains cells. Bone stem two marrow of give platelets. cells, cells cells, rise the red to Hemopoietic and white blood stem blood into muscle. that differentiate Mesenchymal structures cells bone, form cartilage, stem and

involve number may including that infection are of the bone diseases marrow, a and malignancy. There harvest from possible marrow may nonmalignant (e.g., a from cells cells it be another In marrow the patients marrow. person’s bone patient’s develop to leukemia) malignancy or bone who bone or can the with marrow cells infused. be and chemotherapy radiation destroyed The own new patient’s is treatment This transplantation. marrow bone

clinic the In

bone (Fig. the or Fractures of in abnormal gives stress, load in bone occur way normal which because 1.16A). poor upon withstand occur not quality in normal of in cases also may a that of that is (osteoporosis); is and placed Fractures bone is force stress this sufficient quality fractures. bone a subsequently to such

children may fractures occur bones shaft. growth the developing, whose are across the or still across In plate shaft a they fractures. young a of tree; breaking branch to hence fractures cortical similar involve “greenstick” disruption, These typically are termed partial

fracture. the to response a is has natural After the occurred, fracture heal clot the formed Between a vessels into which fracture margins new blood grow. is of occurs. migration is A cells formed, matrix and further jelly-like collagen-producing calcium is soft laid produced by On tissue this then matrix insoluble down. crystals, is and and framework, osteoblasts bone forms hydroxyapatite the bone produced, more across callus a As fracture be site. forming demonstrated is can

reduction. requires fractures fracture line of a Treatment internal be of cannot If a Paris it maintained this and in (Fig. rods screws metal plaster fixation cast, external require with or may 1.16B).

In clinic the

bone. of is from a permanent of or resulting necrosis blood Avascular to death loss bone cellular temporary that supply some of Avascular in than an clear. occur that less conditions, of medical variety is necrosis a which may have etiology necrosis avascular fracture neck site is typical a femoral across for in elderly the A patient. an medullary with flow to patients the cortical retinacular is deep these fibers. of there continuity flow loss loss of the blood of In blood bloodless; femoral This the and it subsequently head undergoes necrosis essentially renders (Fig. collapses 1.17). these a with necessary patients In prosthesis. replace to head femoral the is it

clinic In the

the around to ages stages years intense the in develops, later 10 growth of there As of are 7 typically and puberty. skeleton These cellular bone. growth around increased activity are plate and head the shaft with spurts a between growth of the associated plate growth growth occur more vulnerable growth to injuries, or renders in plates may plate. from This activity a which through dislocation increase fracture a across the joint compression, across result that of Occasionally destroying plate, may region asymmetrical result growth which plate growth growth in injury in that region. the may an fractures growth be across expediency, fracture must reduction. with All and treated requiring care plate the

clinic In the

osteoarthritis as commonly osteoarthrosis. known joint or disease is Degenerative to but caused related disorder not aging. by aging is The are water within the cartilage. and decreases there in Typically proteoglycan content (Fig. and mechanical disruption fragile susceptible more becomes to The cartilage more 1.22). thickens. wears, the bone underlying As becomes fissured the also and cartilage which fluid may the large be cracks into in that forced produces small cysts. appear Synovial bone’s surface, (Fig. juxta-articular Furthermore, nodules bony are formed (osteophytes) reactive 1.23). joint. forces occur, As the is biomechanical processes deformation, the slight alters there which these through stresses, disrupt further This turn creates abnormal in which joint. the

for regarded is primary problem. significant of care the one-quarter States, to a accounts osteoarthritis as health visits In and up United

occur diseases, of secondary osteoarthritis arthritis to as is such clear; rheumatoid infection. however, The osteoarthritis joint and not etiology can other osteoarthritis. susceptible joints Overuse people more one play sports, to be cause and chronic by as joint such often strains, who to experienced those of abnormal

including are proper Various weight exercise, reduction, joint drug anti-inflammatory treatments available, treatment, (Fig. and replacement 1.24).

the the technique small a inside tiny using of joint incision a visualizing telescope of is a through Arthroscopy a placed in skin. in most performed can Arthroscopy be joints. ankle, commonly joints. performed hip it in However, most is shoulder, and the knee,

the of joint to its surgeon Arthroscopy the view contents. allows inside and the to and specific separate are knee, possible and the seen, the and ligaments. menisci cruciate the it ligaments puncture using remove in sites menisci the Notably, replace easily instruments and the is normal arthroscopy through enables activity, procedure. are either recover during it or is to small only to that a and patients light anesthetic requires advantages quickly it regional performed of incisions, return the anesthesia it and The

the clinic In

Joint undertaken of a replacement variety for is reasons. These joint destruction. predominantly disease and joint include degenerative are painful. their degenerated that function have lack or normal Joints severely that In the some pain prevents patients, may of the it from undertaking house and the be without even discomfort. smallest severe activities leaving so them

knee, are shoulder. commonly Large affected, joints and including the hip, and replaced. replacement joint developments small However, can surgical of in even with fingers materials the ongoing techniques, be joints

be both joint will Typically, will in a are hip the of introduced. replaced; or be the joint plastic sides and metal acetabulum reamed, cup the to (Fig. cemented be femur fitted place in will the The precisely component femoral and 1.25).

benefit significant derive an to continue life from and patients active replacement lead Most joint afterward. acetabular component, lesion patients metal a In been femoral metal aseptic ions fitted who an a to of have and (ALVAL) caused release by a lymphocyte-dominated in hypersensitivity develop, the metal response adjacent of with may minority vasculitis-associated cup possibly tissues. need to safer surgery models. and chronic with these joint These often patients replace have pain replacements additional might

the In clinic

fascias The importance of

thin tissue surrounds muscles, between and A and is band organs, that fascia a as 3D nerves, bones, structure uninterrupted a remains tissues. vessels of blood often tissues It support a boundary important can provides and for structures. between provide

they disease. infection often limit the malignant fascias and are because spread Clinically, of important extremely or or primary far malignant extensive to the infections cross render a fascial When free diseases require dissection may clearance of area plain, more a surgical a tumor infection.

layer that muscle. importance of be of example psoas typical a the fascial of would the clinical covering A the into psoas secondary within tuberculosis intervertebral body can muscle. Infection laterally to pass an muscle and spread fills is into but Pus limited which psoas psoas extends the further by the below the fascia, groin muscle inguinal pointing the inferiorly ligament. from the surrounds

the clinic In

and scarring Placement incisions skin of

along skin correspond skin Langer’s to which dermal lines Surgical are that or orientation of ideally the collagen tension of are parallel placed incisions the fibers. to lines, lines to tend made heal to these the as are that underlying They incisions run less along fibers the tend with and better in direction muscle scarring. same incisions prominent In cases scar contrast, to scars. some to firm, in or are a can lines likely heal hypertrophic, lead made Langer’s raised, severe with and to perpendicular more keloid,

the In clinic

paralysis other to muscle loss including may or associated muscle group the and inability Muscle sensation. abnormalities, be of with neurological is specific a move causes factors. include trauma, Major stroke, poliomyelitis, and iatrogenic nerves may be in brain, cord, muscles. to Paralysis the supplying spinal and the due abnormalities the the

In will to long disuse. atrophy wasting overall term, due and muscle muscle paralysis secondary the produce the of region

the In clinic

is Muscle atrophy disorder muscle. a of wasting by variety nerve It can causes, which be of and include damage the muscle produced to disuse. a

who or of long-term an have patients is normal living. Muscle rest and exercises activities in maintain atrophy requiring muscle to daily rehabilitation disuse, building extensive important undergone problem

the In clinic

usually exertion related and specific groups and tend strains muscle to Muscle muscle a sudden disruption. to injuries occur are and in typically They occur athletes. in

disruption a muscle small up Muscle may tears complete to injury a (Fig. interstitial involve 1.26). activity. treatment facilitate return which normal and determine muscle groups the to extent It the is are to affected of rehabilitation prognosis, identify tear important obtain necessary the a will and which length to to of

clinic the In

a disease Atherosclerosis affects arteries. that is with and walls in of of arteries, cholesterol fatty the inflammatory chronic is deposition a the There reaction proteins. secondary the reduction in diameter This the lead turn to flow. in vessels with distal calcification, may of impeding of that The plaque off” “fall platelets attraction a distally. itself be (embolize) for may may site vessel. which the and occur, occlude may clots fresh form allows to Plaque fissuring

is its and importance which atherosclerosis The affected. depend vessel effects of upon the and emboli may a If occurs stroke. artery, form carotid atherosclerosis produce small in the vessel a plaque an acute heart, may In (heart attack). myocardial producing produce thrombosis, infarction fissuring ischemia In and the the cause the may ability narrowing walk of of legs, toes. to vessels distal gangrene and ultimately the patient limit chronic of

clinic the In

may they other organs. tortuous veins of the occur in are and veins veins in superficial legs, in arm although Varicose the that typically occur dilated the

veins in the In movement blood adjacent to muscles the leg the the pumps heart. normal individuals of veins superficial from leg into the through the pumped fascia investing Blood also deep the layer of is of the veins. may become damaged, in perforating the pass allowing to direction. veins opposite Valves these in blood veins volume and the increased This of dilatation produces and tortuosity superficial pressure (Fig. 1.27). with the may a skin become veins, response poor of and the tissue to Apart from larger atrophic trauma. unsightliness pigmented of which trauma elevation of and heal. skin small may some the patients pressure application In ulceration, even requires to produce bandages limb

of on depends and severity. Treatment location, varicose their size, veins excised the veins be drain to Typically superficial the and deep into allowing stripped, only blood can varicose system.

clinic In the

and by organs a veins. All supply from the arteries require blood drainage tissue the ways Within feeding drain perfusing that most draining there blocked, if organ. of continue a organ supply series organ (collateral such vessel to and the multiple vein the vessels is the of the organs main smaller vessels) are or

supplied circumstances, ulnar hand, and more such by radial them, than perfusing one organs In is the certain the arteries. which as have vessel artery radial ulnar the produce any hand. the or may to perfusion the reduced either symptoms of of Loss not

loss significant circumstances venous collateralization. are which produces vein There in a of of Some venous to susceptible become these collaterals bleeding. thrombosis undergone portal have who to liver systemic the through or vein to the is venous from the where This collateral in return considerable a patients occlusion, bypasses circulation. problem veins drainage gut

anastomoses important. with an vascular organ associated are Normal duodenum, branches the of dual supply and the have trunk organs, branches arising superior artery. such from also the of as the Some blood celiac the from mesenteric a either the these organ. be blood of maintained vessels damaged, will to supply be Should The the vertebral arteries. by multiple carotid supplying brain it, arteries has dominated and the vessels have any circulation; brain long-term occlusion Vessels poor a produce damage. are will and the hence end within arteries collateral cerebral

clinic In the

tissue honeycomb are Lymph nodes an connective of efficient internal have with filters and filled lymphocytes. reticular cells on destroy and These act other bacteria, them. lymphocytes viruses, bodily to will Lymph active. drain if and a become lymph to tend drainage the nodes infection occurs specific node within area, areas, node the to inflammatory tender. production and The may and cause cell become rapid of local mediators turnover enlarge lymphatics the patients Similarly, cells the with in malignancy to drain lymph may metastasizing nodes. enlarged These need if and will become clinically be can to inflamed removed symptomatic. and

in with infection), malignancies, nodes (Fig. systemic such become may certain enlarged lymph Lymph viral enlarged may node groups lymphoma illnesses as local or become diffusely primary (e.g., 1.31).

the clinic In

is to carrying out fundamental myotomes examination. a dermatomes neurological A and absolutely knowledge of in map typical A shown Fig. dermatome is 1.38.

that skin by dermatome a single Clinically, area nerve spinal supplied level. cord or is of spinal a myotome of nerve or A innervated is region skeletal spinal that level. single spinal a cord muscle by muscles accomplished muscle of testing by groups. is the spinal joints or than so Most more of of level, one individual body the by evaluation are innervated movements myotomes usually cord

the In clinic

information location interpreted level. when the pain but from same cord to CNS as from by innervated is comes the spinal occurs location one Referred spinal sensory coming by the cord another low happens amount pain has Usually, sensory which the a this output. a comes such information when of as gut, the region, from from amount on level converge which output. same sensory that at the These a high skin, cord of neurons is receive spinal the information an afferents with area output low high As region. the the output is region coming interpreted normally normally result, as a from from pain

is Pain part the side from level, a nervous same cord nervous innervated, region spinal of the often by the the innervated to by the a of at visceral system somatic region referred most system.

to another. the level. innervated the other of arising somatic example, innervated by which to same is For the the nerves the inferior spinal can skin nerve, which phrenic the referred shoulder, on be at is of on by peritoneum the diaphragm, top the cord of surface irritation

was man diffuse sought medical A pain and colicky. central care that young abdominal because of right the the and After fossa constant. became began to some localize in pain hours, iliac grossly appendix. who referred to abdominal He a an inflamed surgeon, removed was made uneventful an recovery. patient The

are visceral becomes the inflamed, appendix stimulated. sensory the When fibers fibers cord T10. with cord spinal level spinal fibers These the enter sympathetic the at region umbilical is pain of in dermatome which The (Fig. referred T10, to the is the 1.50). pain pain is peristaltic every the diffuse, the passes focal; a region, through wave recurs. The not time ileocecal colic. as referred This is intermittent pain to type of

somatic right the and is disease, of appendix nerves. stages the in contacts innervated fossa, parietal by In irritates the sensory the later which iliac the peritoneum the some previously. focal over which the hours patient pain constant colicky predominates This a pain, that produces felt patient referred The from T10 no interprets the the longer pain dermatome.

and signs for mind patient’s always should this in may Although borne is appendicitis, be a the symptoms history that it typical vary. in fossa. the patients; retrocecal right situated never anteriorly iliac it position a is parietal appendix The in contact approximately 70% may peritoneum therefore the in of other long and possible appendix It also that is contact structures. is may directly the appendix (e.g., symptoms). contact patient may then develop may may symptoms and the urological consequence, other have a ureter, the the As the patient

disorders, bowel other produce the common, symptoms. is for Although pelvis, may example appendicitis of similar and

Body The

clinic—cont’d In the

support The and for of provides the of aspect back posterior axis the musculoskeletal trunk. the of the body consists consist of vertebrae, contribute aspects elements of mainly although back’s proximal skeletal pelvic bones, basal of Bony ribs, the to the of skull the the superior the framework posterior elements (Fig. and regions 2.1).

the the each skull. pelvis and interconnect vertebrae ribs with Associated other and with and muscles proximal the contains The of back cord information to and spinal parts the receive most and from and the send nerves, which spinal of body.

and body’s back maneuver and of and the carry pelvis to weight, forces position upper support and help head, the limbs. elements skeletal through the muscular The the the limbs, transmit the lower brace column at is midline. The the positioned body posteriorly vertebral the in of it has a When (Fig. viewed curvatures number laterally, 2.2):

of sacral The vertebral the reflecting in concave is original thoracic shape of and and column retained is the the anteriorly, embryo, curvature primary adults. regions the in

of body’s the vertical way expends line, Secondary column and concave posteriorly, be allows and that amount maintain of an which weight gravity muscular cervical lumbar to a regions curvatures, are in vertebral form the into on bring stance. which upright center bipedal to the a least balanced the in energy the

problems the lower on the stresses lumbar from increase As regions, to back common. cervical are back

Muscles the groups: intrinsic extrinsic of of consist back and

and upper The the the muscles the ribs. of limbs move extrinsic back

posture these back maintain of the include and lateral rotation column; the (Fig. bending), move and vertebral flexion, (anterior muscles movements intrinsic The flexion extension, 2.3).

the along vertebrae of length the movement additive vertebral between two Although is the of amount any are effects between column. vertebrae limited, the the Also, thoracic column. vertebral of the of and limited in relative extension are lumbar the to movement region part freedom Muscles anterior more column. in regions the vertebral flex

and the muscles two the to vertebrae and head. first modified the In are cervical support specifically associated position region, vertebra moves occurs CII head nodding head vertebra (Fig. CI vertebra The motion, rotation flexes and the the on as of on CI, in and extends, 2.3).

Protection nervous of system the

of cord contain proximal nerves column parts the vertebral the spinal tissues of and the soft The associated (Fig. spinal and back 2.4). of body, The certain of other more the the head. regions into distal nerves pass regions of spinal parts all the including

(Fig. back are vertebrae the bones 33 The of major the 2.5). vertebrae depending with specific The of the the number body which they on are associated. region characteristics and vary There vertebrae. thoracic, seven and four sacral, cervical, twelve coccygeal five to are lumbar, three five sacrum. a into The the single bony element, sacral vertebrae fuse in structure, coccyx. to The single are fuse four, vary three a in and vertebrae from rudimentary into number coccygeal often

vertebra a arch and typical of body (Fig. vertebral consists vertebral A a 2.6).

major of body the and is vertebral The anterior weightbearing bone. component the is LV. in size to from vertebra increases CII It vertebra intervertebral separate bodies discs the vertebral adjacent vertebrae. of Fibrocartilaginous

to the surface The two vertebral the arch pillars arch. anchored vertebral which the firmly vertebral by of the posterior body is pedicles, of form lateral laminae, midline. and of The vertebral fuse left arch is the formed roof right at which the by

The the of walls which extends the to SV). vertebrae vertebra vertebral lateral sacral from first posterior of are vertebra the arches canal, the vertebral last aligned to (vertebra the (CI) and cervical form and canal membranes, blood together of and contains vessels, tissue, parts spinal spinal the protective fat, with This cord nerves. bony proximal connective its

has for action serve attachments muscles typical muscles, which for number and of vertebrae. sites of characteristic ligaments, projections, articulation of of levers a the with The a arch adjacent vertebra vertebral as: and

arch. vertebral spinous A the projects and process of generally from the roof posteriorly inferiorly

a transverse laterally On each extends region meets the of where a from arch, vertebral pedicle. the process lamina a side articular process process similar a processes on adjacent From an vertebrae. the inferior and superior with articulate region, same articular

rib also elements. Each contains vertebra thorax, with these form articulate ribs, which and the processes. elements large the In costal bodies are and vertebral transverse

are and other the incorporated elements processes. into rib these regions, small In transverse are all other regions ribs Occasionally, cervical usually than in the upper the in thorax, lower lumbar regions. develop and into they

type innervation on (Fig. back extrinsic classified embryological in of be their based or as and origin the can Muscles intrinsic 2.7).

by general, of muscles and are extrinsic are innervated spinal movements of limbs thoracic upper and, with in The rami involved wall nerves. anterior the wall. intermediate these to upper with associated is of the The layer while muscles related limbs, group thoracic muscles superficial the of the is

the by of posterior the and of in intrinsic innervated spinal position of rami are back are deep All nerves. the muscles in They head. and support and moving the column participate the move vertebral also muscles vertebral of ribs the intrinsic relative column. group to One the moves

formed canal) bony tissue a within lies vertebrae adjacent soft cord (Fig. vertebral by The (the canal and spinal elements 2.8):

The ligaments. discs, and is the wall intervertebral anterior formed the bodies vertebrae, vertebral of by associated

The walls arches and formed roof ligaments. the by are vertebral lateral and

(the the meninges): spinal surrounded canal, vertebral is a three the by membranes cord connective tissue Within series of

surface is of mater innermost and intimately The spinal associated the is membrane the the pia with cord.

from the the pia separated subarachnoid is cerebrospinal space, mater, the The which contains arachnoid fluid. membrane, second by

of directly attached to, thickest mater. is mater, and arachnoid the against, not lies the dura The but external the most membranes,

bone separated by fat, dura plexus. is extradural from connective a mater venous In an tissue, loose the canal, (epidural) vertebral containing surrounding and space the

pairs vertebral segmental are between adjacent canal from nerves of pedicles in of distribution the emerge and the 31 The vertebrae. spinal to (C1 sacral five eight (S1 S5), pairs five to twelve thoracic one coccygeal cervical (L1 to and There T12), (T1 (Co). are nerves L5), of lumbar C8), to a anterior nerve and cord is Each (Fig. to attached posterior root spinal an by the root 2.9).

exclusively, posterior which small body regions back; canal, but rami the After head, other a is except the by rami innervate most anterior innervate into: the innervated predominantly, cranial not exiting and nerve branches the posterior anterior each larger ramus—collectively, nerves. vertebral an spinal ramus—the the much of

and lumbar, plexuses of sacral) The form rami anterior body. brachial, the major the (cervical, somatic body rami of the PNS Major the components of mainly nerves. trunk also spinal are prevertebral with the associated of anterior and (sympathetic visceral plexus)

muscular of regions the the much (Fig. constitute back which Cervical the supports of framework of in the turn the skeletal and and moves neck, head 2.10).

The meninges skull. cord foramen with the are continuous of meninges magnum spinal cranial brain the the at and on the blood arteries, the transverse through participate, side, of carotid in internal with The ascend, to each cervical foramen paired arteries through pass the brain. foramina vertebrae magnum one supplying in to vertebral processes and the

and Thorax, pelvis abdomen,

abdomen, vertebral contribute regions the to column of The pelvis the thorax, and the framework skeletal (Fig. of different 2.10). articulation parts the muscles sites and for each the vertebrae of providing body, for to other and of these addition for support fascia, provide In bones. attachments and thorax, pass The back. with rami from the nerves pelvis body associated the anterior abdomen, spinal these parts of the of into

back associated with provide the for muscles limbs the bones upper moving trunk. and on the attachments extensive anchoring The of true through of This sacrum. less column to firmly pelvic bones with lower is the the the anchored of articulation are the limbs, vertebral which levels, emerge lumbosacral of The cervical lower respectively, spinal innervated and from column. nerves that of upper rami anterior and the by vertebral limbs are

than the much faster cord. development, grows spinal the vertebral column During canal the the extend of spinal does the entire cord vertebral a not length (Fig. result, As 2.11).

disc and it although adult, ends the LII, end vertebrae the LIII. spinal as LI cord and can typically as between the TXII as high LII low vertebrae as vertebra between In and

canal and from increasingly to increasingly the CI pass vertebral roots spinal cord oblique the longer for angles from distances. originate nerves nerve vertebrae Spinal at in Co, the therefore level becomes exit. origin vertebral column dissociated their increasingly Their of level from of cord spinal spinal evident sacral for nerves. lumbar particularly This is and

the nerve intervertebral laterally through spinal canal an Each vertebral exits (Fig. foramen 2.12). and to vertebral is The arches is formed between closely joints: foramen adjacent related intervertebral

adjacent inferior are by superior in pedicles. formed margins and The notches

the of is the The margin vertebral associated joint. by and the posterior articular arches processes formed

between border the of formed the bodies anterior intervertebral is vertebrae. adjacent by The vertebral the disc

herniation spinal or intervertebral the bone or processes), the loss, nerve. foramen, the of of dislocation of intervertebral Any (the function zygapophysial of disc, articular joint joint pathology the such can the size associated between occludes the that reduces affect as an

of back the Innervation

the muscles Posterior spinal skin. back innervate intrinsic nerves of branches and the of adjacent lower rami of of distribution the gluteal limb aspect and The head. into of the the posterior the region these extends posterior cutaneous of innervated dermatomes of spinal rami Parts Fig. nerves the posterior are shown by in 2.13.

the discs. of consist and Skeletal the mainly associated of vertebrae intervertebral components back and bony sites to of the the also bones, attachment. pelvic framework contribute The provide muscle scapulae, ribs and skull, for back

location groups which 33 subdivided on morphology vertebrae, based approximately are There into are five and (Fig. 2.14):

process and The skull characterized the in between size and (Figs. by small their cervical thorax presence of mainly each transverse a the foramen vertebrae seven are and 2.15). 2.14

their thoracic articulated by characterized 12 ribs (Figs. The vertebrae are synovial thorax; the the transverse transverse elements, in articulate than joints and and other with 2.16); elements vertebrae although separate these into associated incorporated and regions ribs processes rib processes thorax, all small are bodies are vertebrae. of in via but the the are the have the 2.14 vertebral bones and

(Figs. form which to their characterized lumbar and large thoracic for are vertebrae, five wall support are abdominal skeletal posterior size the the Inferior by vertebrae the 2.17). 2.14 and

the bone are into fused called Next vertebrae a articulates one on a single wall. each of sacral pelvic and five is bone side which pelvic sacrum, the component with

coccyx. into sacrum number, the Inferior fuse variable to which single triangular small the coccygeal called a vertebrae, of usually is bone four, a

adjacent cells originate from vertebrae somites the embryo, are the In formed (Fig. sclerotomes, from called intersegmentally which 2.18). the Each of on one vertebra the the from side, is cranial below, somites the above. derived of somites caudal and each parts two parts two segmentally the between vertebrae. pass The and spinal nerves develop forming

A body posterior vertebral vertebra a typical of and arch vertebral (Fig. a consists 2.19). a for attachment Extending bone. from of with articulation adjacent number vertebral processes muscle and arch the are

The the vertebra body adjacent is intervertebral and vertebral vertebral weight-bearing the discs by part is of bodies linked and to ligaments. as vertebral increases. of the increases weight size bodies supported inferiorly of amount The

The vertebral and forms posterior of the vertebral foramen. parts the lateral arch

contains foramina which vertebral together the the canal, form the cord. vertebral of and vertebrae spinal all The protects continuous, magnum Superiorly, the skull, through the vertebral the canal is cranial head. with the foramen cavity of of the

pedicles of of arch each vertebral (Fig. and vertebra consists laminae The 2.19):

that The to the attach arch pedicles vertebral pillars are two body. the vertebral bony

arch. form meet each The sheets the two bone laminae that in and are midline to extend of flat pedicle of roof from vertebral the the

ligament the A of and inferiorly junction attachment. posteriorly and spinous from process laminae two and projects for site a muscle the is

muscle pedicle in junction extends posterolaterally a of articulation ribs process ligament thoracic site and for lamina region. with is side and on the and attachment, each A the from the for transverse and

from the are pedicles projecting processes superior join Also laminae region and the articular (Fig. where inferior the articular of with respectively, vertebrae. articulate the superior and 2.19), processes, inferior adjacent which

Between origin surfaces. inferior the the superior its and vertebral pedicle notched each of processes, and body articular on is the superior These inferior participate and notches intervertebral forming foramina. vertebral in

seven process. presence by size characterized small by their foramen the are and transverse each The of in cervical vertebrae a the following A has typical (Fig. cervical vertebra features 2.20A):

from when surface. short height is square body and vertebral shaped convex superior concave The a above and and inferior viewed surface in a has

trough Each shaped a transversarium. round by perforated transverse and process is foramen

bifid. is spinous short process and The

is The triangular. foramen vertebral

The movement first axis—are specialized atlas cervical second and and to the of accommodate vertebrae—the head.

Vertebra CI (Fig. head with the atlas) articulates (the 2.21). body Its that distinguishing is vertebral a feature major (Fig. lacks it 2.20B). to body fact, the In CII. CI onto become development of fuses body dens CII the vertebral the of during of As a CI is result, no CII. disc there intervertebral between and arch. atlas anterior lateral posterior an arch composed shaped the viewed interconnected by two is of and from masses and When above, a ring

lateral with (the of condyle an articulates occipital with and of below mass above skull vertebra articular CII the process superior the Each axis). are bean the surfaces are circular whereas and almost and surfaces inferior shaped flat. concave, superior articular The articular

head column. to nod atlanto-occipital on and allows joint the The vertebral the up down

has articular for surface which projects anterior facet dens, arch of body the an the axis. superiorly the vertebral the from of The posterior a spanning transverse to of strong the masses posterior lateral by the distance is of surfaces between on ligament position the it in and dens the atlas the attachment medial atlas. The oval held of facets

atlas acts The to dens side attached the allows to side. that as pivot the axis, and head on a rotate

further the atlanto-axial The levers action, vertebrae the and muscle atlas as head the are large than cervical and of joints. those at for act particularly move the processes protrude of transverse other muscles laterally that for

(Figs. the superiorly which the by large is from vertebral extends tooth-like body dens, The characterized axis and 2.20B 2.21). articulation dens of atlas. anterior the has for of surface an the the The anterior with oval facet arch

strong the occipital to alar one the each surfaces medial the serve of attachment two which side, condyles. sites superolateral connect dens for of ligaments, surfaces on that impressions circular possess dens The the as check head rotation atlas These of to excessive and the alar relative ligaments the axis.

all articulation vertebrae characterized by twelve thoracic The their with are ribs. thoracic (Fig. of inferior of with the vertebral rib has head rib partial vertebra its the facets) on articulation A (superior the typical side below costal facets each own the and for head and body two of 2.20C). facet. The costal the than facet much larger costal is inferior superior

Each tubercle also a facet for (transverse has of own transverse the articulation process with rib. costal facet) its the The circular. the is somewhat heart foramen is vertebral from above, viewed vertebra and of vertebral body when shaped

vertebrae large in from size lumbar are (Fig. vertebrae five their other The by distinguished regions 2.20D). facets lack Also, they with for articulation ribs. the which ligaments on are thin transverse transverse of bones. cone pelvic iliolumbar long, and with vertebra for those of massive processes the exception to the attachment and connect are to processes LV, generally the The somewhat shaped

cylindrical and foramen thoracic triangular typical is shape The the larger in vertebral of vertebra lumbar vertebrae. is and a body than the in vertebral

a sacral that five vertebrae The the sacrum (Fig. fused single bone represents is 2.20E). and has so anterior correspondingly surface. triangular it It is the pointed concave convex a in that is a inferiorly, curved surface posterior with apex and shape LV It above below with the vertebra and articulates with coccyx. pelvic large with each L-shaped two It one articulation bones. facets, for lateral has on the surface,

the to for passage posterior respectively, surface anterior surface sacral S4 of sacral has and foramina, sacrum anterior of posterior of four foramina of the the four anterior nerves. rami, spinal S1 pairs has of the posterior pairs and The

incomplete inferior The vertebral posterior the may the canal of the end of sacrum. wall be near

represents the bone and coccygeal to (Fig. that fused four the end coccyx vertebrae sacrum The a is of with inferior small triangular articulates three 2.20F). canal. and a arches the absence vertebral size by small by of vertebral and characterized It its is therefore

side each discs associated foramina are and Intervertebral of on vertebrae formed parts (Fig. adjacent between intervertebral 2.22). nerves canal. pass The to in foramina the and allow out vertebral such spinal and of structures, as vessels, blood

on the the is of vertebra An below. intervertebral vertebral vertebra notch above pedicle by the superior inferior foramen formed notch the pedicle and the vertebral on the of is posteriorly zygapophysial of vertebrae, the vertebral bodies. between the disc intervertebral articular processes joint adjacent by The bordered: by and two foramen and the the anteriorly

bone is by Each surrounded ligament, by intervertebral and foramen joints. and a confined space foramen. the these Pathology affect within surrounding can and in of the structures, any muscles, structures in

vertebral regions wall vertebral laminae the processes for adjacent form dorsal a most overlap of to spinous vertebrae of canal. the complete bony reasonably the column, and In components arches However, region, posterior (Fig. lumbar in large the gaps vertebral the between exist adjacent of 2.23). from gaps LV. spinous between and to wide adjacent LI laminae processes vertebra become vertebra increasingly These vertebral by flexion column. further of can spaces be the widened The These relatively canal the allow easy vertebral procedures. for clinical access to gaps

back Joints in the vertebrae between

are: joints bodies major symphyses types two between of (Fig. between The vertebral vertebrae between and processes (Fig. 2.31), joints articular synovial 2.32).

and above synovial symphyses (two has six below) four A (one with and vertebrae: joints two typical one below). a joints of vertebra adjacent above two and total includes intervertebral Each disc. an symphysis

movement of between among column. two the of the in vertebrae vertebral summation range is all any large movement results a by limited, the vertebrae movement Although

column flexion, include the by circumduction. and Movements rotation, flexion, vertebral extension, lateral

the processes (cervical, by shape a articular determined the bodies. on and lumbar) joint and Movements are vertebral thoracic, region on vertebrae the of by in and orientation surfaces specific

each lies on the symphysis bodies disc, which cartilage layers. formed vertebral hyaline between intervertebral is a layer and body an by adjacent vertebral between The of

central fibrosus, disc nucleus consists intervertebral which a The an pulposus outer of anulus (Fig. surrounds 2.31).

consists of a of ring fibrosus surrounding zone a in lamellar collagen of The configuration. anulus an fibrocartilage arranged outer wider rotation of between arrangement fibers vertebrae. This limits

the vertebrae. center nucleus disc, pulposus between absorbs gelatinous, intervertebral The forces fills of is and the compression

Degenerative of can the pulposus. anulus lead the nucleus fibrosus changes in to herniation herniation can the Posterolateral impinge of in nerve on a spinal foramen. intervertebral roots the

The and (Fig. are on synovial the joints between zygapophysial joints articular vertebrae superior inferior processes adjacent 2.32). joint. attached facets the margins articular A of the to articular thin encloses capsule each

flexion the inferiorly regions, extension. shape slope facilitates and their and anterior cervical In from zygapophysial posterior to joints vertically the but and limits flexion shape joints are thoracic extension, regions, In their facilitates oriented rotation. and still curved are thereby extension processes of lumbar the regions, joint surfaces movement, adjacent are range and the region. major interlock, and lumbar In in limiting though movements flexion

lips uncinate the crests vertebrae processes. upper of typical cervical surfaces elevated are or of lateral margins termed The into with above (Fig. to the joints form the body articulate may of These vertebra small synovial “uncovertebral” 2.33).

pass ligaments, and components the which interconnect are Joints bodies vertebral between vertebrae vertebral numerous of between supported reinforced arches. by and

on most bodies vertebral (Fig. the and and anterior anterior ligaments posterior and of along vertebral posterior The longitudinal extend column the the of surfaces are 2.35).

the base the the sacrum. to longitudinal to extends and of skull ligament inferiorly superiorly to surface anterior The of anterior is attach attached the vertebral to Along the attached length its intervertebral and is discs. bodies it

posterior on posterior The of surfaces vertebral is and longitudinal the the ligament anterior of the canal. lines bodies the vertebral surface the intervertebral and length Like it to its attached bodies ligament, anterior discs. along the longitudinal is vertebral intracranial Fig. (see base the of membrane the of of CII the skull posterior longitudinal the tectorial upper that The part the is ligament to aspect termed connects 2.20B).

vertebrae laminae (Fig. side, The each the adjacent pass of flava, on ligamenta between 2.36). tissue ligaments of thin, surface and the the canal. form These broad part elastic predominantly posterior of vertebral of consist vertebra of ligamentum to of Each the between lamina the of the the the runs lamina above. vertebra surface surface below anterior on posterior flavum the of back in and position. assist laminae the flava the anatomical The to extension in separation flexion ligamenta resist

ligament supraspinous the to vertebra the processes the The passes connects along CVII tips spinous sacrum (Fig. of vertebral and from 2.37). the vertebra ligament is nuchae. from From called structurally CVII more ligament the the becomes caudal to ligamentum parts of distinct the skull, and

the sheet-like in sagittal triangular, nuchae a The plane: median structure ligamentum is

skull, occipital to from the base magnum. is of foramen external the attached protuberance to The triangle the the

tip of apex attached of spinous the vertebra The is the to CVII. process

vertebrae. triangle spinous cervical other vertebra and side of to posterior of attached is CI the the The deep of the tubercle processes the

nuchae supports The head. the ligamentum head resists to returning flexion anatomical position. facilitates the It the and ligament the muscles. The posterior and surfaces broad of lateral edge the attachment provide adjacent for

ligaments Interspinous pass processes vertebral adjacent spinous (Fig. between 2.38). and supraspinous each apex the side. anteriorly spinous the They attach the blend on base and process of ligamenta from each flava ligament with the posteriorly to

Muscles intermediate, groups. superficial, the organized are deep back of and into

Muscles other the intermediate than groups because from originate they embryologically back. extrinsic are locations the superficial muscles and in They by spinal innervated rami are nerves: anterior of

of the consists of group to involved limb. and superficial movements in The upper related muscles

may respiratory function. a ribs The serve and muscles intermediate of consists group attached the to

they in develop because group deep Muscles back. are intrinsic muscles of the the vertebral by and are They head. nerves directly spinal related the are innervated and column rami to of posterior of movements

back group muscles of Superficial

superficial The deep in group are the skin muscles fascia (Figs. superficial immediately the to and to 2.42 2.45). scapula, the and vertebral column). the part attach skeleton to axial of They ribs, (clavicle, (skull, appendicular and skeleton the superior humerus) referred are appendicular with as of to primarily the sometimes are part they the Because of these skeleton, this movements involved appendicular group. muscles

rhomboid and the major, scapulae. in dorsi, rhomboid the Muscles minor, superficial trapezius, group include latissimus levator located muscles in minor, The of muscle major, scapulae to the are trapezius rhomboid the rhomboid superior the part and back. levator deep

base Each the the muscle’s origin) triangular, flat insertion) along the muscle’s toward and shoulder and of the with the the (the apex situated column is trapezius (the triangle muscle tip of (Fig. vertebral pointing Table and 2.43 2.1). form sides The a on trapezoid. muscles together both

the the column, to the vertebral clavicle of of the of the trapezius, from of The and upper to the and portion superior lateral fibers attach skull third acromion descend scapula. to the of fibers elevates the these scapula. Contraction needs and the the scapula aspect of rotate fibers to the upward, occur the lateral head. addition, when together In above upper inferior limb to which superior work raising the

of the neck is muscle which the from [XI], Motor accessory nerve innervation trapezius the (Fig. of the the onto deep by descends surface 2.44). fibers the at cervical and of cord levels C3 spinal trapezius cord and pass spinal from plexus the branches C4. in Proprioceptive the the enter

posterior the of from is branch intercostal the supply transverse superficial branch branches dorsal trapezius the of cervical artery, the suprascapular acromial the arteries. of and to blood the artery, The

tapers in the lower the back that portion dorsi to muscle large, Latissimus and ascends attaches is of a flat the humerus triangular it a tendon begins to narrow that (Figs. as anteriorly Table and to 2.45 2.1). 2.42 of include limb. with a adduction, the result, movements As medial extension, muscle upper and associated rotation this the shoulder, depress preventing upward The latissimus can movement. dorsi also its

the dorsi muscle. thoracodorsal innervates plexus brachial of The the latissimus nerve the thoracodorsal artery, blood Associated is of is which with primary this the nerve the supply muscle. lumbar arteries dorsal arteries. posterior intercostal from Additional branches come small of and

muscle superior to (Figs. upper border processes Levator that scapula is transverse a portion on medial from at angle vertebrae of the cervical slender descends the upper the of the the its scapulae 2.43 2.1). and Table 2.45 and elevates the scapula and assist scapula of aspect the may It the in inferiorly. rotating lateral muscles other

and anterior branches innervated primarily nerve, from cervical and spinal of from by the consists transverse C4 of ascending the and levator its arteries. The arterial is scapulae nerves branches dorsal rami and scapular C3 supply the

scapulae levator rhomboid to two are The inferior muscles (Fig. 2.1). 2.45 and Table superior and the ligamentum muscle of rhomboid scapula. attaches nuchae to CVII and minor the neck arises the spinous cylindrical to and is processes the the of the the that small, of of medial and major, border root Rhomboid opposite is spine vertebrae a scapular TI from

the of to border from upper and originates The vertebrae minor. inferior medial to rhomboid larger the attaches the processes thoracic rhomboid major spinous scapular

retract The together toward or column. work the pull the scapula rhomboid muscles to vertebral two of other muscles inferiorly. scapula may rotate the aspect also they lateral With the

both branch nerve, a (Fig. the of brachial scapular innervates rhomboid The dorsal muscles plexus, 2.46).

muscles back Intermediate of group

in back two to (Fig. of the in the the superior deep and muscles the of muscular muscles muscles sheets superficial the thin The group of intermediate regions inferior in back, immediately group consist 2.2). and 2.47 Table serratus ribs. to from pass the posterior outward to obliquely from (serratus posterior serratus Fibers column two the superior vertebral muscles these inferior) attach and posterior suggests group. to and have positioning times, function, respiratory at the referred these been as a respiratory This muscles

Serratus whereas the superior deep serratus latissimus posterior posterior muscles, to dorsi. the deep is to rhomboid inferior is or and to the (the muscles medially, to the associated serratus attached inferior) serratus structures vertebral to either of the posterior Both fibers ribs. superior) attach of serratus descend and are (the column the fibers ascend posterior posterior muscles These ribs. the two depress and elevate therefore

posterior by innervated nerves. segmental of branches intercostal The serratus muscles are of anterior rami segmental similar Their supply is pattern intercostal a vascular the by through provided arteries.

group Deep back of muscles

of the intrinsic are rami The back the the muscles deep from innervated pelvis of of posterior spinal the skull by to nerves. branches or extend and segmental cervicis of splenius column—the and rotators the rotators the the short the transversospinales, segmental and (spinotransversales intertransversarii. include: extensors interspinales the extensors erector spinae muscles), They and and capitis and the neck— and muscles—the head of vertebral and

sacral deep to muscles is branches group lateral of through of cervical, posterior vertebral, lumbar, deep this subcostal, intercostal, The supply arteries. occipital, vascular cervical, the and transverse

of trunk thoracolumbar back and covers The (Fig. muscles the the deep fascia 2.48). is organization layer region: integrity the and of critical to This overall the fascial

posterior Superiorly, in serratus muscle with continuous it is and neck. anteriorly deep to passes fascia the the

the it deep covers superficial and the separates the intermediate muscles from region, In groups. them the muscles and in thoracic

spinous the thoracic processes the ribs. vertebrae to angles to the attaches laterally, and, it of Medially, of the

the inferior blend the into latissimus of and attachments thoracolumbar dorsi fascia. muscles serratus The posterior medial consists layers: lumbar region, the thoracolumbar three the of In fascia

the is and attachments, to supraspinous laterally sacral ligament—from to these erector it posterior to The lumbar extends and spinae. attached the thick cover the of and layer vertebrae spinous vertebrae the is processes

lower transverse iliac crest to the is intertransverse to attached of middle layer it border of ligaments—inferiorly, attached the is the to XII. processes and, the superiorly, rib the tips lumbar vertebrae The medially of and

the posterior quadratus lumbar for of the it arcuate is processes ligament muscle The (a attachment covers layer vertebrae—inferiorly, the diaphragm. the the wall) anterior of to the lumborum attached the abdominal the and, of is medially it crest attached superiorly, anterior of transverse iliac surface to muscle forms and lateral

thoracolumbar the layers middle posterior the and together lateral margin come of the erector (Fig. at fascia spinae The of 2.48). origin quadratus and layer lumborum, the the abdominis them joins At anterior lateral muscle transversus abdominal the of of forms the border aponeurotic the the wall. for

muscles ligamentum laterally processes the two spinotransversales and run and from nuchae upward The spinous (Fig. 2.3): and Table 2.49

attached the is process mastoid muscle and a bone splenius temporal occipital to of bone. capitis the broad The

The is upper the a the to processes cervicis muscle of cervical splenius transverse vertebrae. attached narrow

the spinotransversales extending neck. the Together backward, the head muscles draw as each side the same one muscle to rotates Individually, the muscle. side—the head contracting

spinae is group The intrinsic erector back muscles. the largest of of vertebral the ribs between to lie the processes posterolaterally the laterally. spinous The angles medially the and column muscles lumbar posterior muscles. They splenius covered and regions fascia inferior, in and thoracic by the the are thoracolumbar serratus rhomboid, and thick the iliac (Fig. lumbar sacrum, the broad, the thoracic and The a of mass arises the spinous tendon vertebrae, and to lower attached crest processes from Table and 2.50 2.4). region columns subdivided on of divides is each depending which into in upper vertical cervicis, three where thoracis, attach It lumbar muscle, regionally the (lumborum, capitis), muscles the and of superiorly. further

the is passes iliocostalis, from the the lower origin common and vertebrae. tendon with of most costal which outer of the processes placed into ribs of angles multiple and the column the elements erector The to is cervical the of transverse laterally the associated or spinae muscles insertions

of or origin base the the subdivision intermediate longissimus, the column middle The to largest is which the common tendon of erector from skull. the spinae the of is extending expanse, this the of vertebrae. various longissimus of positioning vast is the area the of transverse processes the Throughout lateral in the muscle

of most and which medial muscle spinalis, The the spinous of smallest the is column subdivisions processes the is the adjacent interconnects vertebrae. is generally the thoracic the and cervical constant most spinalis region. is region in The in absent deeper as the muscle It approaches (the spinae is with associated skull. semispinalis capitis) a the group erector

vertebral the muscles The extensors spinae are column erector of the and the group in head. primary position from and posteriorly. position, it upright straighten flexed pull to a Acting the bilaterally, they the back, head the returning coordinated fashion. by flexion They participate vertebral controlling also contracting in and relaxing a column in column Acting laterally. unilaterally, the vertebral they bend contractions to contracting addition, unilateral the of head to muscles head the attached the In turn actively side.

and from processes medially two upward these transverse transversospinales muscles The groove filling run (Fig. to vertebral spinous the processes, projections obliquely between 2.51 2.5). Table and three spinae They erector subgroups—the are rotatores semispinalis, of to multifidus, deep the muscles. and consist and major

The superficial are fibers most the transversospinales collection semispinalis the of group. muscles muscle in attaching muscles crossing of point origin and between to the of point skull, end four thoracic attachment. to lower by begin six in region These from their vertebrae the and found are bone the of and base attach to and skull. the the Semispinalis in regions, the at occipital thoracic muscles cervical

the Deep the second muscles, to is multifidus. semispinalis of the group from Muscles vertebral this and of attach four to spanning the processes to between point origin in spinous two and length column, lateral upward the group and passing of a vertebrae. medially span multifidus the the present of but length developed are column best region. The the vertebral throughout in lumbar muscles are

transversospinales rotatores the deepest are of The muscles group. the small the of column the vertebral best region. the are thoracic throughout length present are They but in developed rotators). to pass Their crossing attaching vertebra an from and upward spinous (short transverse processes fibers medially (long vertebrae two or processes to adjacent rotators)

the group. When erector the similar to that the vertebral extend transversospinales an action spinae they group muscles contract of in column, bilaterally, rotate processes direction. contract, on turn one processes to causing the muscles when the that spinous transverse trunk side, only on or in However, they side the the opposite pull toward

action attaches muscle the has in transversospinales group, One unique a to the it skull. semispinalis capitis, the because turn toward the to causing chin the whereas this side it, muscle pulls muscle. the Contracting the and bilaterally, the contracting move head unilateral superiorly and posteriorly posteriorly, turns contraction pulls of head similar those actions are These upper of erector the to spinae.

muscles segmental groups The two of (Fig. posterior and nerves. are innervated deeply rami and 2.51 spinal 2.6) back by placed of in Table the

TXI. The and levatores the first transverse to TI muscles, costarum are vertebrae which of from of processes group CVII segmental arise muscles the have and They downward lateral below area into the and in oblique tubercle. the rib the vertebra origin an of of direction insert the the ribs. Contraction elevates

of pass true segmental transverse spinous of adjacent muscles group segmental muscles and pass interspinales, between back—the adjacent the between processes, The the intertransversarii, second which which are processes. the These vertebral large muscles allow muscle effective column of more movements during to postural of the adjoining action the stabilize vertebrae groups.

head. group bone region cervical of muscles occipital of A move upper base small the the the at deep the in vertebra to vertebrae connect vertebra to the axis) CI (the the skull. base both CII They of and atlas) connect (the they (Figs. Because as referred location suboccipital of to are their sometimes muscles Table 2.52 2.51 and and 2.7). major, on rectus rectus obliquus They posterior capitis inferior, posterior obliquus capitis capitis side: include, minor, each superior. capitis and

the suboccipital joints, atlanto-axial extends atlanto-occipital the and head and the rotates respectively. at Contraction of muscles

posterior arch The (Fig. the ramus first the of artery between are suboccipital nerve, the of innervated posterior cervical and the which the area the atlas muscles enters by vertebral 2.52). the vascular occipital branches this from muscles the and The to is in supply arteries. of area vertebral

The structures several suboccipital boundaries suboccipital triangle, form an (Fig. important of muscles the area contains that the 2.52):

The the forms muscle capitis rectus major triangle. posterior border of medial the

the superior lateral forms border. The muscle capitis obliquus

inferior border. forms capitis The muscle obliquus the inferior

veins artery, suboccipital CI, The the of contents ramus and vertebral include: of triangle posterior

cord LII The as spinal and in approximately the end it to as vertebrae adults, as high the extends low magnum TXII (Fig. disc disc although level LIII of from between LII or LI between can the foramen the vertebrae vertebra and as 2.53). spinal as as vertebra vertebra low to reach cord the neonates, LIV. can extends In approximately LIII but medullaris) end distal (the conus cord cone the The of is shaped. tissue continues filum the of of connective the (the inferiorly A fine of part apex from medullaris. filament pial terminale) the conus

its spinal not uniform along is cord length. The diameter in lower spinal and two the has the of or swellings limbs. It with enlargements associated major origin upper innervate that nerves regions in occurs the of T1, to associated limbs. in enlargement spinal the region innervate cervical upper A which with nerves origins C5 the innervate region the spinal nerves origins to limbs. A the S3, in lower lumbosacral the L1 with occurs which of enlargement associated

by of a of the marked The surface and spinal number (Fig. cord external is fissures sulci 2.54):

the fissure anterior of length surface. The extends median the anterior

surface. the extends along The posterior sulcus posterior median

where the side posterolateral of surface spinal the nerves posterior rootlets enter on The cord. of sulcus posterior each marks the

cord by gray Internally, has and the white central a surrounded small canal matter:

cross the in section form the matter columns nerve regions the which cell bodies, cord, a along columns H-shaped these The characteristic cord. gray appearance of longitudinal rich and in form central is in

cord surrounds the form ascend tracts the nerve processes, spinal that bundles which in matter information The in large to other from or levels or rich and white and is the gray to carry and brain. descend cord cell matter

two supply spinal The arterial comes to sources (Fig. the from cord 2.55). vessels, arteries cord, these at level; arteries lumbar consists predominantly of arteries, or the vertebral arteries surface foramina neck, the oriented superior the the feeder longitudinally spinal enter arising through cord; the the vertebral which in of from canal the and the deep intercostal on cervical that vessels, portion cervical segmental the in and the posterior feeder intervertebral to descend thorax, the abdomen. the in It of: arise every arteries and

foramen, rise posterior give an arteries spinal the segmental entering After anterior intervertebral radicular arteries (Fig. and to 2.55). vertebral occurs at level. every This the roots. anterior arteries radicular follow, and and posterior The supply, also arteries various levels, give off medullary vertebral spinal (Fig. segmental the arteries At segmental 2.55). directly oriented These these. vessels, the to reinforcing longitudinally vessels pass

of: branches originates left spinal The anterior the a that vertebral usually inferiorly, cord. that the a two approximately single vessels cavity, artery)—the arteries, (the also arteries—the posterior posterior within and of which sulcus descend median cord, spinal cord; vessels bracket inferior passes connection arteries along posterior each arise cerebellar posterolateral in which cavity as the the the spinal originate from spinal to the cranial directly along right posterior each consist spinal arising spinal of and artery parallel vertebral the as artery of spinal roots and resulting from union two terminal fissure, two single branch the surface anterior anterior the with the of the cranial artery, longitudinal

segmental posterior by medullary (Fig. anterior arteries eight ten are and spinal their The along length arteries to reinforced 2.55). magna is Adamkiewicz The (Fig. arteria of the radicularis artery the of or largest these 2.55). arterial enlargement. lower to the spinal thoracic the supply usually arises including the cord, the This lumbar of region, side, the portion on and lumbar lower in the upper left reinforces vessel or

Veins number a longitudinal channels drain the cord (Fig. spinal that of form 2.56):

Two the the posterior anterior pairs each on of bracket the and to of connections cord. roots veins side

the midline median channel One parallels fissure. anterior

One median sulcus. channel passes posterior midline along the

into azygos as systemic system segmentally connect of canal, longitudinal then drain into internal plexus the vertebral extradural the in thorax. which These in drains channels that veins, an (epidural) extensive vertebral with such space arranged major the the vessels also plexus vertebral intracranial internal with veins. communicates The

spinal the meningeal by the membrane mater and is the outermost (Fig. The is forming vertebral extradural from an dura separated canal space bones 2.59). is mater meningeal of the it cranial foramen layer dura of the skull. inner with magnum at the continuous Superiorly, forms vertebra the for lower the SII cord. of the filum border and at the dramatically sheath of spinal investing part of dural of an sac terminale Inferiorly, narrows level the pial the coccyx. the the This terminal dura (the part of vertebral surface extension terminale) to of posterior the filum bodies of mater cord-like of dural attaches the

their dura with covering (epineurium) and they become and spinal outer As of by the of are nerves of pass roots sleeves tubular part which merge laterally, mater, nerves. surrounded the

dura of is The arachnoid against, to, a membrane the adherent mater surface not deep (Fig. thin mater the delicate but 2.59). from by separated is mater space. the It pia the subarachnoid SII (see ends the vertebra of level The at Fig. mater arachnoid 2.53).

arachnoid (Fig. between subarachnoid CSF and space The mater the pia contains 2.59). the The the space with the is magnum foramen cord around the brain. subarachnoid continuous at subarachnoid surrounding spinal space Fig. space level vertebra the (see Inferiorly, at SII terminates subarachnoid lower the border approximately the of of 2.53).

on and mater side span the space they subarachnoid on the (arachnoid two tissue strands are one of the pia arachnoid adjacent interconnect and Delicate the mater membranes. trabeculae) other; continuous the with form space which to material, a are coat. Large over subarachnoid blood vessels suspended expand by continuous strands external similar in of vessels the the

farther cord. than The spinal space inferiorly the extends subarachnoid The approximately ends space disc LII, LI the to whereas spinal and lower (see subarachnoid the cord the of extends at SII Fig. vertebra between vertebrae approximately border 2.53). region inferior terminal space it end the of largest the in is where equina. subarachnoid spinal the the cord, cauda to The surrounds lower in subarachnoid CSF As region consequence, spinal be from the a endangering space the withdrawn the cord. lumbar without can

is mater spinal The adheres vascular cord the the spinal of that surface pia firmly (Fig. a to membrane 2.59). the and as the coatings posterior fissure into cross and reflects roots as and extends sleeve-like median subarachnoid they space. onto rootlets It anterior anterior coatings arachnoid the mater. onto the sleeve-like space, As exit the roots the reflect

cord longitudinally mater a and mater arachnoid toward each oriented On cord, extends (Fig. pia the from the sheet of spinal the (the of denticulate dura side ligament) laterally 2.59).

of that a Medially, cord the plane to attached ligament in spinal posterior and the is lies each rootlets. between anterior denticulate the origins

along each the extensions forms arachnoid each being the of with through to ligament mater. series triangular apex anchored denticulate mater a dura Laterally, free of its the border, extension

between of attachments posterior The rootlets. anterior points lateral the adjacent of ligaments exit denticulate occur generally and the subarachnoid to space. in function The the ligaments center cord position the spinal the of

Arrangement canal structures vertebral the in of

(Fig. of and The is bodies vertebrae, posterior discs, canal anteriorly by the intervertebral bordered: ligament the vertebral longitudinal flava, laminae side and spinous posteriorly pedicles laterally, the plane each intervertebral and 2.60); the the roots by ligaments the foramina; interspinous by median and vertebral and of in on the ligamenta and processes.

containing in and vertebral sac embedded the of an plexus space the connective Between veins vertebral dural tissue. walls canal fatty a the extradural is of

be skin through back. The regions in can vertebral of in the thoracic processes lumbar the midline the and spinous palpated the skin fascia. is superficial Between processes of and a spinous layer side and processes In do not adjacent lumbar associated spinous regions, gaps on the the adjacent between arches. overlap, of laminae in midline the resulting vertebral either

enters tap), adjacent out vertebral and space. carrying the lumbar between ligaments, supraspinous and the spinous through puncture the passes (spinal a extradural When processes, needle interspinous through mater the subarachnoid continues enters arachnoid The dura CSF. and which space, needle the and contains

posterior anterior (Fig. nerve and roots cord Each by to connected is spinal the spinal 2.61):

cell the the root are spinal contains root, neural at ganglion of posterior neurons neurons, information to The from embryologically foramen. the carrying end processes which cells, crest the are the distal posterior in CNS—the the sensory intervertebral bodies usually of of in a clustered derived sensory

neurons anterior of CNS—the motor motor primary The cell the the signals cord. bodies anterior carry of nerve the in which root are away contains spinal fibers, regions from

attach divide and spinal Medially, the into to rootlets, posterior cord. roots anterior the which

is posterior cord single gives rise form the of anterior area the pair that spinal segment a the which will and to spinal of rootlets, nerves. spinal A roots each a the join and posterior Laterally, spinal form on anterior nerve. to side

a emerges anterior an two nerve and intervertebral it larger ramus ramus posterior a foramen, as small major (Fig. from branches: spinal much Each into divides, 2.61):

the back. skin an narrow muscles) strip on of innervate posterior only muscles epaxial associated and back intrinsic (the The rami

those innervate skin, areas skeletal and for limbs rami hypaxial muscles) of of The most and head. the trunk, of body, certain regions other (the most the the including the anterior except of remaining muscles

small spinal each point gives Near of to division the into two recurrent rise four rami, nerve nerves Fig. meningeal posterior to and (sinuvertebral) anterior (see 2.59). supply discs, nerves reenter These dura, intervertebral and foramen blood ligaments, to vessels. the intervertebral

lumbar, (cervical, sacral) major brachial, by rami. are plexuses formed and All anterior somatic

vertebral pass canal of of the (Fig. shorter more than to obliquely coccygeal regions column, roots become spinal much cervical vertebral the spinal Because and the the cord is longer nerves from the 2.62).

a terminates vertebrae but In and between at cord between adults, vertebrae this LI can LII, the approximately and TXII and LIII. LII spinal disc the level between range vertebra at the cord the the vertebrae anterior in Consequently, nerves lower forming connected higher emerging levels. to are of vertebral between vertebral column posterior spinal roots and regions spinal

sacral, nerves posterior points vertebral reach lumbar, cord, pass of their coccygeal Below exit the roots and the the spinal anterior canal. inferiorly of to end from and the equina. cauda the roots of cluster terminal is This

of Nomenclature nerves spinal

pairs There of approximately are spinal 31 (Fig. nerves 2.62), L5, coccygeal eight thoracic according to position five five their nerve—Co. nerves—S1 to S5, sacral lumbar twelve to respect C8, associated to T12, nerves—T1 nerves—L1 vertebrae: with to one to nerves—C1 named cervical

between cervical emerges CI from The (Fig. the (C1) skull canal vertebral the first vertebra nerve and 2.63). vertebrae. the Therefore to nerves also from cervical vertebral above C2 respective emerge their canal C7 vertebrae between Because vertebrae, are C8 cervical emerges only there and TI. CVII seven emerge respective a vertebral nerves, consequence, below As vertebrae. spinal all their remaining beginning from with T1, canal the

Surface locate peripheral position are spinal back estimate testing the cord. the column, end used of for to of of and the of nerves, determine to muscle inferior groups the the to features approximate regions vertebral also in that occur the to organs and They posteriorly are thorax abdomen. locate used

curvatures Absence lateral of

has behind, normal the column viewed from When no lateral curvatures. vertebral masses side the between on straight The either vertical is (Fig. muscle of skin midline furrow 2.64).

the in sagittal plane

normal the the from column When curvatures and in secondary viewed (Fig. primary vertebral the side, cervical thoracic sacral/coccygeal curvatures regions regions and the in and lumbar has 2.65). The concave anteriorly. curvatures primary are posteriorly. concave are The secondary curvatures

bony vertebral associated structures locating with provide and A defining useful features for the for of muscles landmarks number column. palpable readily crest the scapula, external iliac (Fig. the Among protuberance, the and are these features occipital 2.66).

just The protuberance superior the of occipital external is hairline. in head palpable the back midline the to the at

the inferior border, angle and are The visible palpable. spine, easily and are often of medial scapula

iliac back. of the of posterior lateral is spine the crest superior spine near iliac entire wall the its the the lower base to anterior margin abdominal iliac superior The from along palpable at length, anterior the is The to the the visible superior posterior “sacral as midline. just a position often of spine dimple” iliac lateral

vertebral specific to identify How

Identification spinous processes (Fig. vertebral of can visualizing the structures, facilitate and regions of of column as inferior position such ends the space. the between used to 2.67A) differentiate of and the subarachnoid cord vertebral spinal deeper be

the CII can process vertebra deep identified the to spinous of most through in be protuberance The as inferior bony the palpation superior skull. midline

obscured spinous not because that of vertebra are Most CVII, for readily processes, of except are other the soft tissue. they by palpable

prominent The (Fig. eminence of as in at spinous the the of usually the process CVII visible neck base midline is a flexed. is when particularly neck 2.67B), the

protuberance is and a longitudinal neck Extending the the readily occipital is between as CVII ridge external nuchae, when skull flexed (Fig. apparent which the is the of ligamentum 2.67C).

is also spinous of CVII process the process visible TI, a the of is spinous Inferior which protuberance. to usually midline as process prominent Often of spinous the than is it (Fig. CVII more 2.67A,B).

process vertebra spinous spinous the the the with spine scapula of of TIII, is scapula inferior and vertebra of of is the the root of process level the same The as level TVII the (Fig. at angle 2.67A).

the process spinous and midpoint inferior (Fig. TXII vertical a the line of level vertebra of is the of angle with scapula the iliac crest The between 2.67A).

A of the through of highest horizontal vertebra point spinous between each the process on crosses side the crest iliac LIV. line processes and spinous LV can be spinous below LIII (Fig. above palpated vertebral the and The LIV process, respectively 2.67A).

sacral the dimples the of The SII iliac vertebral superior position the with are process level spinous that spine (Fig. mark posterior 2.67A).

column vertebral The the coccyx the of the palpable masses of at between gluteal (Fig. is tip the base 2.67A).

same vertebral their of always The tips the bodies. corresponding lie processes in not the vertebral spinous as plane horizontal do vertebral tips below. so that sloped body In lie are their and at the long the of downward the thoracic regions, processes level sharply spinous of at other TIII tip vertebral TIV. the words, level process vertebral spinous the In lies

tips position the and are the bodies. closely in spinous sacral generally and regions, In and lumbar processes than more palpable regions, reflect vertebral corresponding their thoracic shorter their sloped less of level. vertebra lies process of As vertebral LIV LIV the at approximately consequence, the end spinous the palpable a of

Visualizing inferior cord and of ends subarachnoid space spinal the the

of vertebral canal. The the cord the not does spinal entire occupy length or end LII; may vertebrae LII the as high terminates it and LIII. in it LI the as disc Normally the level however, disc between vertebrae as of adults, low at TXII as between and approximately level ends SII subarachnoid at The vertebra (Fig. space of the 2.68A).

it subarachnoid endangering spinous region be lower to to of space lumbar is cord, lumbar the Because able the vertebral without in identify position processes. accessed the spinal can be the important the The a with spinous vertebral level highest points LIV is process the horizontal crests. iliac between the line on In palpable their vertebral spinous the ends the the bodies. lumbar region, vertebral opposite of corresponding lie processes The (Fig. spinal the and LIII LIV accessed can and without levels between LIV subarachnoid space LV be vertebral between and endangering cord 2.68B). at ends posterior the which The superior is marking subarachnoid spines. space the level sacral with iliac dimples SII, level vertebral

of extrinsic the and A palpated. be back muscles can observed intrinsic of and number readily are trapezius these the latissimus of and (Fig. muscles dorsi largest The 2.69A 2.69B). and muscles Retracting the accentuate the midline rhomboid toward can the (Fig. scapulae muscle. 2.69C), to deep lie the which trapezius are (Fig. The the in muscles midline by erector longitudinal as spinae columns separated visible furrow two a 2.69A).

Fig. framework back. of Skeletal the 2.1

Fig. 2.2 the Curvatures column. of vertebral

of curvature(primary Cervical curvature)Sacral/coccygeal curvature)Gravity backEarly curvature)Lumbar curvature(primary curvature(secondary primarycurvature lineConcave curvature)Thoracic embryoAdultSomites curvature(secondary

Fig. movements. 2.3 Back

Fig. 2.4 system. Nervous

Fig. 2.5 Vertebrae.

Fig. A typical vertebra. 2.6 A. view. Superior B. view. Lateral

Fig. Back 2.7 muscles. A. muscles. Extrinsic Intrinsic B. muscles.

majorSpinalisIliocostalisErector spinal nerve cranial musclesTrue groupSerratus musclesInnervated by muscles scapulaeSpleniusRhomboid posteriorinferiorSerratus spinal innervated back rami minorSuperficial Deep anterior by nerves (trapezius) posteriorsuperiorSuboccipitalLevator XI nervesRhomboid rami spinaeLongissimusLatissimusdorsiTrapeziusExtrinsic of or of groupIntrinsic posterior groupABIntermediate

Fig. Vertebral 2.8 canal.

materAnterior longitudinalligamentAnterior ganglionTransverseprocessSpinousprocessPosterior fatVertebral materSubarachnoid materArachnoid body discExtradural of ramusPosition spaceDura Spinal internal vertebralvenous cordPia plexusIntervertebral spaceExtradural ramusPosterior spinal

Fig. section). (transverse nerves Spinal 2.9

Fig. 2.10 regions. Relationships to the other of back

region• and Cervical and ofC6-C1, to region• region• support arteries region• thoraxLumbar transmits moves and arteries lower framework pass aspect spinal for Thoracic posterior cord throughforamen head• head then supports limbs abdomenSacral magnum vertebral for for of weight travelin between transverse processes through bones• neck pelvisVertebral pelvic transmits support

Fig. spinal nerves. cord, canal, spinal 2.11 and Vertebral

cord)C2C3C1SubarachnoidspaceLumbosacralenlargement(of IIDura ofsubarachnoidspace–sacralvertebra of spinal ofvertebraeSpinalganglion spinalcord LI–LIIvertebraeEnd 1121110112233445595678412345678123C8T1T2T3T4T5T6T7T8T9T10T11T12L1L2L3L4L5S1S2S3S4S5CoC7C6C5C4Cervicalenlargement(of materPedicles at cord)Arachnoid materEnd spinal

Fig. 2.12 Intervertebral foramina.

Fig. posterior Dermatomes rami nerves. innervated by of spinal 2.13

be rami on and and not may asdermatomes may the not C2C3C4T2T3T4T5T6T7T8T9L5S1S2S4S3S5, cutaneousbranches of therefore have L4 Co*The represented backL4L3L2L1T11T12T10 dorsal L5

Fig. 2.14 Vertebrae.

Fig. vertebral cervical column. of of 2.15 region Radiograph Anteroposterior view. A. view. Lateral B.

CVII process IICIISpinous of ARib

process CVII)Posterior Vertebralbody (atlas)B of of discVertebra CIIILocation ofintervertebral prominens(spinous tubercleof CI

Fig. of region thoracic column. of Radiograph 2.16 vertebral Anteroposterior view. A. Lateral B. view.

of processTransverse processVertebral intervertebral RibPedicleLocation discSpinous bodyA

foramenVertebral BIntervertebral intervertebral bodyLocation of disc

Fig. of of 2.17 column. region Radiograph lumbar vertebral A. Anteroposterior view. B. Lateral view.

RibTransverse LIVA of process processPedicleSpinous

foramenB of LIIIIntervertebral discVertebral body ofintervertebral Location

Fig. 2.18 of the Development vertebrae.

Fig. vertebra. Typical 2.19

Fig. vertebrae. Regional 2.20 A. vertebra. cervical Typical

axis. B. and Atlas vertebra. Typical thoracic C. Typical D. vertebra. lumbar

E. Sacrum. F. Coccyx.

of belowDemifacet viewSuperior tuberclePosterior for ligamentof for vertebra)Atlas (upper rib and Axis ligament)PosteriorlongitudinalligamentFacets viewPosterior ribDemifacet densInferior head own articulationwith articulationwith ribCDApical cruciformligament (CII viewLateral vertebra) ligamentsAtlas for viewPosterosuperior of occipital atlasTransverse viewFacet partof bodyTransverse (CI posterior alarligamentsAlarligamentsTectorial archLateral its membrane ofalar of skullAxis vertebra)and Transverse viewBAnterior of processTransverseprocessSpinousprocessMammillaryprocessSpinousprocessSuperior viewSuperior own ligament of tubercleAnterior for Axis(CII (CII vertebra)Atlas longitudinalband head viewSuperior processDensDensForamen baseof massPosterior archFacet vertebra)Transverse tubercle forattachment condyleImpressionsfor transversariumSuperior (CI ofits longitudinal atlasVertebral (CIvertebra)and densFacet for ligament articulationwith

cornuIncomplete articulation viewDorsolateral foraminaPosterior canal for viewPosterior foraminaCoccygeal sacral Anterior viewFacet boneEFAnterior pelvic with sacral sacral

Fig. (atlas) Radiograph showing and CII CI vertebrae. 2.21 (axis) Open view. (odontoid peg) mouth, anteroposterior

Superior articular mass lateral faceton CI CIIDensInferior of of articularfacet

Fig. foramen. 2.22 Intervertebral

Fig. lumbar the 2.23 vertebral arches region. Spaces adjacent between in

Fig. MR in image sagittal demonstrating myelomeningocele. T1-weighted lumbosacral the plane a 2.24 lumbosacral region. of absence spinous is the There processes an laminae in and

Fig. the the lumbar vertebra. of Radiograph column L1 vertebral the 2.25 fracture of wedge demonstrating a region of patients This seen osteoporosis. is with in typically condition

Fig. all which region lumbar the of middle the into vertebral of 2.26 Radiograph bodies. column the of demonstrating of the three been intrapedicular have placed vertebral needles, bone cement, high-density been that as harden. material has injected is liquid which will The a radiopaque

Fig. 2.27 scoliosis. Severe view. Radiograph, A. anteroposterior CT, B. view. anterior Volume-rendered

Fig. CT Sagittal kyphosis. showing 2.28

Fig. 2.29 vertebral Variations in number. cervical vertebrae. A. bodies vertebral of Fused B. Hemivertebra. through the LV Axial slice vertebra. MRI C. of tip the iliolumbar the process iliac runs the from LV crest. transverse The to ligament vertebra

vertebraeA Fused cervical bodies of

first sacral of HemivertebraPartial vertebraB lumbarization

Fig. collapsed with A. infiltration. due of spine to 2.30 diffuse vertebrae myeloma a metastatic MRI multiple B2. B1, cancer (PETCT) Positron cells that in high tomography metabolism. spine study CT emission glucose have the detecting

Fig. joints. Intervertebral 2.31

fibrosusNucleus Anulus hyalinecartilage pulposusLayer of

Fig. joints. Zygapophysial 2.32

Fig. Uncovertebral joint. 2.33

Fig. Disc 2.34 protrusion. resonance lumbar the the vertebral magnetic of of region images T2-weighted column. plane. Sagittal A.

B. plane. Axial

Fig. column. 2.35 vertebral ligaments posterior longitudinal Anterior and of

Fig. 2.36 Ligamenta flava.

Fig. ligamentum nuchae. and 2.37 Supraspinous ligament

Fig. 2.38 Interspinous ligaments.

Fig. ligamentum through bilateral slice 2.39 hypertrophy flavum. demonstrating the of Axial the lumbar spine MRI

Fig. lumbar 2.40 (“Scottie oblique region vertebral dog”). of of column, Radiograph view A. view. radiograph vertebral of column, of Normal oblique lumbar region (eye), (nose), articular a (ear), the process In (neck) dog. inferior leg), this and resemble process superior process pedicle view, (front articular pars transverse interarticularis of pars a visible as the fracture collar. of break A is of the neck the or a dog, the appearance interarticularis in pars of B. interarticularis. Fracture of interarticularis. the shows lumbar pars of LV C. fracture spine CT

Fig. 2.41 interbody lumbar fusion (ALIF). Anterior A. fusion B. interbody lumbar (PLIF). Posterior

Fig. Superficial muscles—trapezius dorsi. and 2.42 back latissimus of group

fascia occipital of branches crestGreater nerve(posterior nerve(posterior of branches of ramiTrapeziusLatissimus ramus Spinous posterior ramiLateral posterior process of dorsiThoracolumbar C3)Medial ramus of CVIIAcromionSpine of C2)Third scapulaIliac occipital

Fig. levator superior 2.43 dorsi, to deep rhomboid the located minor, and back. group of latissimus the part with in of back rhomboid Superficial and trapezius muscles—trapezius major, scapulae

Fig. blood Innervation and supply 2.44 trapezius. of

branch artery nerve [XI]Superficial dorsiRhomboid minorRhomboid majorLevator TrapeziusLatissimus scapulaeAccessory of transverse cervical

Fig. levator scapulae. muscles Rhomboid and 2.45

Fig. muscles. supply of Innervation blood rhomboid the 2.46 and

arteryDeep of minorRhomboid cervical transverse majorLevator scapular dorsiRhomboid of artery nerveTrapeziusLatissimus scapulaeSuperficial cervical transverse Dorsal branch branch

Fig. Intermediate 2.47 muscles—serratus muscles. posterior of group back

Fig. section). deep muscles fascia 2.48 Thoracolumbar and the (transverse back

Fig. Deep muscles—spinotransversales and group splenius muscles 2.49 capitis back cervicis). of (splenius

Fig. of Deep muscles—erector group back muscles. 2.50 spinae

Iliocostalis of cervicisIliocostalisLongissimus crestSplenius lumborum Ligamentum thoracisIliocostalis nuchaeLongissimus process thoracisLongissimus thoracisSpinalisIliocostalis cervicisSpinalis capitis CVIIIliac Spinous capitisLongissimus

Fig. 2.51 muscles. group Deep segmental of back and muscles—transversospinales

superiorRectus Spinous capitis of posterior spinaeRotatores capitis costarum(short, inferiorObliquus capitisMultifidus posterior process majorSemispinalis long)Levatores thoracisIntertransversariusErector capitis minorRectus CVIIObliquus capitis long)Semispinalis thoracis(short,

Fig. muscles—suboccipital group 2.52 Deep muscles. of back shows the the also This triangle. of suboccipital borders

capitis artery capitis ramus capitisVertebral capitisLongissimus cervicisSemispinalis posterior inferiorRectus posterior CIIPosterior Rectus capitisSemispinalis capitis C1Obliquus of capitisSplenius process capitisSemispinalis superior of Spinous majorSplenius capitis minorObliquus

Fig. 2.53 cord. Spinal

spinal cord)Lumbosacralenlargement(of medullarisInferior materEnd part End spinal of ofvertebrae subarachnoidspace LI–LIIConus SIICervicalenlargement(of spinalcord partPedicles of partDural cord)FilumterminalePial ofarachnoid

Fig. cord. spinal of 2.54 the Features

Fig. 2.55 spinal cord. that the Arteries supply arteries all shown). Anterior are spinal (not of segmental spinal view A. cord

B. Segmental supply cord. spinal of

Posterior fromsegmental trunkThyrocervical artery sacral arteryCostocervical spinal spinal Adamkiewicz(branch arteryPosterior medullaryarteriesAnterior arteryADeep arteryArtery artery)Ascending arterySegmental cervical cervicalarteryVertebral trunkSubclavian fromsegmentalspinal arterySegmentalspinal of medullaryarteries spinalartery)Lateral (branch intercostalarterySegmentalspinal arterySegmental

Fig. 2.56 drain cord. the spinal Veins that

Fig. 2.57 MRI spine. the of intervertebral the endplates. destruction There of disc the is discitis T10-T11 adjacent of with abscess, epidural impinges is prevertebral abscess and a an also cord. which the There

Fig. following the of demonstrates 2.58 CI the breaks CT at level injury. atlas an two in closed of the ring axial-loading

Fig. Meninges. 2.59

Fig. in vertebral (lumbar and 2.60 Arrangement back the region). canal structures the of

foramenLaminaPediclePosterior spinae of ligamentInterspinous discIntervertebral ligamentLumbar diaphragmAortaPsoasDuraQuadratus ligament longitudinal flavaSupraspinous plexus extradural equinaSkinVertebraIntervertebral musclesLigamenta Crura veinsin arteryVeinCauda spaceErector vertebral of lumborumInternal

Fig. nerve. Basic 2.61 a organization spinal of

Fig. spinal of canal. in Course 2.62 nerves the vertebral

cord)Cauda spinal cord)C2C3C1Lumbosacral equinaPedicles vertebraeSpinal of enlargement(of ganglion spinal 1121110112233445595678412345678123C8T1T2T3T4T5T6T7T8T9T10T11T12L1L2L3L4L5S1S2S3S4S5CoC7C6C5C4Cervical enlargement(of

Fig. Nomenclature nerves. spinal of the 2.63

oftheir C7 to to emergesuperior C2 topedicle betweenskull to vertebraNerves to pediclesNerves T1 C1 nervesT2 Nerve of vertebraeC2C1C3C4C5C6C7C8T1CICVIITIPedicleTransition vertebraNerve emergeinferior innomenclatureof and inferior C8 pedicles emerges Co CVII emerges respective CI

Fig. 2.64 back. appearance the Normal of A. In women. B. men. In

Fig. 2.65 Normal column. the of curvatures vertebral

Fig. with a Back palpable 2.66 bony major woman landmarks indicated. of

protuberancePosterior scapulaMedial of externaloccipital of of spineIliac scapulaPosition scapulaInferior iliac crest border of superior angle Spine

Fig. of processes The back the 2.67 associated structures indicated. spinous positions with vertebral and A. man. In a B. In a flexed. with neck woman and vertebral processes spinous TI prominent The are labeled. CVII neck nuchae. C. ligamentum accentuate to with woman In the a flexed

spine spinous spinous Tip vertebral angle scapulaHighest of protuberanceLIV spinous processTVII processA scapulaInferior of spinous spinous of vertebral vertebral processCII spinous externaloccipital processPosition of processTI crestSacral vertebral of point dimpleCVII vertebral crestIliac spinous vertebral of processRoot iliac coccyxSII vertebral processTIII spinous processTXII vertebral

Fig. spinal with Back of indicated. subarachnoid the cord ends the 2.68 and space A. a man. In

space indicated. Back the of spinal the and ends with cord subarachnoid B. spinous on side a accentuates vertebral and her woman lumbar in position, which In a adjacent arches. the between processes the spaces opens lying vertebral fetal in cord. regions be Cerebrospinal without can subarachnoid the lower space spinal fluid lumbar from endangering withdrawn the

processTXII betweenLI vertebral end Tip vertebral of spinous spinous coccyxSII spinous end of processInferior spinal vertebra)Inferior process cord(normally vertebral and spaceALIV ofsubarachnoid LII

processTip vertebral spinous of vertebral spinous coccyxB LIV processNeedleLV

Fig. Back 2.69 muscles. A. and muscles erector dorsi, with latissimus spinae outlined. In trapezius, a man

muscles. Back B. a dorsi lateral to the man In arms the latissimus accentuate abducted of muscles. with margins accentuate a forcibly with to In C. and woman externally scapulae rotated muscles. rhomboid the retracted

Fig. the cauda disc MRI spine herniation filaments. lumbar in reveals of compression the 2.70 of of equina L2-3 resulting posterior the

of back Table Superficial group 2.1 muscles (appendicular)

of muscles back (respiratory) 2.2 Intermediate group Table

muscles Spinotransversales Table 2.3

2.4 Erector back spinae muscles of Table group

Transversospinales 2.5 group of muscles back Table

2.6 muscles Table Segmental back

back 2.7 Suboccipital muscles Table of group

the clinic In

a sides fuse in usually Spina is vertebral in to vertebral vertebrae, of during in arches, bifida resulting lower two development, the fail disorder “open” an canal which (Fig. 2.24). bifida. types two spina are There of

of LV is in occulta, The commonest vertebral or type SI. defect there the which arch is a in spina bifida fuse as 10% posterior failure many defect to of individuals midline. in as of results and This the in the arch in occurs processes. asymptomatic, a Clinically, hair although patient spinous is examination may tuft reveal the physical of the over

of of a the with arch at of The complete failure large lumbosacral posterior of spina more bifida meninges. outpouching severe involves form the the fusion junction, may This myelomeningocele). (a portion fluid cerebrospinal meningocele) or (a the spinal cord of a contain problems including may variety result deficits, bladder neurological These with of abnormalities walking and function. in a

clinic the In

in relatively a is cement body vertebra (typically filled bone methacrylate). can of a new Vertebroplasty technique be with which the methyl for the include from secondary tumor The the may indications vertebral collapse be to which body, technique pain body and vertebral infiltration. commonly is of in most and procedure cause patients. considerable which wedge are a for osteoporotic performed fractures, The pain older morbidity

(Fig. wedge fractures Osteoporotic is thoracolumbar vertebroplasty occur performing to 2.25) typically in region, the relatively and and straightforward. the approach novel general light or The sedation under anesthetic. procedure performed is identified is on X-ray image. guidance pedicle anteroposterior Using the the cannula A vertebral the body. through is pedicle the metal placed into via cement into vertebral bone body the (Fig. Liquid injected is the cannula 2.26). of is cement The bone two-fold. the function the strength of the and height. of further body vertebral increases it loss First, prevents Furthermore, is disrupt degree a that endings. is bone the generated of to heat pain nerve cement as there sets, believed by wedge to from height the liquid restore Kyphoplasty or aims is the a bone of injecting similar cement technique vertebral body. lost into vertebral the all body fracture that some

the In clinic

lateral curvature Scoliosis vertebral the abnormal of column an is (Fig. 2.27).

involves curvature rotational of A also the true upon element scoliosis not another. (rightor but vertebra left-sided) only one a

The are termed those and understanding scoliosis idiopathic types of occur or little which about scoliosis. are we why how for commonest they have of of leading that growth bone initial rotation some distractive to to applied in of alters then forces the curvature. there vertebrae, growth spinal is ultimately mechanical and vertebral changes and compressive the plates, the the which locations axial through speed is changes It thought age never are tend or in birth juvenile, occur adolescent groups. These infantile, either at the present to and are bodies (pedicles in and these and laminae) posterior normal vertebral elements The patients.

is is (congenital from When developmental birth with abnormalities. other a it scoliosis present associated scoliosis) usually wall, a with abnormalities strong and the heart patients, is tract, these In disease. association other there genitourinary chest of careful patients needs of evaluation specialists. This by group many

is which in but A that abnormal. of group scoliosis important is muscle rare the is dystrophy commonest example. the Muscular does alignment as column, the the and abnormal The curvature a normal muscle not develops retain of result. vertebral make the A needed diagnosis. is muscle biopsy to

that produce bone tumors, tumors, can protrusions. disc scoliosis cord localized include spinal Other and disorders

clinic In the

Kyphosis a of column is “hunchback” curvature deformity. region, in the producing the vertebral abnormal thoracic disease certain the lesion. infection in vertebral the This where at of of thoracic usually which site most tuberculosis occurs dramatic angulated a secondary becomes the to body, states, of kyphosis condition the is deformity, a of the that use prevalent (Fig. medication antituberculous deformity gibbus produces was before the This 2.28).

clinic the In

the abnormal producing of a the column deformity. vertebral region, is in Lordosis curvature lumbar swayback

clinic the In

may diseases these fused. usually seven although There are in be vertebrae, certain cervical cervical of (Fig. Fusion vertebrae or high-riding CI associated abnormalities, associated be 2.29A) which example can of Klippel-Feil CII and is for may and a with with be there and in syndrome, vertebrae other abnormalities. CV fusion CVI,

are in Variations also vertebrae number well described. of the thoracic

of the lumbar of (sacralization LV the the of lumbar vertebra commonest vertebrae sacrum abnormalities is One partial with a fusion in the vertebra). the SI sacrum vertebra) occur sacral may (lumbarization of first (Fig. from of Partial separation vertebra also 2.29B). The band a crest ligament, transverse the of iliolumbar runs LV of the the be LV from which that by process can connective bilaterally to iliac the (Fig. tissue tip identified is usually vertebra of 2.29C).

vertebra on develops (Fig. occurs side hemivertebra only one a when A 2.29B).

clinic In the

The cancer vertebrae and

cancer metastatic spread of cells). for are (secondary The common sites disease vertebrae the destroying bone. or and vertebral either and formation leading destruction interrupt mechanical bodies cancer properties bone the normal turnover, When bone the of cell grow they posterior within elements, the to cells to injury A collapse vertebral (Fig. minor lead may therefore 2.30A). higher normal cells Cancer metabolism much adjacent with a glucose compared bone have cells. metastatic cancer be glucose metabolized administering has a then therefore radioisotope-labeled can tracing labeled detected by (Fig. where been to glucose the and These cells patient 2.30B). contain spinal and that canal, may metastatic the the fragments tumor nerves compressing Importantly, vertebrae into cord. extensive disease vertebral extrude of

the In clinic

is quantity bone Osteoporosis is which but in condition deficient. pathophysiologic is normal bone a of quality the and is in commonly disorder in a men bone in occurs in women that 50s It 60s their 70s. and their metabolic

and status, women. level in levels in nutritional of the influence factors and, including particular, of estrogen predetermination, Many activity genetic osteoporosis, development

Typical fractures complications and of radius, body vertebral the include fractures. distal fractures, “crush” hip osteoporosis of

poor-quality age are With fracture. bone, to patients and increasing more susceptible require who long be Healing consequently stays hospital impaired and these prolonged tends rehabilitation. patients, to in elderly

absorptiometry to (DXA) develop dual-photon identified osteoporosis scanning. by can likely Patients be X-ray detected and of passed can photons the counting be X-rays the number the absorbed bone, and bone given, by by number through Low-dose X-rays of the are dose knowing the calculated. patient bone fractures. can for at can correlated predict the used directly to osteoporotic with mass, whether this be The risk be of X-ray amount absorption a and is

In the clinic

extremely Back disorder. pain common is an to It impinging problems on mechanical related can disc nerve. protrusion be to or a may remove necessary and be that operate discs, is disc involving cases the In the on nerve. pressing it to

the mechanical infrequently, patients discomfort, by Not to disease. attributed complain is pain immediate caused degenerative of which and may therefore be found; pain cause is no joint is needle inject One corticosteroid. facet and pass with to and it the local a the of treatments anesthetic into

the clinic In

intervertebral Herniation of discs

portion and rings vertebrae central (the (anulus a fibrosus). The of are discs fibrous of series a the complex nucleus between made up pulposus) anulus can track. within nucleus can fibrosus of A occur through tear which pulposus the the material the of or period (Fig. a on impinge structures time, to vertebral foramen neural into material the track into After intervertebral canal may the this 2.34). is a pain. cause of common back This directly to the posteriorly on nerves, posterolaterally impinge lumbar of cord on adjacent impinge depending level, A pedicle descending to the the the may or the protrude disc may root. the on protrude and or roots

cervical regions often In of osteophyte column, the disc cervical termed bars. are vertebral and disc become ossified protrusions

the In clinic

a synovial Some diseases have predilection rather for symphyses. than joints affects bursae, resulting and example in rheumatoid of typical which lining. is and A joints its joint synovial primarily destruction arthritis, synovial the usually are preserved. Symphyses

clinic In the

flava with ligamenta (Fig. canal vertebral important structures are associated the The 2.39). vertebral ligamenta flava conditions the of the degenerative In may column, hypertrophy. with hypertrophy arthritic often joints. is the and change This of zygapophysial associated disc can a hypertrophy, flava combination, hypertrophy, dimensions canal, zygapophysial the and ligamenta of syndrome In producing mild stenosis. joint of the the vertebral spinal reduce protrusion

clinic In the

anywhere column. fractures occur the Vertebral can along vertebral under heal will appropriate instances, In circumstances. the fracture most fracture canal of damage severity the the At the tissues determines of time patient’s to the and injury, vertebral contents the of it but not the the that is condition. related surrounding itself

and clinical of and of cervical arbitrary into Vertebral ligament; longitudinal flava, is three the ligaments, supraspinous ligaments, posterior and made the middle the divided “columns”: interspinous the the the column. the comprises column the anterior up ligamentum column posterior and vertebral vertebral column vertebral nuchae longitudinal in is consists bodies column ligamenta anterior body stability the the ligament;

stable is usually of analgesia. rest injury of requiring and more than appropriate one Destruction clinical a the columns little be two of fixation Disruption highly likely columns and immobilization. unstable requires and is to spinal A in the injury prevent of and significant create requires event to usually and column to further neurological results neurological extension vertebral stability. a defect fixation three-column

complex series stability. At of a craniocervical the junction, ligaments create injury significant stability, of disrupts spinal incident cord high. a chances the traumatic extremely craniocervical the are If quadriplegia. consequences The are from hypotension of division In spinal C3 to C5), function nerves may of respiratory arises of part central paralysis nervous and system. blood sympathetic disruption autonomic (which the result addition, the pressure) (low compromised the nerve from by severe phrenic may of be the

lower unlikely range of is and although vertebral involving function problems limbs, may the complex respiratory Mid and to compromised. neurological below a column the disruption be C5, level upper produce cervical lower of

are injuries rare. Lumbar column vertebral usually force. occur, involve When they significant they further and the and rupture. fractures a force the of to organs a that visceral rest axial required Knowing skeleton fracture assess for vertebra, the abdominal significant must is one

structures between Vertebral tissues and involve vertebrae. injuries the soft the may supporting also the dislocations Typical that examples and unifacetal hyperflexion this vertebral are in injuries. occur bifacetal of cervical

of the a is inferior facet term (Fig. pars vertebra between specific region describe clinical interarticularis to the and (zygapophysial) a joints superior The 2.40A). athletes. in to region susceptible is trauma, This especially

occurs vertebral anteriorly the If body compress fracture canal. around and a the interarticularis, pars slip the vertebral may

are (Fig. the for sites LV levels pars LIV and common most interarticularis The fractures 2.40B,C). and parts instead are are the column example, apophyseal column.) of for to of instead terms often back in and not joints terms zygapophysial used shorthand vertebral of strictly used anatomical; joints (Clinicians facet joints, is that spinal refer

its anteriorly to pars possible fracture. a slip is for interarticularis a without inferior vertebra counterpart It upon this joints, Usually related to change. the facet of is degenerative facet anatomy joint abnormal termed is spondylolisthesis. disorder This

In clinic the

on procedures back the Surgical

commonly upon the that prolapsed producing and disc sac, (thecal) symptoms the A may meningeal most intervertebral attributable nerve to impinge cord, root, level. allow In that instances undergo of resolve may to will degree protrusion disc some intervention. involution without a symptoms the and remove some to of resolve require failure may surgery loss pain, the function, disc instances protrusion. In to

disc level the is importance the the surgery. before protrusion of It utmost that of is identified may the operating wrong require MRI This level. and to fluoroscopy on scanning on-table prevent approach the the spinous the left prominent will A site or to the the midline right disc to upon of depend most processes bulge. of space of removal may some the In instances relieve potential symptoms. will the lamina and increase small a the ligamentum (windowing) flavum. fenestration surgeons Some perform within to canal. This provides the access and sac meningeal nerve gently contents the offending exposing disc. its The the retracted, and root are removing root and the disc the nerve dissected its canal. is The effect on free,

inferior one it vertebra instances when superior performed in fusion is fusion vertebra, be some may and fuse the necessary. Spinal necessary or to is corresponding multilevel with disc either they mechanical infiltration, produced related after stabilization the pain varied, elements. include or from Indications stabilization stabilization is when to posterior fracture, the from tumor though are and

methods a elements, approach number in posterior fusion, fusing of a (Fig. are disc are some fused and anterior can approach replacement 360° performed, the instances posterior a anterior in where elements and an the of There disc through posterior the or fusion either by the fusion or which a removal and be surgical bodies vertebral either 2.41A,B).

clinic In the

of in interruption rotation appear above in to by as of impaired because the shrug may arm the head caused weakness resistance). the (i.e., against of shoulder, [XI], of shoulder nerve the drooping attempting Weakness shoulder inability trapezius, raise to scapula, the the raise the an or accessory the

A to resulting the the to or an in, doing pull-up. a use, upward pull the thoracodorsal or inability capacity body to an from diminishes dorsi, injury nerve, while the weakness climbing latissimus

result the dorsal laterally). position to An muscle’s normal prevent to antagonistic scapula may pulling affected side is from the nerve, the (i.e., muscles the on the in of shift of scapula the the lateral the rhomboids, scapula the lost innervates scapular inability of position a injury which because affected in

the In clinic

adjacent body to bloodstream The discs from of poorly spinal within arteries the immediately the the lie within intervertebral endplates, the discs terminal branches spread vascularized; the to infection (Fig. are however, can discs which vertebral the 2.57). the lungs include and sources urinary Common tract. of infection

In clinic the

atlas and the Fractures of axis

due including injury contains respiratory injury cord which the brainstem, types Fractures vertebra (the and cardiac worst lead CI of atlas) centers. axis) of and the the spinal vertebra death and of can to potentially to paralysis (the CII vertebral closed a no atlas body. ring is The with injuries, head fracture, shallow than site while ring a roof one or breaks as on into of more where type the accident, the the a at (Fig. vehicle such “burst” Axial-loading hitting diving motor head water the can in a cause of car hitting 2.58). Geoffrey in Jefferson often first Jefferson, British called so these this of described fractures. fracture neurosurgeon, types 1920, are pattern The fractures

and of the the base of tip which the due dens, to the of axis occur dens, result atlas. the in of or usually fracture body the severe through of can hyperextension Fractures flexion, judicial hyperextension In C2 the distraction through spondylolisthesis causing on is fracture hangings, and atlas injury and there of pedicles C3. fracture often a fracture. is called This hangman’s type of

neck to injury the atlas can injuries, pose In unstable or in there spinal upper atlanto-axial cord. ligaments, of render which to severe the axis, upper to and be the fractures the and many of absence the brainstem may risk even neck cases

the clinic In

varying lead cord sensory (paralysis) the of motor column of termed quadriplegia degrees all or the and portion in injury limbs, tetraplegia. the vertebral in can 4 to impairment of An spinal to function cervical loss An innervation the upper of levels in because can the in injury diaphragm. of result death vertebral of cervical to column the spinal limbs, injury the below termed sensory impairment paraplegia. degrees TI to level the (paralysis) of lower function can in and lead of cord An motor in to varying

the In clinic

to carried tap is examination. obtain lumbar (puncture) out A of a for sample CSF of a space the (CSF space) subarachnoid and conduit addition, agents, inject to antibiotics, needle chemotherapeutic anesthetics. passage into or is used In

is LII around an access to terminates spinal of disc subarachnoid the the the The ideal region the level the vertebrae between because in lumbar and cord site adult. LI space The vertebra. the SII lower space the of of subarachnoid extends to region the border large is cord. containing no but CSF-filled spinal therefore and sacral lumbar nerve There space a roots

the position. Depending the prone patient in clinician’s or on the lateral is preference, placed the spinous into extradural needle is the passed A space. processes the in between in midline to subarachnoid punctures space. enter the arachnoid mater dura advancement and Further the needles away push without from the the Most any causing patient symptoms. roots tip the subarachnoid in is be aspirated. needle fluid Once the can the space, situations, CSF it measure important some is In to pressure.

or into space the space subarachnoid Local extradural roots. anesthetics to the anesthetize be and nerve the injected sacral can lumbar on out which is anesthesia general useful for the be can operations the pelvis need anesthesia. carried Such the then for legs, and without lying position. When out, side the in carried patient the her or and position or in not must the head-down erect be his on procedures are is lies on or side, unilateral. the be patient If to her likely a his anesthesia If potentially position, the respiration. cranially is can the head-down anesthetic patient placed and pass in the depress

choose In anesthesiologists carry instances, some anesthesia. out to extradural and placed mater. the areolar A the ligament, through skin, the into needle ligament, around is dura fat supraspinous and tissue interspinous ligamenta flava nerve the agent subarachnoid Anesthetic space. anesthetize vertebral to around diffuse is the exiting diffuses roots the into introduced and and canal

In clinic the

children. in the is that Herpes chickenpox produces virus zoster the remains cells In spinal virus some ganglia. dormant patients the in the of nerve travels activated that the supplied and the along Under neuronal circumstances, the areas certain becomes bundles virus dermatome). (the to by A exquisitely which characteristically painful. rash is ensues, typical this disorder. characteristic dermatomal this of Importantly, distribution is

In clinic the

extremely stage common all is condition an some their life. individuals during pain affecting almost Back at its attachments key identify relates pain to and It column back structures. of or is to to whether clinical the relates the vertebral other importance

other produce and mortality lead can pain to morbidity. The consider failure significant back may potential that structures to the from may Pain situated organs in retroperitoneum. number back the a to of refer and the pancreatic be refers pain cancer may particular pancreatitis. to and with associated Pancreatic in back to tumors, pain, renal system refers in renal Renal collecting stones by which the also be produced back. typically may the or this posterior central is can More produce pain. not unilateral; back often usually than however, it lymph sign a central preand pain infection, posterior back the lymphoma. of or produce nodes be malignancy, in Enlarged solid region and may para-aortic may Hodgkin’s tumor as aorta (abdominal back aortic aneurysm) An may without pain it cause abdominal enlarging enlarges rupture. critical lifesaving. of as of pain, potential to is it a this structure think will because back cause treatment be Therefore pain the a aneurysm Moreover, abdominal in acute may ruptured cause instance. also first back aortic

pain and back assessment that the structures but other back. only miss column also patients anatomical important not in produce chest all of radiating to not may and order signs symptoms the vertebral careful In abdomen of the requires to

emergency back 50-year-old started lower had man department days that several A severe the to brought with was pain ago. now fecal weakness 24 inability his and and to legs. had past the in urine he reports episodes hours has pass and incontinence numbness both two of In

physical and the dorsiflexing toes. examination feet and strength man his The reduced attending during knee and that performed when extension physician found had a knees in as perineal numbness and reduced (saddle) well also the as He tone. ankles, had his reduced region, in anal reflexes sphincter

the and sensory both symptoms sacral lumbar spine, concern and examination in findings roots multiple nerve pathways. raised patient’s The physical and serious compression for of motor affecting in knee reduced power reduced roots. suggestive and compression nerve reflexes was L4 knees His his of the of extending feet ability roots. L5 reduced nerve and his compression was suggestive of dorsiflex of to His toes the perineal S5 His of and and nerve of and S2 his nerve compression roots, the of roots. was S4, compression S1 suggestive numbness suggestive ankle was reduced the reflexes of S3,

urgent compressing scan, diagnosis cauda for A to giving herniating syndrome syndrome the presence severely the an which made, L2-3 transferred a of was equina the equina, rise confirmed was of patient equina and the disc MRI cauda cauda (Fig. 2.70). underwent surgical the made equina a patient cauda recovery. and The full of decompression

degenerative horsetail-like this case), (as its appearance, canal. which a roots stenosis traumatic abscess, derives caused following from name of of The “cauda has lumbar central equina.” in fracture severe medullaris tumor, equina beyond cauda disc conus the sacral be fragments by the or of a the nerve it Compression collection injury, herniating and may

irreversible to emergency compressed as surgical the to nerve classed damage prevent roots. Cauda a syndrome permanent is equina and

serious in accident. involved was car a man A 45-year-old his the he with cord. of cervical On examination region to to the a damage spinal vertebral had injury column severe In became breathing stopped. fact, his and erratic

If cervical spinal level cord the C5, injury stop. is is to the of likely breathing above phrenic from takes The C5 C3, origin diaphragm. nerve and and supplies the C4, becomes edematous immediately the may cease C5, superiorly. below the Breathing and progresses as cord is but damage not if so lesion just does plus are by [XI]. some respiratory muscles may In muscles, neck by nerve the the innervated and using which trapezius exchange sternocleidomastoid addition, and ventilatory occur accessory

move patient sense The lower and limbs. his was unable to upper or

patient paralysis limbs quadriplegic. The and is upper and the therefore has lower of breathing C5. level of level unaffected, below or the is C5 at If the of is the lesion the upper which nerve via the limbs The brachial plexus, at supply begins C5 is the to level. level. above the the at C5 spinal cord of site injury is The or

this is the transected cervical although has the intact. that important It remember is to the in been level cord region, cord below is the but lost. the therefore communication injury, below Reflex may activity brain occur with

of woman 25-year-old increasing complained pain. lumbar back A groin, to was an right touch. have lump in to enlarging tender Over the noted was which she mildly the ensuing weeks the cough complained and a mucus productive sputum she patient of direct On a blood, and with temperature. had containing mild also questioning,

which The a pulmonary radiograph lung mass, the history. apical cavitating revealed explains chest

is lung of the Given primary age patient the a cancer unlikely. history lung in the rest hemoptysis sputum) the and patient the a infection. up The (coughing of blood has the suggest apex lung, (TB) radiographic cavity Given in the a the of made. of tuberculosis diagnosis chest of the findings a was of This pus, was which bronchoscopy confirmed cultured. and by aspiration was

infection, the LI. to vertebra spread the blood pulmonary via the tuberculous During had bacillus patient’s the body the bone close bone intervertebral of the vertebral cancellous destruction to The began in discs. intervertebral progressed into disc, and infected. the became eroded This disease which the psoas disc the passed destroyed, disc and was sheath. material anteriorly around infected The into extruded muscle and disc the uncommon vertebral for of an portion This lumbar tuberculous the finding the a infection not is column. of

mass As in sheath spread muscle progressed, produce to a the groin. infection the hard the the the pus ligament inguinal psoas within beneath a typical a abscess. This psoas is for finding

for evidence any damage Fortunately the patient, was within vertebral the there no canal. of

long-term a The abscess with psoas antibiotic 6 guided patient the and treated radiologically months was a of regimen. drainage for underwent over lungs remain. cavities the within recovery further the She an no although with symptoms, excellent made with healed sclerosis. It

healthy level the A with at the to and back extending man beginning fit was region. department severe midlumbar blades brought the the to pain emergency shoulder 72-year-old and of pain and of onset The was was acute continuous. relatively the inability legs. of as use to emergency the at the entered to was able however, patient ambulance; The walk complained both department to patient the he gurney

examined no significant thoroughly the physician abnormality. The found attending and back flexor was reduced and groups. sensation there there was or that noted legs, no extensor virtually in both He in power believed The pressure measured obtained to patient was was which the due be and blood pain, Hg. in to mm ambulance 120/80 tachycardic, the It not clinical noted complain was 80/40 was mm pressure current symptoms of the patient hypotension. blood typical of did Hg; patient’s that the however,

“add these symptoms is inspection, signs. it difficult On and to clinical first up” have essence of and progressive paraplegia the associated state the are In a anomaly with an severe clinical compatible not back measurements, we in pain pressure which patient. blood with

were was different arms, obtained measurements deduced and pressure in that reassessed. It both blood the were

measurements The pressure were true. blood blood Hg arm measured measured right and In the arm mm in the the 120/80 pressure left the 80/40 pressure blood Hg. mm left the would blood imply to deficiency arm. This a of

the CT included performed that scan The scanner, the patient was abdomen, department from emergency and chest, transferred was the and a to pelvis.

CT dissecting thoracic aortic demonstrated a aneurysm. The scan aorta Aortic wall. aorta tunica of the the of intima the remainder the separated wall become of the the the of tunica occurs adventitia the when part media dissection tunica media tunica and of from and produces false a lumen. This false lumen. wall Blood lumen hole through passes the also not but a the small into and aorta the of true the in into only aortic inferiorly. the aortic true lumen It often reenters which flow. two may This blood channels produces through produces considerable pain the patient for of dissection is the and of The aortic onset. usually rapid process between the structures careful the pain the although is back musculature shoulder is column, be back felt and the from blades back, not should radiating the always Typically into sought. the vertebral or than of consideration other pain and the

The which two pressure in the level the begun. between difference at dissection the blood the has arms indicates entry” The is subclavian left of to artery. proximal “point the this blood blood limits which limb, pressure the been flap the the recording. upper low giving At small to a level flow created, left has the to brachiocephalic blood not the has hence dissection, limb. been trunk affected right by and upper flow appropriate aortic remains The

the was cord. spinal The by caused paraplegia to ischemia

The single artery two spinal from is spinal to blood spinal arteries. posterior a and cord anterior the supply arteries level. every fed These segmental are arteries via spinal at vertebral a the of spinal largest artery is the the of arteries) arteries of There medullary cord—the along (segmental of are which length reinforcing Adamkiewicz. number upper was segmental medullary thoracic and or this from the of unfortunately a dissection, lower This artery, during of disrupted. patient’s lumbar vessel this typically the aortic arises Adamkiewicz, artery region, origin cord produced ischemia paraplegia the in patient. and This the has spinal produces acute

and succumbed. ruptured, the extended, aorta patient Unfortunately, the dissection the

the and (buttock) gluteal woman (natal) alteration in A in sensory intergluteal cleft. came right the physician region her 55-year-old to with extensor digitorum of the muscles longus, longus, the foot tertius Examination right. weakness on and demonstrated extensor also fibularis subtle the low-grade and of hallucis weakness of the also mild posteriorly right some The in symptoms gluteal patient the of complained region. pain

A in lesion the sacrum. left was postulated

be region which right to the is could attributed to Pain sacro-iliac very often pain. the in sensitive easily sacro-iliac joint, and of an muscles possibly the extensor weakness the sacrum of the digitorum raises the longus, junction. exiting affecting and intrinsic and extensor foot fibularis The the the the hallucis lumbosacral of possibility nerves tertius longus, muscles abnormality features. these altered sensation the also the region localizing anus support anatomical gluteal around would The toward

the An was X-ray of obtained pelvis.

on The X-ray first appeared unremarkable. inspection of large investigation, levels. at anterior into sacral the underwent a including further foramina S1, the lesion S3 whole S2, and destructive sacrum CT and the MRI, demonstrated the which involving left patient the However, extending sacral often a the in of radiographs appear first should sacrum with on imaging inspection, patients further be abnormality. always and normal suspected sought Interestingly, may plain

The lesion was and lytic. expansile

nonexpansile. metastases bony Most typically are lesions, lytic become They very metastases breast erode the well (prostate type of or producing bone, may and metastases). sclerotic may sclerotic. and From time lytic to a see we of mixed pattern time

uncommon are in and which are of lytic. certain metastases instances a number expansile There may renal and occur seen in be These typically multiple myeloma. in metastases importance that structures. and The tumors other specific often they anatomical is of impinge upon expand these The producing for sacrum expansile sacral within the was of nature the roots, cause of her symptoms. compression tumor nerve this patient’s the

a patient is of course underwent undergoing and renal The radiotherapy, chemoimmunotherapy. currently had of course tumor the a excised,

122.e1 122.e2

Overview • Regions Relationship Other to Conceptual

Fig. cont’d 2.20,

Fig. 2.20, cont’d

the clinic—cont’d In

Fig. 2.55, cont’d

Fig. cont’d 2.68,

Fig. 2.69, cont’d

irregularly superiorly (superior is aperture) narrow aperture) (Fig. The a with inferiorly and thoracic opening cylinder large an a thorax (inferior shaped thoracic relatively opening 3.1). is superior thoracic the diaphragm. aperture neck; The by open, closed inferior continuity the aperture the allowing with is thoracic

and of and consists sternum. muscles segmentally is flexible thorax the The musculoskeletal the arranged ribs, of vertebrae, wall and

the left into enclosed compartments: each the mediastinum. lung, a and diaphragm wall thoracic and thoracic cavity, right a subdivided cavity the three pleural a surrounding by is major The and

is a median mediastinum partition thick, in sagittal flexible soft The a longitudinally oriented position. tissue nerves, vessels. It blood the major heart, major systemic esophagus, contains trachea, and

from mediastinum. pleural each The are the other by cavities separated completely abnormal cavity in do the pleural one affect necessarily events cavity. other not Therefore the that can without This also pleural surgically entered mediastinum means the be opening cavities.

that level I. the the pleural of rib Another extend is cavities feature they of important above extends lung The root actually of of into the the apex each neck. of and consequence, root pleura events the the can pleura abnormal in involve in a neck adjacent the events neck. the root the can involve and and As the of lung, lung adjacent

functions is breathing. of important One the of most thorax the but lungs machinery diaphragm, of only not thorax necessary—the air contains the also The thoracic out into moving the effectively lungs. the and and provides ribs—for wall,

wall, alter down of by the lateral diaphragm volume and of of in the are the dimensions thoracic and the thoracic of cavity movements breathing. elements caused Up the movements in anterior the changes ribs, and key and

of vital Protection organs

heart, protects thorax The and lungs, and great the houses vessels. upward abdominal shape important offers some of viscera. wall domed diaphragm, to also protection Because the thoracic the the of

of stomach spleen of Much lie right the liver under the and dome left. diaphragm, the lies the under and the and kidneys posterior of anterior to right, XI on diaphragm XII, to the aspects the on on The superior of left. the and the poles ribs rib are the lie and XII,

the for and one regions. through thorax region structures conduit pass connect organs completely that body from thorax The mediastinum body that to to in another for as other structures the acts a

nerves, the they vagus course thoracic duct The abdomen neck. esophagus, mediastinum pass as through and the and between

in nerves, which The penetrate phrenic through also the to pass supply mediastinum diaphragm. originate the neck, the and

mediastinum en visceral the route within superior structures in as the such to and vena the Other course from trachea, and major thoracic cava aorta, organs thorax.

muscles thoracic wall and skeletal (Fig. of consists elements The 3.1):

up their thoracic discs; intervening intervertebral is made twelve Posteriorly, and vertebrae of it

and of three wall side) ribs, move the formed is the ribs adjacent and each layers Laterally, the by between support provide ribs, for span intercostal on spaces; flat spaces muscles, intercostal (twelve the which

of is sternum, made sternum, which of body xiphoid wall Anteriorly, the of the consists of sternum, up and process. manubrium the

angled sternal sternum is manubriosternal examinations the of angle, posteriorly at The physical used surface sternum, by landmark the major forms performing the joint, clinicians thorax. in on body manubrium the a which of of

of cartilage, the rib contributes The composed mobility which elasticity of the costal wall. each end anterior to and is (distal) of

All posteriorly. thoracic with articulate vertebrae ribs three the Most ribs IX) have vertebral articulations to column. rib (from with II the articulates above rib with head and body its of (Fig. body each vertebra vertebra of the the of own The with 3.2). transverse ribs with these each curve also vertebra. its articulates posteriorly, the of process As

VII costal of articulate with cartilages to the sternum. I ribs the Anteriorly,

the margins articulate The costal with above of the of X cartilages inferior them. to VIII costal ribs cartilages floating XI sternum. costal articulate do not they because XII with Ribs cartilages, and called are other or ribs the ribs, their Their only small, tips. costal cartilages covering are

extensive of sites for the limbs. of muscles the attachment thoracic wall framework back, provides and skeletal abdomen, neck, The upper

them of respiratory stabilize the to these attach ribs and last also as accessory A function some muscles; the muscles number position first of and of ribs.

skeletal the anteriorly. posteriorly, superior by of vertebra of the side, medial aperture surrounded the of consists manubrium TI rib elements, and the margin thoracic each body on I Completely

superior the TII margin plane vertebrae The the approximately and disc same manubrium intervertebral TIII. between is horizontal of as in the

attachment manubrium. vertebra their first to inferiorly articulation posterior ribs their to slope anterior the The TI with from the superior Consequently, an oblique somewhat angle, thoracic is aperture plane of facing the at anteriorly.

the surround the At pleural the aspects entrance the of to on (Fig. which lie superior either of the the cavities, thoracic aperture, lungs, mediastinum side superior 3.3).

Structures between the cavity pass that the leave and the pass mediastinum. enter thorax superior and upper and pleural part over of limb as rib I the they pass thorax more between aperture. Structures through the and that pass and neck vertically head the thoracic superior the

aperture thoracic expandable. The and large inferior is form its (Fig. Bone, ligaments cartilage, and margin 3.4A).

diaphragm, and by thoracic to the the closed pass passing inferior and or diaphragm. pierce aperture The thorax structures abdomen between posteriorly is the

rib to costal vertebra Skeletal rib thoracic posterolaterally, XII inferior distal the the margin body and XI distal end the of posteriorly, cartilaginous of which and ribs ends TXII of VII unite form anterolaterally, to of the process X, xiphoid the the aperture elements are: anteriorly.

TIX in the roughly sternum horizontal costal vertebrae between between plane TX. as same and margin joint the lies intervertebral disc The the and the is other posterior words, aperture margin. the inferior inferior In of thoracic margin to the anterior

is superiorly. viewed tilted anteriorly, thoracic aperture inferior When the

aperture seals inferior The thoracic the (Fig. diaphragm musculotendinous 3.4B).

diaphragm inferior Generally, a and radially, large fibers the converge margins central from aperture, the the arise of muscle into thoracic of tendon.

angle aperture, the the the to attachment. inferior of of diaphragm of oblique anterior the Because inferior attachment is thoracic the posterior

and sides, form it superiorly, rather, right not flat; the diaphragm is on to “balloons” both domes. The left than the rib V. as reaching dome is as left, higher The right far

of the height decreases As and increases. diaphragm volume the of the contracts, thorax domes the the

the to and the posterior aorta the diaphragm. inferior esophagus penetrate cava passes The diaphragm; vena

superior anteriorly that thoracic the from and midline sternum to mediastinum thoracic partition thick the The a the posteriorly, aperture. is thoracic vertebrae the from inferior aperture extends to

TIV between and parts separates through sternal and disc and superior inferior plane into TV the vertebrae passing horizontal (Fig. intervertebral A mediastinum angle the the 3.5). pericardial The which is subdivided inferior by heart. surrounding pericardium, encloses further cavity the part the the middle The heart and pericardium the mediastinum. constitute

pericardium; the and anterior between the posterior sternum thoracic the lies and the pericardium mediastinum vertebrae. mediastinum The between lies

cavities side on of two are situated The pleural the either mediastinum (Fig. 3.6).

pleura. completely a Each the lined mesothelial pleural is membrane by cavity called

by pleural the the of mediastinum, the lungs During cavities. grow surrounded becoming out development, covered result, a organ outer by As the of is pleura. each surface

remains nerves. blood to the formed lung attached lymphatic mediastinum vessels, pulmonary Each tissues, airway, a root and the by by

the the lungs that lining The pleura. surfaces from of the pleura onto walls whereas the cavity of mediastinum the parietal and roots reflected is the at the the pleura, is visceral a the potential lining wall and cavity. space pleura covering visceral of the the thoracic exists normally pleura Only between lung parietal the

fill does changes space lung The accommodating potential in lung not for important volume breathing. of and do cavity, the resulting which the not completely pleural contain during are recesses, lung in important and diaphragm. which between is largest the recess, The the recess, and costodiaphragmatic inferiorly lies most thoracic wall clinically

neck superior thoracic directly opens into the The of the (Fig. root aperture 3.7).

into cm pleural above 2 cartilage neck. aspect rib the cavity I costal approximately the superior extends and The 3 each to of between neck pleural and extensions, these pass mediastinum. superior visceral Between major the structures midline, the In the lies to the anterior trachea esophagus. immediately laterally thoracic of and the anteriorly at to vessels these pass blood superior Major thorax structures. out nerves in and and aperture the

upper lies gateway on axillary thoracic the inlet, of side to each or An superior aperture. limb, the the aperture superiorly the thoracic (Fig. the and two inlets These communicate neck root superior of with axillary 3.7).

of lateral I the the the anteriorly, axillary the rib margin formed and scapula posteriorly, by: is inlet margin of Each medially. superior clavicle

the medial extends coracoid anteriorly scapula. directed The formed superior is the process, laterally from each triangular which the and inlet margin of is of of apex margin the by

the lateral opening of inlet’s rib triangular The is axillary I. base margin of the

passing so over between Large by superior the blood thoracic and passing vessels do rib aperture inlet axillary I.

passing inlet. between by of parts Proximal plexus the pass axillary the brachial and upper also the limb through neck

thorax from abdomen. diaphragm separates the the The thorax pass the between it Structures abdomen the pass (Fig. diaphragm that either posteriorly and or penetrate to 3.8):

pierces cava of enter vena central vertebral The inferior the right TVIII. of the the to mediastinum diaphragm near the level tendon side

the mediastinum the the vertebral abdomen esophagus leave enter just TX. to the left the part to penetrates level of the at muscular of The and midline diaphragm

posteriorly The the at the to diaphragm passes at midline vertebral aorta level TXII.

other that abdomen structures through Numerous pass thorax posterior the pass and to between diaphragm. or the

wall side the breasts, superficial anterior mammary the pectoral The overlying are of thoracic fascia, in on glands, (Fig. skin, consisting region and each of 3.9).

are breast nerves associated and lymphatics, with as the Vessels, follows:

arteries Branches and sternum the the chest to thoracic the perforate supply each aspects of anterior wall. veins internal thoracic the on anterior of wall from side second the to also the Those with each breast. branches supply associated spaces intercostal fourth mainly anteromedial of parts

drain surface the medial nodes the on from the the of wall. the and thoracic part of the breast arteries accompany parasternal Lymphatic perforating deep into vessels

lymphatics the into of limb. from the associated region parts breast with Vessels upper or drain lateral axillary the and of emerge

sixth and branches of sensation of to nerves carry breast. skin anterior intercostal the the Lateral from general the fourth

anatomical vertebral physicians working levels the important use structures patients, with within regions. position body of to determine When

plane vertebrae body The passing disc horizontal most in TV and thoracic through the significant TIV one (Fig. of the the is separates planes that articulation position sternal passes the rib the of anteriorly, of II because the with cartilage sternum. the costal through marking of angle the it: anterior 3.10) a the superior and find and the pulmonary enter the clavicle, aorta ends; pericardium where bronchi; of rib palpable); superior the II main separates The used penetrates level superior sternal the the the of begins the for left the the cava I to of rib marks as counting and and mediastinum the is to of reference into the passes trunk. marks limit which the heart; mediastinum the site not at the through from the marks pericardium; ribs position inferior (because is vena limit where of trachea of is overlying superior bifurcates position angle right the arch

from shunts right to left Venous

chamber the returning body. atrium the deoxygenated blood receives of the right from that is heart The the superior also the and It that of on of midline, right the major the on it venae located and into veins, the the drain body. right two lies side cavae, inferior side are the side left midline. blood This side body, coming means has the from cross all that, of to get the to right the to number and, some in This carried large are of left-to-right several a by very (Fig. in out is the important shunting cases, thorax veins, which of 3.11).

vena and left and In left brachiocephalic neck, wall the crosses the left into superior to blood the part delivers limb, side thoracic immediately midline from the of posterior the the left adults, and the vein upper head of manubrium the cava.

the hemiazygos cava. azygos vena connects side, lateral the and which of thoracic veins on accessory drain immediately wall, flow and with posterior superior vein left into to thoracic and right the hemiazygos The vertebrae, pass bodies of the parts ultimately anterior the

thoracic that nerves the the wall arrangement organization of and vessels segmental the The of reflects wall. supply from aspect thoracic posterior vessels, of sternum. the anterior deep run is wall a mediastinum, on side of arteries, the arise the in which two along the to thoracic pair the wall which the the sources: thoracic either and Arteries aorta, of internal

rib mainly along inferior (Fig. the each margin the of wall, 3.12A). the pleura, thoracic Running anterior related skin. of vessels (the are wall, with which spinal nerves intercostal innervate and these parietal rami nerves), associated wall. when through and thoracic considered passing relative vessels be nerves chest as position such to of The tubes, objects, ribs must the these the

thoracic nerves generally (Fig. the of of reflect spinal Dermatomes segmental organization the the thorax 3.12B). which occurs, dermatome, the trunk. the superiorly, upper and on located in with is first anteriorly limb, exception and The mostly the not thoracic

plexus. the C4 The the branches ramus anterior trunk the supraclavicular from of cervical via of anterosuperior receives branches region of

into upper highest on anterior thoracic is The also chest T2, the wall dermatome extends the which limb.

skin In the is innervated xiphoid by T6. the over midline, process

T7 ribs T12 (Fig. anterior abdominal the of Dermatomes of the onto contour follow the wall to 3.12C).

of fibers of in preganglionic system carried to (Fig. L2 nerves the nerve out cord spinal T1 sympathetic are spinal the All 3.13). found the ultimately spinal these means emerge cord components of nerves. body This sympathetic in as from anywhere spinal fibers the that spinal destined Preganglionic carried for sympathetic are of the cord fibers spinal in out the T1. head nerve

of ribs of the is The because other shape (Fig. the the true that by wall of joints ribs and thoracic movement, with because expandable components most orientation and articulate allow wall 3.14).

to superior is its A rib’s attachment posterior anterior attachment. moves fixed. is forward which when to relative Therefore, wall the the it wall, is posterior a rib anterior elevated, thoracic its of region is it that rib addition, the rib expands thoracic is of laterally. when wall so the middle elevated, to ends, inferior this part two each In the of the because direction. changes the thorax is the muscular, it the volume Finally, vertical in diaphragm

Changes dimensions anterior, are important lateral, the in for the thoracic of cavity breathing. vertical and

the of Innervation diaphragm

each by of side, as two the nerves The one branches the that innervated cervical in phrenic on plexus originate, (Fig. diaphragm is neck 3.15). C5, C4. arise from C3, nerves C4, anterior major cervical from They and with contribution rami the of the coming

aperture, neck, the lumbar and (muscular entire innervation superior supply extensions vertically the the diaphragm, motor that crura thoracic including diaphragm the through upper the attach to to to the phrenic nerves The mediastinum the pass vertebrae). pass phrenic the In the the to mediastinum, roots the nerves lungs. of anteriorly

the tissues that diaphragm rise disc origin position cervical The anterior the nerves of diaphragm. before in initially an the fold to the explains give head are on the innervate embryological which that develops, the ultimate of that originates words, to other superior the gives the diaphragm rise tissue In to location the diaphragm. the

diaphragm. injuries of cord not Spinal the the affect of phrenic below origin nerve the movement do the level of

the two mediastinum. pleural consists of: thorax a lungs, wall, the cavities, and cylindrical The

plays and breathing. a principal role passing The the neck the abdomen, conduit acts for and a thorax houses lungs, structures and heart the between in as limbs. support the the provides and thoracic for and addition, wall lungs heart protects upper In the anchored wall with thoracic and associated fascia, the define and the to and skin connective their tissues, pectoral provide together and Muscles vessels, nerves, anterior of the this some overlying region. superficial support,

helps wall anchor to external the The and trunk. thoracic limb region to the anterior the pectoral is upper superficial consists breasts; muscles compartment fascia, containing compartment containing and of: and structures. superficial a deep skin, It and associated a

in the emerge vessels, the from lymphatics thoracic and the neck. Nerves, and wall, superficial the axilla, compartment

and connective consist skin tissues. The and of mammary associated glands breasts pectoral sweat mammary and muscles glands the superficial fascia in to The modified the (Fig. wall anterior the anterior thoracic glands are 3.16).

The associated and consist mammary glands ducts lobules. secretory series of of a open independently converge onto the lactiferous ducts, to 15 20 nipple. to These which form pigmented is the area surrounded The circular nipple termed of areola. by skin a

mammary tissue the A lobules of well-developed, ducts connective stroma surrounds and gland. the skin the suspensory ligaments, In breast. form and of of the the well-defined breast, this support to are certain the with dermis regions, continuous ligaments condenses which these pitting of of tension the breast Carcinoma ligaments, skin. the creates on causing

more breasts is in nonlactating glandular lactating abundant the women. fat, predominant the women, of component tissue while is In

lies surrounding major breast pectoralis muscles. to fascia on the The other and muscle related deep over space) of structures. deep fascia degree tissue layer the retromammary provides (the the some and breast of A underlying connective separates from loose movement

midaxillary as from extends sternum to II each far breast attached vertically the to The transversely from laterally of as VI, surface, and or the base, ribs line.

The limb; is routes occur the by with associated to supply structures related thoracic and multiple vascular wall therefore, can drainage and the breast (Fig. upper to intercostal overlying artery—superior second internal perforate the and laterally, 3.16): thoracic, the wall thoracic thoraco-acromial, branches subscapular that thoracic, arteries the medially, vessels axillary the and from branches via thoracic from muscle. to arteries; lateral artery; fourth

breast arteries thoracic, axillary, internal the and and into the draining Veins drain veins. parallel ultimately intercostal the

second the is intercostal and lateral Innervation branches via cutaneous of to breast sixth the of anterior nerves. innervated fourth nerve. is nipple The the intercostal by

breast as the is drainage follows: Lymphatic of

laterally 75% is that and Approximately superiorly axillary (Fig. vessels drain into via nodes lymphatic 3.16).

Most anterior with wall of drainage internal into the remaining thoracic thoracic artery. is parasternal and nodes to deep the the associated

arteries intercostal necks with the lymphatic of near branches intercostal the and follow heads ribs. via connect may situated posterior lateral of nodes drainage that and occur vessels Some

drain into trunks, nodes parasternal trunks. intercostal into the nodes into bronchomediastinal drain thoracic subclavian duct into trunks, the nodes and Axillary the the or either bronchomediastinal drain

normally only men of not small that extend often is beyond breast rudimentary The consists cords in and of of ducts, the composed areola. cells, do Breast can occur men. cancer in

pectoral the region of Muscles

pectoralis region subclavius minor, (Fig. muscles major, the contains Each pectoral and pectoralis Table 3.17 and 3.1). thoracic of All anterior wall bones and the from insert into upper the originate limb.

muscle major region pectoral the the largest most pectoralis muscles. superficial and The is of connective retromammary directly by the it tissue the breast It and space. loose fascia of deep the from is separated and underlies

of and the includes anterior costal the sternum, origin broad clavicle, cartilages. that has surfaces a half medial related of pectoralis the major the The fibers a to inserts intertubercular lateral into which humerus. of sulcus muscle lip The the the the tendon, form of converge flat

the rotates arm. flexes, and The major medially pectoralis adducts,

underlie the pectoralis minor muscles subclavius major: The and pectoralis

the subclavius the inferior and is of part passes small and medial clavicle. I the laterally of to rib from The surface anterior

V The process to III passes the to ribs minor surfaces pectoralis of the from the scapula. of coracoid anterior

pectoralis the Both the minor tip pull subclavius shoulder inferiorly. and of the

to axilla A the clavipectoral subclavius encloses clavicle and above floor fascia, to attaches continuous of the layer and and below. pectoralis minor fascia, the the the of deep

The the through the major the of limb a pass. of structures upper pectoral neck all form which wall region anterior muscles axilla, region the the and between pass Nerves, the and between lymphatics minor. under between pass axilla of and the or region pass pectoralis inferior and the margins that clavipectoral through major minor the pectoral fascia and the subclavius pectoralis vessels, the

The composed is elements skeletal in and and wall design muscles. segmental thoracic of the of rib thoracic bordered of inferior by margin, and extends vertebra I, the process the rib and sternum. thoracic TXII, XI, TI, end aperture, the xiphoid by and vertebra manubrium It sternum; superior the bordered rib the the the aperture, of XII, between: costal

elements wall consist skeletal intervertebral of of ribs, discs, the The the thoracic and sternum. vertebrae, thoracic

thoracic which each twelve articulations characterized ribs. of by vertebrae, There are is with

A vertebra transverse has process (Fig. typical roughly and long dimensions the with directions, body, thoracic spinous a and heart-shaped in equal vertebral a anteroposterior 3.18). foramen The with those laminae is are vertebra overlap the and generally circular the broad and of vertebral below. The articular laminae facets processes facing almost while their face the project articular anteriorly. the flat, posteriorly, articular surfaces articular processes directly from and are with inferior superior their transverse processes The project posterolaterally. club are shaped and

Articulation with ribs

with typical articulation thoracic has each ribs. on sites A side for three vertebra

body Two located for on the of adjacent the heads superior on ribs. of and sites articulation corresponding are demifacets (i.e., with aspects the inferior facets) partial costal below. superior facet rib with of articulates part of part own the inferior head of facet costal the rib, its articulates and the the with head The of

tubercle of with facet end costal (transverse the at of articulates the process the transverse An rib. facet) oval own its

all Not same in vertebrae (Fig. fashion with ribs the articulate 3.19):

own of the complete costal the vertebra are head TI rib head articulate not facets words, vertebra facet the with of and CVII. does of rib—in body a The single superior with on on other its articulate I

the (and Similarly, TX demifacets with lacks and body. often ribs TIX) own inferior only therefore on articulates its vertebra

heads Vertebrae ribs—they a and only each have articulate transverse of the side lack their bodies. with only single costal their TXI TXII own and of on facet complete facets

each are cartilage pairs anteriorly in of a terminating ribs, (Fig. costal There twelve 3.20).

with the upper ribs, sternum. Although articulate all only seven of the cartilages known articulate the as vertebral column, ribs, directly the true with costal ribs pairs of five are ribs remaining ribs: false The

costal articulate of The the costal cartilages ribs VIII with to ribs of cartilages anteriorly the above. X

connection or XII the often and and are floating Ribs have ribs ribs. sternum called XI anterior other with with no

A curved consists typical rib anterior and posterior a ends (Fig. shaft of with 3.21). is continuous its costal end cartilage. The with anterior The by and is the a vertebral posterior column with tubercle. end and neck, characterized articulates head,

somewhat typically articular by a surfaces and crest. head expanded is separated The two presents above, with facet with the costal own surface articulates the of superior inferior facet vertebra the vertebra. The whereas the its costal facet body superior articulates inferior larger the of on smaller

head that of neck a short separates region from is the the bone tubercle. flat The

the The regions, and an neck posteriorly part: nonarticular the shaft of two projects junction consists articular of the tubercle a and part with from

oval has for facet transverse part an facet corresponding on a the the The is with associated process and articular of articulation medial vertebra.

ligament is The nonarticular part raised attachments. by roughened

is thin surfaces. generally internal shaft flat external and The with and

rounded, margin superior The whereas the inferior margin is is smooth and sharp. the just at site angle. The to shaft forward bends laterally tubercle the termed a has part It the twist a axis faces the anterior part. also gentle around so external superiorly relative shaft the surface that the of posterior of to its longitudinal somewhat by The the a groove. inferior internal distinct marked surface margin costal is of

and upper features lower of Distinct ribs

ribs and have upper (Fig. The distinct features lower 3.22).

superior is surfaces. inferior has broad I in horizontal flat and and Rib plane the with sternum. the articulation the to From of to its slopes vertebra manubrium its attachment it TI, inferiorly the only surface. articulates vertebra body with and one The has therefore of TI head articular only articulation facet Like with other has ribs, process. a tubercle the for transverse the rib rib that shaft. the the tubercle, smooth along a by superior scalene the approximately which midway grooves the The separates of distinct is surface tubercle, cross two characterized caused and artery. anterior subclavian vein, the is groove the is groove caused the The subclavian by by posterior ligament and muscle is to attachments. and roughened these by Anterior the grooves, posterior shaft

is as II, long. rib like flat Rib I, twice but articulates of a most vertebral with way column It the typical ribs. in

rib with facet own has a for head single of X articulation The vertebra. its

XII Ribs have or and no vertebrae tubercles and with XI of bodies own articulate the their necks. only ribs and little Both are short, curve, have pointed anteriorly. are

manubrium the process consists three (Fig. small positioned narrow sternum oriented of superiorly positioned inferiorly the broad xiphoid the the of adult major elements: and The sternum, and the longitudinally body sternum, of and and 3.23).

of Manubrium the sternum

the the framework forms of the manubrium of neck The bony of thorax. the sternum part and

surface a manubrium superior in notch), The laterally notch distinct notch, palpable midline. and the jugular (suprasternal the of is and bears expanded the

a this the notch fossa clavicle. of with On either large oval for articulation is side first lateral surface attachment facet on inferior Immediately fossa, is of the manubrium, this cartilage. of the to for a each costal the lateral of border of lower At of costal end the half the anterior articulation cartilage. second demifacet is end the upper for the with a the

the Body of sternum

sternum is body of flat. the The

fusion of sternum transverse of body marked lines The represent embryologically. the that part arises called this anterior the the the segmental between ridges is sternebrae, sternum which from of elements of often by surface

sternum of The margins body lateral the the facets articular costal have for cartilages. of lateral with costal the demifacet margin cartilage. inferior for each a Superiorly, has the of aspect articulation second ribs are III with to this for facets four the to demifacet of articulation VI. costal Inferior cartilages

seventh At a the cartilage. costal sternum inferior on demifacet is end with of the of for the articulation demifacet the body upper the xiphoid of attached to body process. inferior of The end is the sternum the the

the of The part smallest the is sternum. xiphoid process pointed, or variable: curved, wide, is shape perforated. may Its bifid, thin, it be begins cartilaginous as the a adult. It structure, becomes in ossified which costal articulation lateral a demifacet seventh cartilage. margin its of On inferior the end for is with of each side upper the

forming and its transverse adjacent the the rib bodies joint of a of forming the of head typical vertebrae, vertebra, related joint A with: with the rib; (Fig. a articulates process costotransverse 3.24).

relative occurs around axes, which to upper to costovertebral joints the ascend longitudinal either and ligaments column, the ribs. ribs, vertebral in the rotate lower necks and related which the mainly to the descend Together, or mainly of occurs in allow their ribs the combined during ribs of volume of for column the of all cavity vertebral breathing. are essential altering the the movements on The thoracic the

Joint with rib head of

rib head on body the own its superior on the and vertebra facet above. with articulate the of facet on the with vertebra the the The inferior of the body two of facets which on the and separates the intervertebral joint compartments by is surfaces synovial rib. divided ligament, intra-articular disc an the to head adjacent the articular into This attaches two crest the two of joint The attached the of single a surrounded to the articular the margins compartments outer column. the ligament and head capsule intervening are and two by vertebral combined surfaces synovial of

Costotransverse transverse vertebra synovial related the between process of the are (Fig. rib and joints joints of tubercle the a 3.24). thin. surrounding each capsule is The joint stabilized is sides rib of the transverse the process medial and on by lateral strong ligaments space joint the that joint: extracapsular The the span between and the two

attaches is the The medial of neck to rib transverse costotransverse the and the the to joint ligament process.

and to lateral process the the nonarticular ligament of to rib. tubercle roughened costotransverse part the lateral joint the the tip transverse attaches of The is of the

transverse the A ligament, of process above. the surface to attaches third neck costotransverse the the ligament, superior superior the the vertebra rib of of

Slight costotransverse movements joints. at gliding the occur

(Fig. seven between are sternum the costal the The upper joints and cartilages joints sternocostal 3.25).

between and rib and the of consists synovial is fibrocartilaginous a the The joint cartilage. and I the manubrium manubrium between not costal connection by seventh second are The reinforced have ligaments. and sternocostal synovial to thin surrounding capsules joints

intraarticular an between divided and second by the ligament. into is costal The two sternum cartilage compartments the joint the of the junction attaches costal cartilage the the to manubrium body ligament This the second of and sternum.

Interchondral ribs between (Fig. the adjacent occur cartilages costal joints of costal 3.25), ribs ribs also involve the mainly X, VI. of the to cartilages may V and of costal cartilages VII but between

inferior anchorage and joints indirect Interchondral formation costal to the of sternum smooth the contribute to provide a margin. and reinforced ligaments. the usually are They are fibrous thin synovial, by capsules interchondral

and between joints of the (Fig. the symphyses of The are the body and usually between and manubrium the xiphoid the process body sternum the sternum 3.25). angular during body manubrium between sternum the the slight respiration. and occur of Only movements the of The process age. xiphoid sternum becomes with joint and ossified body the between the often the

easily. be the feature manubriosternal of A joint that palpated it can clinically useful is referred normally of the a angles the posteriorly feature forming the the because angle. manubrium to raised as sternum, body This on is sternal elevation the with II rib the site of This articulation of sternum. marks Rib in of is inferior palpable, not and because to the the neck. the is it lies base tissues embedded clavicle I at used be can lateral reference Therefore, as immediately ribs counting the to a and felt is sternal for angle. rib II

a the TV and Fig. through that horizontal vertebrae plane In (see on intervertebral lies TIV disc angle between the addition, passes sternal 3.10). mediastinum superior mediastinum border the of inferior pericardium. from the the marks the This separates and plane superior ascending and (see the superior the the of through pulmonary beginning trunk and the passes bifurcation the of the aorta, the The of of of of aorta beginning the to of Fig. and the also trachea, arch aorta the end and just arch plane the aorta, the thoracic end the 3.79 3.86). and

between ribs and (Fig. by adjacent lie Intercostal muscles spaces intercostal filled are 3.26).

the Intercostal in and major plane veins inferior margin lie and the arteries inner and between pass rib muscles. of superior costal the in groove of the nerves layers associated along the two

costal vein the in groove. each structure is most space, In highest therefore superior the is the and often nerve artery not inferior the inferior the to artery is the vein, is to and and protected groove. by the The at when the nerve perforate objects aspect intercostal an structure upper risk most the is the space. of Therefore,

major superior of the and vessels inferior often intercostal below. present nerves collateral branches Small are rib to the

to ribs, of which separating loose layer these spaces tissue, structures Deep is the intercostal fat. pleura, and endothoracic the amounts of variable contains a fascia, underlying connective from called and

to fascia, skin. spaces fascia, superficial deep are Superficial and the the Muscles with limbs spaces. back overlie upper and the associated

ribs, fill and the the that ribs 3.2). wall those Muscles costal spaces, that include and those the the sternum of that thoracic and cross between those attachments (Table intercostal between several pass support

wall, vertebrae muscles costarum posterior the ribs so posteriorly the inferior The muscles) of during with alter change breathing. volume and and and levatores together serratus superior position and the thoracic (i.e., between serratus and sternum the muscles the thoracic ribs the of posterior the thoracic also wall. They reinforce

between adjacent three pass that ribs (Fig. space are intercostal muscles flat found The muscles intercostal in each 3.27). are in this Individual muscles group positions: according named to their

superficial. external The intercostal are the most muscles

are internal muscles between external sandwiched muscles. intercostal and The innermost the

intercostal deepest three muscles innermost the The the of muscles. are

are by nerves. intercostal The muscles innervated related intercostal the provide during As group, a muscles support intercostal structural spaces the intercostal breathing. for the the They also ribs. can move

The grooves) below. superior from eleven to muscles edges external ribs of of ribs the above (lateral the costal extend of pairs of inferior margins intercostal the margins the viewed fibers muscle wall the When thoracic lateral is from obliquely position, the (Fig. pass a anteroinferiorly 3.27). continues external the tissue where The thin termed extend from layer connective ribs a intercostal tubercles of the costal around thoracic the muscles aponeurosis of membrane. cartilages, wall each the as regions the to the most The are in external intercostal muscles inspiration. active

inferior of the to superior grooves the lateral above, the ribs of the below. of margins eleven intercostal edge costal ribs pairs the The muscles pass of between internal most to extend (Fig. adjacent between ribs the costal where posteriorly course muscles the the They from of angle regions, parasternal cartilages, 3.27). layer continues medially as space, intercostal the vertebral column, in intercostal toward the internal This membrane. each opposite of to muscle fibers the intercostal in The pass direction muscles. the external those viewed from position, muscle When a fibers the pass obliquely wall is lateral posteroinferiorly. thoracic the intercostal are The active internal during muscles most expiration.

innermost as fibers The (Fig. intercostal and of muscles, same are intercostal have the the internal orientation distinct the intercostals the muscles the least 3.27). wall. most evident muscles in thoracic lateral are the These deep adjacent They the surface groove the surfaces ribs of below. costal rib from medial between the to edge extend inner the the of of the wall the associated in muscles. around bundles in costal intercostal innermost spaces the a between thoracic and the with plane neurovascular Importantly, pass grooves the internal intercostal

of the the thoracic in the posterior ribs, intercostals, lower more plane as are in (Fig. regions span The same innermost multiple numerous subcostales and wall are 3.28A). the third internal or extend internal second (next) of rib below. the from to They surfaces the one rib surface of parallel course the extend and angle fibers of muscles below. the ribs the on medial intercostal to from Their the more internal of positions ribs the

thoracis surface (Fig. of the are the on muscles transversus thoracic The wall anterior found deep and innermost same 3.28B) the intercostals. plane in as the

and transversus thoracis posterior lower the the sternum, cartilages of muscles from the the the xiphoid of inferior the true part process, ribs. costal aspect of originate body the The of adjacent costal the pass the of VI. They cartilages to of lower ribs insert superiorly into laterally to borders III and most pull likely elements latter these They inferiorly.

wall. secure thoracis muscles thoracic to The to deep the internal transversus and vessels the these vessels lie

ribs spaces posterior around between intercostal the (Fig. arteries, thoracic intercostal pass in and Vessels the wall that mainly anterior which supply wall adjacent of consist 3.29). in the subclavian in of aorta the internal arteries arteries which from thoracic originate arteries, the and arise These neck. turn root from the vascular arteries basket-like pattern the supply around Together, a intercostal wall. the of thoracic form

Posterior posterior from vessels originate with associated thoracic arteries wall. the intercostal artery, supreme side intercostal the from on trunk the branch which thorax intercostal posterior the descends into are of arteries The derived two each upper in as neck. the costocervical a costocervical subclavian posterior trunk is artery The a branch (Fig. the of 3.29).

pairs aorta. of remaining The posterior from intercostal of arise the arteries surface the thoracic posterior nine left the of to the corresponding aorta the Because longer posterior thoracic right cross is and on the of intercostal on vessels those anterior side column, midline to vertebral vessels left. the the of passing side vertebrae bodies the wall are therefore the the than the

nerves to In intercostal of intercostal have the branches having supply the that the various accompany lateral arteries wall, regions. cutaneous that branches to components superficial numerous addition posterior of branches

branches thoracic the arteries lateral directly internal as anterior The (Fig. from arteries indirectly or originate intercostal 3.29).

internal of artery major neck. subclavian a the the Each thoracic artery as arises in branch aspect the of deep pleura anterior the aperture dome over superior and anteriorly descends thoracic cervical thoracic the the through passes and wall. the along of It vertically internal upper the posterior On lateral sternum. side, to ribs lies thoracic six and cartilages artery costal 1 of the about the to the cm each continues abdominal space, superior sixth level the it epigastric of the anterior terminal two At intercostal approximately branches: the divides the into which into artery, (Fig. wall inferiorly passes the along space. the intercostal ends costal goes the diaphragm, which margin, last musculophrenic near and and the artery, 3.29); through

from thoracic the Anterior spaces the supply from those intercostal as branches musculophrenic that whereas supplying six spaces the lateral internal upper artery. arteries intercostal the artery, arise lower arise

anterior intercostal have two the usually branches: each In intercostal space, arteries

below upper of the One margin passes rib. the

rib lower collateral a posterior margin meets artery. and The of the branch other passes above the of the intercostal

and develop overlap intercostal anterior The anastomotic posterior the of distributions can vessels and connections. posterior are than The smaller arteries vessels. intercostal anterior generally the

to In external cartilages arteries give to to between arteries the internal costal anterior branches, other perforating number to structures thoracic pass and the branches wall. a thoracic forward of intercostal the that supply directly rise addition of vessels anterior the intercostal the with These travel branches nerves. cutaneous

drainage supply pattern Venous thoracic wall from parallels (Fig. generally of arterial the the 3.30).

in the drain intercostal into the Centrally, veins azygos which veins, veins the into connect the ultimately of neck. thoracic internal veins system with brachiocephalic or

empties Often left intercostal the the vein, left form upper together veins side come left on and which the posterior superior intercostal into vein. brachiocephalic the

intercostal on intercostal the right come vein. azygos the which veins right superior posterior the empties the Similarly, together into form may vein, side upper and

the thoracic (intercostal (parasternal necks ribs wall with of vessels (Fig. nodes and internal lymph nodes) the with with nodes), Lymphatic heads associated mainly and (diaphragmatic drain diaphragm the of into arteries the thoracic nodes), 3.31). the Diaphragmatic are where posterior nodes at and to nerves diaphragm. the phrenic the xiphoid penetrate sites where in diaphragm is to vertebral regions the attached the They also column. occur

drain trunks. bronchomediastinal nodes into Parasternal the lower Intercostal intercostal drain in bronchomediastinal in trunks, the whereas into duct. drain upper also the thorax thorax thoracic nodes into nodes

and diaphragm brachiocephalic prevertebral, (in the mediastinum), and the in with superior brachiocephalic associated the Nodes nodes, lateral (anterior juxta-esophageal veins parasternal, interconnect the to abdomen). with nodes aortic/lumbar nodes

into thoracic regions mainly axilla in Superficial nodes. parasternal the or the nodes lymph wall of axillary drain

in T1 the intercostal of nerves wall T11 the spinal adjacent the rami by lie of and nerves, which the is between thoracic ribs. mainly to are Innervation spaces anterior intercostal rib subcostal anterior spinal of inferior nerve XII T12 ramus is The (Fig. (the nerve) to 3.32).

around intercostal A in space. nerve typical thoracic an intercostal the passes wall laterally into lateral is that of innervate lateral wall which pierces and a anterior an the branch largest the thoracic posterior The overlying the the and branch, skin. branch divides cutaneous branches

as anterior intercostal the supply wall, end laterally either branches, skin. anterior on to the parasternally, adjacent between which cartilages, The abdominal cutaneous to emerge costal midline, nerves the or

addition in major the can border to running intercostal these lower small the branches, branches rib. In superior space found along the collateral be of

wall the innervation the and the intercostal muscles In skin to sensory motor transversus pleura, thoracic thoracis (intercostal, the thorax, somatic subcostal, muscles), from nerves periphery. parietal sympathetic the the to postganglionic of and fibers carry: innervation and somatic

plexus (supraclavicular wall overlying the in is the cervical skin which neck. thoracic supplied nerves), the the innervation descend upper from Sensory branches by cutaneous of

In regions: innervating other innervate thoracic to the addition intercostal nerves wall,

to brachial plexus. of anterior contributes The the ramus T1

to arm. (the lateral contributes The intercostobrachial branch second the cutaneous innervation cutaneous medial surface of nerve) the of of the nerve upper intercostal

muscles, the skin, lower and intercostal The wall. nerves peritoneum of the supply abdominal

The abdominal diaphragm thoracic from a the structure musculotendinous thin and that fills inferior aperture separates is cavity cavity (Fig. thoracic the the Chapter see 3.34 4). and abdominal span lumbar that to the: xiphoid region. ribs the is XII, thoracic ligaments posterior of of margin and the of the of sternum, vertebrae ends of structures costal wall, and peripherally It attached XI across process wall, the

to attachments, tendon. From these converge peripheral the join central fibers muscle of to central The is middle the part pericardium tendon. attached the

crossing to the level ligament, sagittal TVIII/IX, anteriorly vertebral to plane, attachment aorta median posterior diaphragm inferiorly to at the at from vertebral the its attachment xiphoid, the median approximately the slopes approximately its level arcuate anterior to In TXII.

between thorax and abdomen diaphragm diaphragm or pass the traveling peripheral the attachments: between its through the Structures and

vena inferior passes vertebral at The level the TVIII. cava through central tendon approximately

at approximately TX. passes The the vertebral left diaphragm, through just the of midline, muscular the of to level part esophagus

esophagus. the diaphragm The nerves through pass vagus with the

of behind passes level The diaphragm at vertebral posterior aorta TXII. attachment the the

diaphragm The passes the with duct the behind thoracic aorta.

azygos and hemiazygos through of The the the may hiatus through the diaphragm. aortic or veins pass also crura

the the to aortic hiatus posterior outside include the diaphragm of Other the sympathetic structures lateral trunks. attachments The splanchnic penetrate crura. greater, least and lesser, nerves the

(see it diaphragm supply to vessels arise arterial is the and to from The Fig. inferiorly that superiorly 3.34). and the pericardiacophrenic supply From diaphragm. arteries above, musculophrenic the vessels of branches arteries. These are thoracic internal of parts from directly supply. arteries, phrenic from arise lower the Superior thoracic which intercostal branches and the contribute to arteries small aorta, The arteries the supplying diaphragm arise largest it. from below inferior aorta. phrenic the abdominal branch arteries, the directly are These which arteries from

that by generally the arteries. diaphragm the is of Venous drainage parallel veins of vein the brachiocephalic system veins, into: drain suprarenal (left inferior abdominal and veins neck, vena veins or The the in veins cava). azygos the

The innervated nerves and diaphragm is innervate (C3, C4, penetrate diaphragm abdominal by its it and from phrenic C5), which the the surface.

thoracic increasing Contraction volume. diaphragm, domes diaphragm of the the flattens of the thereby for the normal of Movements diaphragm essential are breathing.

is volume of thorax alter principal and thereby and One to and air the diaphragm the lungs. the thoracic the of the of in of wall the move out functions

the directions. dimensions of breathing, in During anteroposterior and the the vertical, lateral, thorax change

significantly the vertical depression of Elevation and dimensions alter the of diaphragm the thorax. muscle Depression diaphragm contract. results fibers the the of when the occurs Elevation relaxes. diaphragm when

the of and result from ribs (Fig. dimensions and elevation in Changes lateral anteroposterior the depression 3.35). adjacent ends the ribs whereas of or The the vertebral of articulate most anterior the ribs. ends articulate the posterior with column, sternum with ribs

ribs ends of they to the and elevated, anterior the the when ends, upward forward. inferior ribs sternum are are the Because the move posterior become slightly less may sternum manubrium angle Also, the and body the between the acute. the of the sternum and backward. moves depressed, ribs When the downward are movement of in (Fig. anteroposterior dimensions the This the “pump changes thorax the handle” direction 3.35A).

well tend of the posterior be ends, middles as the ribs the two than of shafts to the the the As being than ends ends. anterior lower lower elevated, middles the shafts the are shafts the When laterally. of move thorax lateral “bucket This dimensions the movement the increases handle” (Fig. of 3.35B).

relative another ribs accessory act respiratory to move potentially the Any muscles. to rib can attaching one and as muscles therefore the and upper of alter in Muscles fix positions the or ribs. abdomen neck can lower the and

surround lungs pleural on (Fig. of one the mediastinum, either the cavities, Two side 3.37):

of the rib into extend above I they root neck. the Superiorly,

above the just level they a extend Inferiorly, margin. to costal

is mediastinum. pleural medial the cavity wall each of The

of is flat pleural layer and Each they mesothelium, single connective form of a cells, by cavity layer together, supporting an lined associated the tissue; pleura.

location: pleura is types, into major The on based divided two

Pleura pleura a parietal of associated cavity with pleural is (Fig. walls the 3.37).

Pleura is the surface and the onto of medial visceral pleura that reflects (Fig. lung the wall from lung. the which and adheres covers to 3.37),

enclosed parietal the space pleurae. cavity visceral between is and Each potential the pleural only thin normally fluid. very contain They a of serous layer to pleura, and the wall. the is covered lung, freely surface by result, attached which of parietal the pleura the As opposes directly a visceral slides over

the associated given (Fig. to The are pleura names correspond with the wall which they of parts to the parietal 3.38):

related part. intercostal termed and Pleura to spaces the ribs costal the is

covering the Pleura the diaphragm diaphragmatic part. is

mediastinal Pleura covering the is part. mediastinum the

pleura or cervical cupola). of parietal cavity layer pleura dome-shaped pleura pleural of the of the extension The (dome is pleural cervical lining

distinct cervical Covering the a of fascia, is membrane dome-like of pleura the the suprapleural superior layer surface (Fig. 3.38). first CVII. tissue rib process membrane attached margin laterally of and This connective to transverse vertebra to behind the medial the of is the deep fibers the Superiorly, (scalene muscles some membrane of neck receives muscle from in the function that muscles) the the to keep membrane taut. the of root support membrane cavity in pleural the neck. suprapleural The provides for apical the

and TV sleeve-like (i.e., that for mediastinum structures as between the mediastinal lung lymphatics) airway, the pleura of covering In pass a the mediastinum. the tubular, TVII, nerves, region vertebrae to off reflects vessels, covering lung. the the the structures forms it This root contains of and sleeve-like joins as hilum lung of at lung. The the area medial to root surface the the the referred an of pleura the continuous is pleura. the mediastinal visceral with Here,

The innervated by afferent parietal pleural somatic fibers. is pleura the costal and would intercostal by is be pain felt nerves, wall. in thoracic the The from relation to innervated branches at the nerves are mainly pleura phrenic mediastinal C4, diaphragmatic The C5). and the by levels C3, (originating pleura innervated spinal and cord to neck from (lateral the shoulder). C5 refer region areas C4, and C3, these supraclavicular dermatomes the and the would Pain of

peripheral the mark (Fig. the pleura reflections parietal extent The cavities of of pleural 3.39).

does neck as much the costal as I. can above project cartilage above first Superiorly, to the cavity cm 3 of rib pleural 4 the extend not but articulation by inferior its is rib manubrium. to I the This slope caused with of the limitation

part the the pleural upper each to other approach Anteriorly, cavities sternum. posterior the of because the side on However, mediastinum, the the heart, sternum, to the and midline the parietal right the on the pleura left. does posterior not middle lower the does come the to bulges as left close as of containing to pericardium it part

costal pleura the Inferiorly, reflects the costal above onto margin. diaphragm the VIII. pleural inferiorly to approximately rib cavity extends midclavicular the the In line, to extends midaxillary it the In rib X. line, this horizontally, vertebra courses inferior ribs the From crossing to point, and TXII. XII margin somewhat XI reach vertebra can the midclavicular boundary by rib From to that column, and be VIII, line the approximated rib TXII. the a runs the line X, inferior of between vertebral pleura

visceral at leave parietal lung, structures The the pleura is organ. enter with and where each the of continuous the hilum pleura surfaces opposed pleura visceral both of lobes. to that surface firmly lung, is attached the lungs into the fissures the divide the including The of

tissue. pleura the not from pain that afferent bronchial innervated accompany vessels, Although generally visceral elicited is visceral is by this nerves

pleural do lungs anterior The regions not completely (Fig. fill the posterior the cavities of inferior or 3.40). which two results parietal in pleura become layers opposed. This recesses of in recesses inspiration; occurs which spaces lungs Expansion the forced which fluids collect can fluids also and these aspirated. potential during only of be in can spaces into the from usually provide

to costal is where pleura. costomediastinal a Anteriorly, each on side recess occurs mediastinal pleura opposed is overlying the the left the heart in region (Fig. The side largest on 3.40).

each which between the largest and most The and pleura occur are costal important pleura recesses, in costodiaphragmatic pleural cavity diaphragmatic recesses the (Fig. clinically 3.40). the the pleural costodiaphragmatic margin and lungs cavities. the between are The the inferior of recesses regions of inferior margin forced and are after shallowest after deepest forced expiration They inspiration.

and at then inferior quiet VIII in During reach somewhat the midclavicular VI lung crosses horizontally to rib line, courses midaxillary margin and column the of vertebral rib TX. the respiration, level the line vertebral the in column, running VIII, and Thus, rib and of vertebral the between lung margin approximated TX. can rib the vertebra the the VI, around wall midclavicular be thoracic line to from by a line the inferior same of cavity rib the margin is pleural VIII, X, The rib vertebra TXII. and inferior at the points the recess region two between margins. costodiaphragmatic the The is

larger. expiration, the lung of margin costodiaphragmatic rises During inferior becomes recess and the the

mediastinum the and and lungs pleural side two on by either cavities. of right are the left organs lie The of surrounded respiration which the of the enters and branches lungs are leaves via trachea. bronchi, Air main

the right heart. the deoxygenated lungs from deliver ventricle the arteries blood to pulmonary The of the pulmonary the blood veins. returns atrium via to Oxygenated left

to the the bulges left containing the than little mediastinum, the because middle the than lung left right. larger more The is normally right to heart, lung a

has (Fig. borders shape, surfaces, apex, a lung base, a half-cone two with and three Each 3.43).

diaphragm. sits base on The the

projects rib and above the root apex neck. into The I the of

spaces The lies to ribs two the the costal surface wall. adjacent of intercostal immediately thoracic surfaces—the and lung, through the hilum lies column comma-shaped The vertebral of which enter surface the mediastinum and the contains and leave. structures mediastinal anteriorly against and the posteriorly

costal inferior from separates sharp the three The lung base and border the the of is borders—the surface. medial the anterior the costal separate surface. and The borders posterior from surface borders, the sharp, and and border inferior anterior smooth Unlike rounded. is the which posterior are

in area. indented overlying by, The lie contained lungs are directly to, adjacent the structures and heart the that surfaces The indent mediastinum major in the and ribs the of indent lung; surfaces. costal vessels the the medial form bulges can or Pathology, affect as tumors, related abnormalities such structure in the structure. one

of is short lung together that collection in the the tubular structures a mediastinum The (Fig. attach lung of each to structures root 3.44). the pleura. that is of reflects pleura as surface a sleeve visceral of It covered the mediastinal by onto lung this region outlined pleural medial where reflection surface enter is structures of leave. the the by hilum, the on The and lung

the extends of thin and pleura from A from lung blade-like mediastinum. fold of the inferiorly the hilum root the to projects This ligament. is structure the pulmonary the translocation lobe may also of may down-and-up in inferior accommodate structures breathing. root the of and stabilize It position during the the

the vagus roots to immediately nerves lungs, pass them. mediastinum, while the the the immediately nerves the In posterior of phrenic anterior pass to

Within pulmonary and lymphatics. veins, are: root located in bronchial each and bronchus, main vessels, nerves, a hilum the a two artery, pulmonary

superior the are veins hilum, are at Generally, is pulmonary and pulmonary the the posterior artery in the inferior, position. somewhat bronchi

the and to bronchus the the lung On to the within side, main in from superior superior unlike lobe branches root, the branches left artery. right bronchus it pulmonary the itself, is lobar the on where the

and has three two The right (Fig. fissures lung lobes 3.45A). they invaginations by freely movable visceral lobes are other the each almost hilum, against to the Normally, separated, pleura. of are because These invaginations the form fissures:

and (lower separates superior the fissure lobe lung. lobe) lobe right The inferior of middle the oblique the the lobe from

the lobe (upper superior from lobe. lobe) middle separates the horizontal fissure The

can approximate be process rib the the fissure thoracic oblique on interspace follows a anteriorly The the crosses in curved of by laterally, respiration, the the VI position quiet the of spine, at contour patient, of (see level fifth wall vertebra marked on pp. spinous and roughly TIV line that begins the a then of 241–242).

from as follows it the oblique crosses meets The it rib horizontal fissure V. space sternum fourth fissure intercostal the the until

of determine each orientations listen the horizontal sounds should and oblique fissures The for clinicians lobe. from where lung

of of part the the contact in of upper superior apex the largest neck. root into of is and lobe this surface the lobe The the projects with wall anterolateral the to mainly lower wall. and middle the the surface anterior The lobe lies of adjacent lateral walls. contact costal the is The and with inferior of surface the lobe in inferior posterior

p. 243). the of position When lung related positions important the listening is stethoscope areas wall to sounds lobes, lobes the underlying thoracic of on each to to (see the of from those the it

neck the (Fig. and number medial root right lung in a the important mediastinum the surface lies of The to of of structures the adjacent 3.45B). vena esophagus. vein, cava, inferior azygos vena and include These superior heart, the: cava,

of superior and axilla. arch lung right pass over the The the and the cervical lobe dome into of and to as they artery related the are the right over pleura vein subclavian

an oblique and separated left lung has lung lobes smaller fissure than The right is (Fig. two the by 3.46A). left oblique the The fissure the oblique lung lung. slightly than more right the fissure of corresponding is of

and wall fissure a begins be line can approximate quiet the VI laterally, crosses the (see and the anteriorly rib marked of curved the interspace respiration, thoracic processes of TIII TIV, of fifth vertebrae by between that spinous oblique follows the contour on position During pp. the left 241–242).

each As determines listen the of sounds for to the lung orientation lung, oblique lobe. the with where fissure right from

surface neck. contact the of upper into is projects wall, the in of part largest superior lobe the of this the of root apex The the and with lobe the anterolateral the and costal lobe walls. with posterior inferior surface contact is the inferior in of The

underlying each 243). When the of be should on (see to wall positions p. related lobes of the areas placed of the the sounds thoracic lobes, those the from stethoscope listening lung to

because lung, the the left of mediastinum. of pleural the from the inferior notched is portion the The surface the heart’s unlike lung, left into projection medial cavity right of middle

the over anterior lung) the projects border From heart bulge. left the of tongue-like (the a part lobe extension superior the of lower the of lingula

neck and the lies lung in root to structures of left number medial important mediastinum of the a of surface adjacent (Fig. the The 3.46B). These the: esophagus. aortic include heart, and thoracic aorta, arch,

left they the left the The vein lung cervical and the subclavian over axilla. related arch artery superior the and and pleura dome as of to into of are lobe over pass the

bifurcates a it from where TIV/V neck (Fig. a extends CVI in to bronchus left is that a vertebral and trachea right tube lower The into level mediastinum in vertebral level the flexible main the 3.47). C open wall—the its in cartilage open trachea of facing posteriorly. embedded the rings The part C-shaped transverse held by is in the tracheal hook-shaped origins that the of two the main between midline ring The structure, bronchi. the has lowest projects a carina, backward composed of smooth trachea wall muscle. The mainly is the posterior of

and lung the root enters Each itself. hilum lung main bronchus passes the the of through a into bronchus main course The and more vertical left takes through root (Fig. the hilum than and main right bronchus the wider a is 3.47A). on tend the to on Therefore, frequently left. the inhaled foreign more than right lodge side bodies

divides bronchus lung (secondary which each lobe. lobar bronchi supplies bronchi), a within the The of into main lobar right the side, superior of to within originates On root the the lobe bronchus the lung. the

bronchi lobar further (Fig. supply segmental into bronchi), The bronchopulmonary segments bronchi divide (tertiary which 3.47B).

surfaces. and each supply further segmental rise to bronchi the which multiple segment, Within to generations bronchioles, ultimately, bronchopulmonary divisions the of give respiratory subdivide and, are the of cartilage, elongated open bronchi discontinuous not held these present by but plates walls are The of in bronchioles.

branch. bronchopulmonary accompanying is by and the area supplied segment segmental its of artery pulmonary bronchus a A lung

margins of vein tend the segments. around pulmonary Tributaries intersegmentally pass between the to of and

the onto the with Each is shaped peripherally origin the lung. surface like at bronchus projected bronchopulmonary apex and an the the the cone, segment base of segmental irregular of

smallest isolated area the a adjacent and lung of can independent A be bronchopulmonary segment is without affecting and smallest functionally regions. that removed the lung of region

lung There ten each are (Fig. in bronchopulmonary segments fuse some the 3.48); of them in left lung.

ventricle of and pulmonary the heart blood arteries from deoxygenated pulmonary to left right lungs the The the the originate right and carry (Fig. from trunk 3.49).

of and the The of the level bifurcation occurs vertebral to left TIV/V, pulmonary of midline left anteroinferiorly inferior of to the trachea. the just the to the bifurcation trunk

the right left mediastinum across artery is and (Fig. passes The the longer than horizontally pulmonary 3.49).

anteriorly the pulmonary to vena It bronchus, tracheal to posteriorly vein. superior bifurcation and and the and main passes: right upper inferiorly to ascending anteriorly slightly right aorta, and cava, the

the the right lobe to artery large branch lung. superior The lung the and of enters off pulmonary of the root gives a gives divides the lobes. continues The the through superior and then inferior vessel lung, to branch a lobe, the supply (recurrent) the of to hilum middle and main off second

shorter and (Fig. to aorta pulmonary superior anterior to pulmonary than vein posterior The artery left the the lies and right is the descending 3.49). within the and and through passes hilum It root lung. branches the

pulmonary vein side carry superior each heart lungs (Fig. back the On from vein a inferior oxygenated to the blood an and pulmonary 3.49). the the the of pass and lung, through immediately The hilum veins lung, into the root begin the of at atrium. left drain

(Fig. The arteries bronchial glands, system visceral and tissues the of veins “nutritive” walls the vascular and walls vessels, and large (bronchial 3.49) constitute pulmonary pleura). of lung of with pulmonary within veins. branches and arteries interconnect the the They

of originate or The one bronchial aorta its the branches: arteries from thoracic

from A arises upper artery right posterior single bronchial occasionally, the normally intercostal left originates (but it the artery). artery from third bronchial

surface and at bronchial superior left arteries the to TV, Two the arises anterior one vertebral the of the arise aorta—the left bronchus. left directly bronchial thoracic level artery inferior from inferior

to bronchi pulmonary the tissues. arteries and lungs run the supply of The posterior surfaces ramify in on the bronchial

the vein into the left or bronchial the into: superior on atrium, either the intercostal right the on left. or hemiazygos veins The pulmonary or vein and veins azygos the into drain vein

visceral afferents the through plexus distributed anterior and pleura by Structures lung (Fig. and efferents of the are pulmonary supplied posterior visceral the plexus and pulmonary 3.50). bronchi. bifurcation the These tracheal posteriorly interconnected and main and lie anteriorly plexuses to smaller than the plexus. The plexus anterior is posterior much

plexuses, of are trunks vessels. of the ultimately branches airway the these vagus distributed and Branches along originate and from sympathetic which nerves,

the bronchioles; vagus from: Visceral the sympathetic nerves bronchioles. the efferents system dilates constrict the

(Fig. lung of deep bronchi lymphatics roots lobar Superficial, along the sides and drain trachea main into of the around nodes and nodes the the of lymph called tracheobronchial or and subpleural, 3.51). the these from hilum group, through posterior the nodes a As root, mediastinum. into and lung, the extend and within lymph

along superior to from unite and vessels left anterior in similar from to brachiocephalic nodes, nodes vessels the are pass the the right superiorly mediastinum, bronchomediastinal these veins nodes and form brachiocephalic parasternal Efferent to with trunks. trachea which the right the may trunk base veins neck, thoracic drain directly deep into the or lymphatic drain at into trunks of These or duct.

mediastinum central broad placed The laterally two is that (Fig. cavities pleural a partition the separates 3.55). the superior bodies thoracic the the extends: the (Fig. to vertebrae, to the It diaphragm of from sternum aperture from and 3.56).

the contains sac, major arteries and the trachea, mediastinum and pericardial heart, the veins. the thymus gland, The the

on thorax the nervous their components serves as the such thoracic Additionally, of the and various way a esophagus, traverse duct, as for abdomen. as mediastinum passageway to system the the they structures

the purposes, smaller into mediastinum several is For subdivided regions. organizational between transverse TIV inferior extending and between further the (the sternal posterior the is plane mediastinum, mediastinum partitioned and into by angle intervertebral to into junction superior A middle, mediastinum, sac. the anterior, TV the: separates from sternum) mediastinum body manubrium of the which and disc vertebrae the the the and pericardial the

sternum pericardial and the The mediastinum. the the posterior sac to of is body area anterior anterior the to sac the diaphragm posterior the the pericardial posterior to of is mediastinum. bodies the anterior to the and The and region vertebrae the pericardial in and The is mediastinum its the middle sac middle, area which (Fig. the includes contents, 3.57).

the Fig. and sternum anterior body the sac The the posterior (see pericardial of to to anterior is mediastinum 3.57).

plane a passing boundary mediastinum. separating from and vertebra disc superior the TIV to superior Its TV, is transverse the from the between intervertebral it angle sternal

diaphragm. the Its inferior boundary is

bordered side. part the of either it by parietal on pleura Laterally, is mediastinal

structure an is thymus (Fig. extension in of gland The the anterior major inferior the mediastinum 3.58). of the are Also connective fat, body from branches posterior the of and tissue, of thoracic to which present fibrous surface sternum vessels, lymph nodes, pericardium. sternopericardial the pass ligaments, internal mediastinal the the

mediastinum is middle located in cavity. the The thoracic centrally It heart, of great pericardium, various origins the the vessels. nerves, smaller contains and vessels,

of sac heart The is and fibroserous vessels. great roots pericardium surrounding the the the a components, consists the serous fibrous and pericardium It pericardium the of (Fig. two 3.59).

boundaries pericardium mediastinum. connective a fibrous defines the that tough The layer is the middle of tissue outer two pericardium serous of The parts: consists thin is and

parietal the lines inner of fibrous the of layer surface pericardium. The pericardium serous

serous pericardium forms its of the outer The (epicardium) layer and covering. heart adheres to visceral

at roots pericardium continuous layers The the vessels. of of and serous great the are parietal visceral the pericardium, created is layers small serous the two space between containing of The fluid, of narrow cavity. pericardial amount a space heart. uninhibited potential This of movement for the the allows relatively

The is its the adventitia with fibrous bag on (Fig. the base apex its and diaphragm with great pericardium the a cone-shaped vessels of continuous 3.59). and small left diaphragm diaphragm The a central is attached area of to the muscular the on base to tendon side. the the of surface attached the posterior to it sternum sternopericardial the is of by Anteriorly, ligaments. the its thoracic heart in to the position attachments in retain help cavity. These cardiac The also sac distention. limits

cord levels they fibrous of and phrenic innervate The pericardium (Fig. to destination origin the the the nerves, which from fibrous as C3 their diaphragm from C5, point originate innervate travel through pass final to and pericardium their spinal 3.60). the pericardium, the the the location, the directly to diaphragm within the changes origin of and fibrous is related Their formation occur of during that pericardial embryological cavity. thoracic vessels fibrous they pericardium cavity. the are also located as through within pericardiacophrenic supply Similarly, pass the and the

of is parietal around the roots vessels. with serous The layer the pericardium of serous of the great layer visceral pericardium continuous These of serous reflections (Fig. pericardium inferior more occur in pulmonary the locations: cava posteriorly, two and pulmonary vena the the 3.61) veins. the and arteries—the the superiorly, and aorta trunk; second superior surrounding one veins—the surrounding

is surrounding to the of J, J-shaped, posterior left cul-de-sac the the veins reflection oblique atrium, and sinus. the pericardial within formed zone the is The

passage reflected between two the sinus. sites pericardial of serous transverse is A the pericardium superior lies superior trunk, the anterior cava, to This and sinus posterior pulmonary to left atrium. ascending aorta to the vena the and the

When in arteries separates is surgery, from anteriorly the pericardium during transverse placed opened sinus the veins. finger a slips apex hand moved into superiorly under the of heart the placed sinus. A the and oblique

by supplied pericardiacophrenic, and musculophrenic, the from pericardium thoracic, inferior The arteries, and phrenic is internal thoracic branches the aorta.

veins. and superior azygos Veins internal pericardium and phrenic from the enter veins the thoracic system of the

and trunks, the sympathetic arise nerve [X], pericardium nerves. phrenic the supplying from vagus Nerves the the

phrenic by pericardium nerves. the source somatic carried in afferent to (pain) is parietal fibers is note sensation the the It from that somatic important of referred supraclavicular or For dermatomes shoulder reason, spinal this “pain” to related for be neck segments region of to cord may pericardial problem a the lateral area the

C3, C5. and C4,

one of of that on heart fallen and has are pyramid sides. The a its over shape and orientation is the general that of resting thoracic and the base the this apex faces in (Fig. cavity, a opposite to in apex projects posterior direction of is the and the downward, forward, whereas the Placed left, pyramid 3.63). oriented pyramid sides rests, a an The on pulmonary of diaphragmatic surface, the right pulmonary (sternocostal) the a left anterior and (inferior) consist which surface a surface of: surface. anteriorly, pyramid

posteriorly. base directed quadrilateral of The the is heart and left of inferior veins) atrium, of: and (Fig. portion venae parts and of pulmonary consists small right great a the (superior proximal cavae and veins the the the atrium, It the 3.64).

with atrium, the heart, enter entering atrium left the base and venae opposite to of the heart sides of TVIII superior veins left the fixed right of when TIX pericardial the pulmonary is base TV the to of to Because (TVI the and of veins lower the at and right cavae ends posteriorly standing). great the vertebrae inferior and upper the the the bodies the wall, immediately base. to posterior lies the The esophagus

and downward, the base the forward, ending left, From in to apex. the projects heart the by (Fig. part inferolateral the the heart of the apex left formed is ventricle of The and space, the line. intercostal is fifth left from midsternal 8 cm 3.65) 9 to positioned the deep to

of the heart Surfaces

the some surface (Fig. of left mostly and right on of faces the atrium the anteriorly some consists the on with ventricle and right right of The anterior the left ventricle, 3.65).

which left on in The the diaphragmatic ventricle consists separated the rests surface, posterior anatomical interventricular the groove the small heart of the and position of portion by right a (Fig. ventricle 3.66). base to of the and the by the This surface rests coronary heart inferiorly, of is heart. from on apex faces separated from the the base sinus, extends the the diaphragm,

is broad left a consists left the and pulmonary the faces and atrium of left ventricle surface (Fig. and lung, convex, The of left the portion 3.66).

faces (Fig. The right of the right the broad is consists and atrium right and lung, convex, pulmonary surface 3.66).

obtuse refer descriptions to orientation of (acute), right, left, and general inferior cardiac margins: Some

are the the the and and right pulmonary The left left heart. as margins right of surfaces same

left defined heart by portion (Figs inferior and the the the right small edge apex. between formed near anterior 3.63 of as a margin the The of mostly sharp 3.65)—it ventricle and ventricle surfaces the the is diaphragmatic is and

margin anterior pulmonary obtuse The and (Fig. the separates surfaces left cardiac the apex (Fig. round and left is from extends to auricle 3.63)—it the ventricle left superiorly of small formed auricle. portion by and and by the is 3.65), a the left mostly

the critical. defining structures is understanding For the cardiac evaluations, radiological borders a thorough of view vena border of the cava, standard inferior (Fig. a right atrium, superior posteroanterior consists right The vena and the the cava in 3.67A). pulmonary border the ventricle. the arch in of view and of trunk, a left left the similar consists left The aorta, the auricle, radiological ventricle left apex. in study this the of consists inferior right ventricle border and the the at The right seen the lateral is and left posteriorly ventricle visualized is anteriorly, atrium views, In (Fig. the 3.67B).

as two divide four to two into and grooves atria external produce referred sulci. ventricles) heart or chambers surface (i.e., partitions the and Internal

sulcus from ventricles the the circles atria separating coronary (Fig. The the heart, 3.68). contains small the cardiac left it the of the heart, sinus, coronary vein, As and coronary right the artery, it the artery. coronary branch circumflex circles the

diaphragmatic is interventricular the middle vein, the heart of cardiac and of sulcus the vein. posterior the on interventricular contains two contains heart and great interventricular ventricles—the interventricular anterior on is anterior posterior sulcus anterior surface interventricular the The artery artery and sulci and and surface the separate posterior cardiac anterior the the the the and

heart. of right These inferiorly, apex just the to the the continuous of are sulci

heart (Fig. partition functionally a by of separated consists two pumps The 3.69A). sends right from and receives The the pump it body lungs. to deoxygenated the blood from body. receives sends the to the The blood oxygenated pump it lungs left and by a Each atrium consists of ventricle separated pump and valve. an a

the heart. the heart, The of relatively thick-walled coming pump out atria into blood whereas receive ventricles thin-walled the blood

lungs, the ventricle muscular to the force of the right. body through than is wall left the blood so thicker the pump is required through More than

heart the chambers atrioventricular the of four septa separate (Fig. and Interatrial, interventricular, 3.69B). is critical internal of anatomy chamber The its function. each to

anatomical formed the position, the by the In atrium. is border right heart the right of surface. the right This portion also to heart’s of contributes anterior the chamber

to right of three atrium through the returning vessels. one enters Blood blood from are: heart cavae, coronary sinus, from which and inferior superior itself. the body; the heart returns to the blood walls the of the the and which deliver together These venae

atrium, vena enters enter right vena cava inferior lower of the the the the portion superior cava upper the right posterior and and posterior sinus of coronary portion The atrium.

From right the atrium, blood ventricle atrioventricular passes right into through orifice. the right the ventricular is tricuspid medially faces during closed and This opening forward the and contraction valve. by

into interior atrium right is divided two the The spaces. of continuous the right from the opening of side groove separation to is the Externally, cordis), side sulcus inferior extends of the the of superior cava right shallow, indicated vena opening by cava. a terminalis vertical vena (the of the which this division terminalis Internally, this is crista (Fig. by indicated the roof is anterior just and a the front which in of vena on the superior the down of lateral wall the begins of cava extends that the 3.70), vena smooth, cava. opening ridge muscular lip the atrium to the inferior of

the crista sinus space venosus. the right of horn cavae embryologically from to is venae the The is derived sinus and of posterior the the venae walls, both empty atrium into this This space. thin cavae smooth, has right component of and

as space to anterior right the atrium The auricle, the the including crista, to referred is sometimes proper. embryonic primitive on This its origin the atrium. based terminology from is musculi the auricle, “teeth the an These of pouch walls aorta. also which comb.” that fan right found Its the overlaps from crista pectinati muscular is are (pectinate covered a are the ridges muscles), ascending in ridges by ear-like, out the externally like called which conical,

the coronary in of additional cardiac sinus, is medially the structure opens cava. veins to and of most the blood the the right opening receives the atrium vena of opening from which An inferior coronary openings Associated embryonic sinus vena with valve of tissue venosus derived (the inferior respectively). the sinus are the folds of small from cava, valve the and these of the valve of of blood the and During incoming inferior the oxygenated the valve through left direct the foramen development, into cava helps vena atrium. ovale

atrium posteriorly from interatrial right forward and left the because which the the the to lies atrium left atrium of septum, the to Separating faces is left atrium. right the the right and visible inferior cava. the A vena septum above the is the depression clearly in of orifice just limbus margin, (border its the (oval the the is prominent fossa ovalis This fossa fossa), ovalis of with fossa). oval

marks fossa the The ovale, of ovalis foramen is important fetal which circulation. an embryonic of part location the the right bypass foramen allows and vena through to inferior lungs, the cava to the the ovale The atrium nonfunctional atrium blood oxygenated which are before entering so directly pass left birth.

openings openings—the cardiac along foramina scattered veins (the of small of venae atrium. smallest the of right minimae)—are numerous walls the Finally, cordis the the These that small atrium. are into drain myocardium the directly right the veins

surface. the right and diaphragmatic of the position, of ventricle heart forms portion most the In anterior the of a the surface anatomical right to atrium and of located The ventricle the the front ventricle right right the the atrioventricular in right is of to and is of the right orifice. left right horizontal forward the direction. and the a entering therefore moves atrium from Blood ventricle in right

conus which The arteriosus leads pulmonary the to is the trunk, ventricle, the right of (infundibulum). outflow tract area smooth has This and embryonic the derives walls cordis. from bulbus

irregular (Fig. carneae called of The inflow muscular, numerous have trabeculae structures the the portion of ventricle right walls 3.71). either Most attached forming both attached length, are walls bridges. ridges, their throughout at ends, of these the forming ventricular to or

the A of only while surface, one to carneae serves ventricular the (papillary as tendineae), other attached trabeculae muscles) of of point end fibrous the end attachment the cords tricuspid which the have free chordae tendon-like edges (the cusps for few valve. connect to the

ventricle. are muscles papillary in There three the right are papillary to on origin and anterior, septal posterior, relative of they Named surface, the their muscles: point ventricular the

muscle muscle, anterior ventricle. the largest papillary the anterior of arises is papillary wall constant and most The and from the

one, three The tendineae from or ventricular papillary consist with posterior the wall. arising some directly chordae of two, muscle structures, may

from small directly muscle, emerging being or papillary most absent, the inconsistent wall. with is muscle The septal chordae septal either papillary tendineae the

the the of papillary (moderator the trabeculum, base bridge of interventricular the single septum the anterior between muscle. trabecula and A portion a specialized lower band), septomarginal forms trabecula wall anterior bundle the The bundle, the the of to the ventricle. system, right portion septomarginal the of of carries a right conduction cardiac atrioventricular

ventricular valve or so during (Fig. it contraction atrioventricular of (right The atrioventricular the leaflets three right named tricuspid is valve), closed orifice because by consists cusps usually 3.71). to The that the cusp ring atrioventricular orifice. of is secured surrounds each base fibrous the This maintain of fibrous the shape ring helps to opening. the sites continuous bases at are cusps near their The other termed each commissures. with

septal, cusps, right anterior, ventricle. naming the their is and of three cusps, based The the position the relative on in posterior of cusps to margins tendineae, from the the tips the papillary of chordae attached free are the which The muscles. arise

valve cusps three the the ventricle, right ventricle. open, right the the into of and is tricuspid project During filling

a and presence mechanism, compensating when forced back of the upward with musculature the ventricular right the Without into would contracts, be valve the move of the atrium. flow would blood blood cusps the atrium. chordae of prevents the to the attached cusps right cusps being into muscles from tendineae papillary contraction by the everted However,

papillary changes occur muscles the the tendineae associated dramatic valves the during and chordae put, keep size that during ventricular in Simply closed contraction.

to addition, In chordae papillary tendineae muscles from cusp. attach two each ventricular the of helps during separation contraction. prevent This cusps and the causes exit move of the to into closing tricuspid ventricle right blood pulmonary the trunk. valve Proper

may valve. of Necrosis in a of a prolapse result (heart infarction myocardial related following papillary muscle attack) the

of tract by closed ventricle, the into pulmonary the (Fig. At opening the the valve pulmonary outflow the is trunk the the infundibulum, apex right of pulmonary upward lumen free cusps projecting which three the trunk. into of with 3.71), semilunar the of consists edges of thin the (Fig. superior each a the middle, lateral semilunar and the cusp, nodule thickened free edge has the semilunar cusp The portion, of a portion, of lunula cusp 3.72).

ventricles tracts right, complete. to is their position named The relative the of before the fetal anterior semilunar cusps rotation are the cusps, and outflow from left, (Fig. pocket-like a Each sinus forms cusp of trunk. pulmonary dilation the the in the initial wall of 3.72)—a portion forces of and the contraction, blood fills pulmonary sinuses closed. cusps After recoil the ventricular these from the ventricle. the right trunk refilling pulmonary This blood in prevents

heart. the of left The of or base forms the surface atrium posterior most

is the As structures. from derived the right atrium, two embryologically left atrium with

portion, pulmonary The veins four (Fig. or inflow the receives half, posterior 3.73). are from of veins that derives and during the the pulmonary walls It atrium the into development. parts has proximal left incorporated smooth

is auricle. left the with The half anterior continuous It derives contains and atrium. pectinati the musculi embryonic from primitive structure components separates terminalis the the in right crista atrium, distinct of Unlike the atrium. two no the left

the atrium. The septum wall is of left interatrial anterior the of part atrium. ovale fossa is the right of The and foramen of area or thin the in the valve ovalis floor depression septum is the opposite the the in

atrium blood the prevents of valve atrium. from to from ovale left foramen the right the development, passing During the between adults, not “probe passage the some valve atrium. the left and a fused This may completely leaving patent” in atrium right be

ventricle anterior left atrium. lies the left to The left contributes pulmonary surfaces the and diaphragmatic, and to heart, the the anterior, forms of It apex.

a enters the in direction to Blood left flows apex. the ventricle orifice the forward and atrioventricular through chamber right the of the is The has thickest layer conical, is itself longer ventricle, myocardium. and than (the derived tract the vestibule) infundibulum from is the ventricle, bulbus embryonic has right and outflow is walls, the The aortic to cordis. posterior of smooth

are to in those fine right delicate carneae in ventricle. left the contrast in the and The trabeculae ventricle

muscular similar of to general the is of appearance the that The bridges and ventricle (Fig. with right ridges trabeculae 3.74).

chordae for are structure muscles, the observed also ventricle. their as is right and described Papillary with above together tendineae, right ventricle. found are usually than left papillary and the and the muscles, in larger are Two those of muscles, the ventricle anterior posterior papillary

the position, somewhat left posterior ventricle the In to the right ventricle. is anatomical forms and anterior the of interventricular the ventricle. therefore the some wall on The septum side right wall the of left two is having muscular membranous part. described septum a The part, a as and parts:

part major and thin, of part part septum, of is membranous The muscular the the the whereas forms septum. is part upper the thick the be its may the considered an third septum of cusp the valve. tricuspid A above septal the position part because of of atrioventricular part atrium. the part the This location of this septum and right superior left ventricle places between

left the right side opens into orifice posterior the The part atrioventricular superior of ventricle. of left the two anterior contraction bicuspid cusps, as (left valve atrioventricular it is It by which also ventricular mitral valve), closed is cusps has referred to the the because during the and posterior valve (Fig. 3.74). with ring cusps are are and other the of at cusps The surrounding opening, commissures. secured each the continuous the to fibrous bases a the is right the chordae as The tendineae for described of coordinated the papillary action and muscles ventricle.

the or superiorly aorta. of left with is vestibule, tract outflow The ascending aortic continuous ventricle, the left aorta ventricle closed aortic is into by the from the opening the valve. The is valve in valve. structure to pulmonary This the similar cusps three semilunar each the the edge consists aorta with into ascending of projecting of lumen of It upward free (Fig. the 3.75).

the posterior right, left, aortic aorta the the ascending cusps pocket-like sinuses. and wall are of semilunar Between and sinuses—the aortic left The from and the arteries originate coronary sinuses. right left and right posterior sinus Because cusp this, referred to sinus and noncoronary and sometimes of the cusp. as aortic are the

pulmonary is originate sinuses. process: with functioning and of the of similar one aortic forced and the recoils into from it sinuses, contraction The coronary the because arteries additional aortic as vessels left the aortic blood important after right valve the is ventricular that to fills valve automatically these

dense, ventricles. of The form the fibrous in a rings the atria between with of tissue interconnecting connective cardiac in collection and the areas four plane is a skeleton the of orifices, and rings surround the opening The pulmonary cardiac aortic orifice trunks. the skeleton of the two atrioventricular four the They fibrosus. anulus are connective interconnecting connective and fibrous which the tissue trigone, ring ring; areas thickened which ring include: trigone, the aortic thickened the of The left between fibrous between (Fig. aortic area right atrioventricular atrioventricular right left and the area ring a and tissue is is the a of 3.76).

for the and skeleton cusps. of surrounds helps attachment provides maintain the of cardiac integrity the The points openings it ventricular It atrial from musculature. separates musculature the also the atrial the originates from the the myocardium the rings. the rings, upper border lower ventricular of The of originates from myocardium whereas border

tissue that as from ventricles. a the partition The electrically connective cardiac isolates serves atria dense also skeleton the groups myocardium. of through the anulus, which atrioventricular single The between the passes these connection is two bundle,

coronary arise Two and of supply from sinuses portion in aorta ascending of heart. the initial and the other the the tissues aortic arteries muscle the of circle and apex toward in with marginal converging coronary heart the the interventricular the sulcus, the heart in (Fig. They interventricular the sulci, branches, 3.77).

cardiac through venous the most sinus. veins, empty returning blood which The coronary of into passes ventricle. structure This the posterior the atrium sulcus coronary and left the surface between large is in of heart the venous on located left the right the between cava into sinus of atrioventricular the opening atrium and coronary the orifice. The vena inferior empties right

coronary artery. Right the ascending The artery right aortic coronary from of right the originates aorta. sinus anteriorly descends right in (Fig. passes right and ventricle then sulcus, vertically the the atrium It and between coronary 3.78A). diaphragmatic sulcus heart. and and the On turns it heart, the reaching posteriorly onto base surface of the margin inferior the the of continues in the course, this branches vessel: several the of stem During arise main from

(Fig. right and early ascending nodal sinu-atrial in off atrial gives groove and auricle aorta, between An the passes branch branch the the which 3.78A), to sinu-atrial cava passes vena the the supply superior node. posteriorly around

coronary right branch (acute) right inferior the as the heart artery margin off (Fig. marginal approaches A given of is the this heart. 3.78A,B) and continues toward border the along apex the of

diaphragmatic small branch base/ it the As interventricular surface of the the final continues coronary before off to atrioventricular node the the artery posterior heart, giving branch, (Fig. a branch major supplies on right its in which sulcus. interventricular posterior 3.78A), the lies

septum, third the the the left the of supplies sinu-atrial the ventricle. right of a artery portion right atrium, coronary The and posteroinferior part posterior and right of the the atrium one interventricular portion left a the interatrial ventricle, atrioventricular and of nodes, septum,

coronary artery. Left of the coronary sinus from left ascending left aortic the The originates artery aorta. entering coronary left sulcus. the passes auricle the It and trunk before the pulmonary between and behind from (Fig. two the the terminal interventricular branches, pulmonary the artery its circumflex Emerging into the divides anterior trunk, 3.78A).

anterior interventricular anterior artery—LAD) The descending branch (Fig. (left interventricular 3.78A,C) the sulcus the in heart left the pulmonary the apex obliquely of descends the of continues side (Fig. and trunk anterior around toward 3.78A,C). left surface anterior may diagonal large descend the its of two one During across and branches the course, or diagonally ventricle. arise

circumflex The (Fig. branch the and sulcus. coronary left, the posterior surface toward before the and sulcus base/diaphragmatic in courses interventricular the 3.78A,C) reaching of heart, ends onto the usually A marginal (Fig. branch, large the artery left continues it across from and 3.78A,C), of margin the arises the heart. usually obtuse rounded

of most and artery to left atrioventricular bundle left interventricular including enables atrium it the the supply and pattern the of left coronary septum, ventricle, its distribution of most and the The branches.

distribution coronary patterns in Variations of the arteries. occur. the in arteries the major patterns basic Several distribution variations coronary of

coronary and coronary left most above arteries described pattern the both a consists dominant right is and of artery. for The common distribution right This means posterior the from right artery. coronary the arises branch that interventricular the small. and coronary therefore of the right of a the supplies is ventricle the artery of portion circumflex coronary relatively large wall branch artery left The left posterior

hearts from branch posterior of the contrast, most enlarged dominant the artery, left In the arises supplies a and circumflex posterior an coronary with branch in (Fig. of wall interventricular left ventricle 3.79).

the point Another sinu-atrial to nodes. arterial variation to of relates and supply the atrioventricular the coronary most right structures cases, are supplied these by In two artery. branch circumflex these vessels structures. the from supply artery of occasionally However, coronary the left

cardiac small, great, coronary middle, and tributaries: posterior The sinus the four major veins. receives

Great cardiac vein. of cardiac apex The begins the vein at heart the (Fig. great 3.82A). interventricular artery anterior sulcus, is to where termed it is and the often the interventricular in It related anterior anterior ascends the vein. interventricular sulcus, the left the surface of Reaching and great coronary the cardiac the vein continues the onto base/diaphragmatic turns to heart. artery. it this branch is point, of coronary the left with the circumflex associated At its sinus, along (Fig. form enlarges in the coronary which the coronary cardiac great Continuing vein sulcus, the atrium right gradually enters the to path 3.82B).

cardiac Middle vein. begins coronary near The heart interventricular the the middle (Fig. vein vein) sulcus ascends the interventricular apex posterior in of the and cardiac sinus toward (posterior 3.82B). course. interventricular posterior the associated branch right its with throughout is It of left the coronary artery or

cardiac vein. Small begins ventricle sulcus the the vein anterior lower the coronary right cardiac of (Fig. in section small and between The right atrium 3.82A). surface the the coronary enters its where sinus It base/diaphragmatic groove in continues at heart of onto end. it the this atrial

the of throughout (Fig. right receive artery companion marginal and the vein It course is a its coronary may right 3.82A). the vein along the of artery small of right heart. coronary marginal branch accompanies the This the acute margin vein marginal not If join atrium the right small cardiac the does right directly. the enters it vein,

cardiac Posterior vein. surface the of on vein (Fig. of cardiac posterior middle cardiac just to left the posterior left the ventricle The vein the lies 3.82B). joins cardiac enters the coronary directly great It either vein. the or sinus

veins. cardiac Other are in the cardiac of involved of groups Two venous the additional also drainage veins heart.

right (Fig. that of anterior on (anterior anterior are the the arise surface veins The ventricle the right cardiac veins) ventricle small veins of 3.82A). enter coronary anterior wall atrium. the and right of the cross the sulcus They of the ventricle. the portion They anterior right drain small The right it cardiac be this marginal part of may does group enter if the not vein. vein

have of smallest minimae veins of also cordis group cardiac A described. been or (venae veins Thebesius) the the they and rarely are cardiac and are ventricle, left into ventricle. left right chambers, atrium associated directly occasionally in right the Draining with with numerous atrium, the associated are

inferior the vessels drain nodes, of nodes, of mainly coronary heart The into: at brachiocephalic anterior the the to brachiocephalic and arteries lymphatic trachea. and the veins; the end follow tracheobronchial

capable contracting is and spontaneously. of atria the ventricles musculature The of conduction The initiates coordinates and cardiac system contraction. the the node, the cardiac (the The basic conduction of muscle bundle components: networks subendocardial sinu-atrial system branches, and right consists nodes the into atrioventricular cells left atrioventricular conduction with fibers). of of and node, its bundle organized cells Purkinje plexus four and specialized

establishes cardiac system distribution of important The unique an the unidirectional conduction excitation/contraction. pathway pattern of conduction connective from course, tissue. myocardium its large of the branches the by insulated system Throughout are surrounding to This of tends contraction cardiac fibers. decrease inappropriate muscle and stimulation

number increases pathway contacts the The greatly cardiac of conduction functional and between musculature subendocardial network. in the

wave of ventricles apex muscles the the the of is outflow excitation unidirectional which moves arterial and papillary a and tracts. Thus, contraction from established, to

node, the the pacemaker. sinu-atrial begin at Impulses cardiac end superior the the superior This the cells terminalis of located is the at of (Fig. and right collection crista at the junction vena atrium of cava 3.83A).

the the proper. venosus between and derived parts of from junction the right the also atrium the is This sinus embryonic atrium

generated the muscle to the spread causing sinu-atrial by The the atria, contract. signals node excitation across

atrioventricular which the the close of Concurrently, attachment excitation wave of stimulates node, the atrioventricular located the the to valve, within of in coronary septal the septum atria the near cusp tricuspid and (Fig. is opening the sinus, the of 3.83A).

of elaborate to beginning The musculature. extends tissue, impulse an conducting specialized of is node excitatory the atrioventricular the all collection ventricular cells forms a that of bundle, the system atrioventricular which

a bundle (Fig. is node atrioventricular continuation the direct The atrioventricular of 3.83A). border of of the and right bundles. It part the follows left interventricular lower before into along septum the splitting membranous

septum of right the the apex bundle side continues of right toward the branch right ventricle. on interventricular the The to the it papillary of the reach base the anterior septomarginal trabecula the muscle. enters septum From with and At divides conduction final point, plexus subendocardial cardiac component fibers. the or ventricular of continuous of it this conduction the cells the is system, Purkinje throughout the specialized network musculature, cells This to spreads including the muscles. supply papillary ventricular the of ventricle

left left left and the to interventricular ventricle descends apex of passes side the (Fig. to of muscular The branch septum the bundle the 3.83B). become plexus conduction that eventually Along (Purkinje branches cells it its the with off continuous fibers). of gives subendocardial course specialized with cells of side, ventricle. the impulses excitation As left this the right network throughout spreads the

of responsible the peripheral division regulating: autonomic output. system rate, contraction, The directly of each and force heart cardiac is nervous for

parasympathetic both Branches contribute the of systems cardiac from to sympathetic and plexus. the formation the arch superficial between (Fig. trunk to and inferior aortic of the it This consists part, pulmonary plexus the and a deep part, the aortic and (Fig. 3.84A), bifurcation arch tracheal the a between and 3.84B).

the sympathetic From plexus, nerves small supply fibers that are and both parasympathetic heart. cardiac mixed the branches containing conduction vessels, components of ventricular atrial coronary blood and the and branches musculature. tissue and system, affect These other nodal

of the force contraction, parasympathetic of system: rate, constricts decreases arteries. reduces coronary Stimulation and the heart

as the preganglionic The heart right cardiac reach fibers and left the parasympathetic from branches vagus nerves. either within plexus They plexus and of cardiac walls ganglia the or the in the synapse the enter atria. in located

rate, Stimulation of the system: contraction. of sympathetic force the and increases increases heart

the the through trunk. Sympathetic cardiac plexus reach the from cardiac nerves fibers sympathetic of sympathetic the thoracic and four or sympathetic fibers spinal enter the cord segments five move from trunk. the upper Preganglionic through fibers the They proceed to in cervical as from the and trunk sympathetic postganglionic bilateral upper ganglia, sympathetic plexus. branches synapse and cardiac thoracic

of a are Visceral heart the the component plexus. also from afferents cardiac branches. fibers cardiac through pass sympathetic cardiac nervous nerves in from the and plexus in cardiac the the central and return to system These the trunk vagal the

nerve vagus vagal nerves afferents with the cardiac The to return [X]. associated the They in blood alterations and sense blood primarily therefore cardiac pressure concerned are chemistry and with reflexes.

to trunks the the The or return thoracic the afferents of sympathetic cervical sympathetic cardiac nerves with from trunk. the the associated either portions thoracic with sympathetic the or the upper where the reenter of are portion they four thoracic trunk. the spinal descend they along If cervical region five in cord to they from the afferents segments, the trunk, of thoracic the region, normally pain at Visceral ischemia). the as the which afferents system with cardiac heart, (i.e., is sensation tissue-damaging associated events from level cellular the conduct detected sympathetic cord the “In often and pain to is supplied same levels This 1,” Referred cutaneous clinic: pp. by the regions (see 46, “Case p. spinal pain.” “referred” 244–246).

is pericardial pulmonary contained The trunk (Fig. the within sac with visceral layer a 3.85), the ascending and pericardium, by the of sheath. in is is covered serous aorta associated common conus anterior It posteriorly opening then moving aortic ventricle pulmonary the arises the from to ascending the to at of orifice left, of the initially left the slightly anterior right to the aorta. the of arteriosus and the and and trunk lying ascends, the TVI, between passes superior right vena and approximately lung. left artery, to passes to to the third and aorta to the TV of inferiorly posterior cava, and left the disc to divides ascending level the left to cartilage, trunk opposite to pulmonary right, the right which the the border into: of aorta anteriorly aorta the and the of the the descending enter pulmonary the artery, vertebrae the At and sternum left which posterior the intervertebral lung; arch enter the costal pulmonary

serous covered which common ascending is the of (Fig. in trunk by surrounds pericardium, pulmonary contained sheath and visceral is a also sac a layer aorta the pericardial The within 3.85A).

of ventricle, level left half the the to base edge the left the posterior sternum. aorta of which aortic costal lower the is the left ascending origin cartilage, with is The the third of the of at orifice right costal the to the right, the slightly second level Moving of continues aorta the ascending superiorly, forward to cartilage. and mediastinum arch and the superior to At it enters the the of point, referred this then aorta. as is

ascending cusps valve. to the are aorta bulges point three superior outward left the the from Immediately small where aortic ventricle semilunar arises the the opposite of sinuses. and are posterior, the left right, aortic These The and left originate aortic and coronary from respectively. right the left right sinuses, arteries

sac the (Fig. is superior inferior within vena the of The located pericardial half cava 3.85B). cartilage the at enters second at level third through lower passes atrium pericardium right the costal level of the the approximately the and of fibrous the costal It cartilage. for is within posterior area pericardial sac a the with small on its pericardium covered surface. except serous The portion

diaphragm, approximately at cava fibrous inferior level pericardium. the the of vena passing After TVIII, the the enters through vertebra within A this before pericardial is vessel the atrium. sac right short entering portion the of a pericardium covered (Fig. by the of pericardial except for within surface is small portion serous posterior it sac, While its 3.85B).

the of pericardial short veins the very is sac. within of each also segment A pulmonary the of left usually lung, pericardium pass surface. enter region posterior from two These the each its and through on veins, superior fibrous atrium the surface a pericardial the posterior serous these covered all In veins sac, is but of pericardium. of the by portion (Fig. pericardial veins, addition, is pericardial sinus within pulmonary the sac and the oblique the right left In between 3.85B).

to manubrium thoracic Fig. is the sternum of four the vertebrae of to mediastinum anterior superior and bodies the first posterior The (see the 3.57).

an from boundary upward Its jugular is notch the plane vertebra of passing TI. border oblique superior and posteriorly the to superior

between inferior plane mediastinum. the a the vertebra separates from the angle from Inferiorly, disc passing transverse to TIV/V it intervertebral sternal

part side. mediastinal bordered is the by either on parietal the of Laterally, it pleura

is the mediastinum superior continuous inferior neck and above mediastinum with with The the below.

mediastinum (Figs. The superior found in structures the major thymus, superior branch trachea, vessels, lymphatics. of 3.86 branches, and include phrenic laryngeal its vagus thoracic left nerves, blood vagus and brachiocephalic the intercostal left esophagus, with of nerve, recurrent and arch other and three nerves, left nerves, the: 3.87) veins, aorta right duct, left superior small vein, the vena large cava,

superior most the of mediastinum, sternum. the posterior anterior of component lying the is thymus The immediately the to manubrium structure It bilobed Fig. is an (see asymmetrical, 3.58).

the as extent pericardial lower of the a portion thyroid can anterior reach into the high typically mediastinum as thymus neck extends gland; upper the the over The into sac.

in considerable and large the structure the variation after of puberty, system, the begins early to atrophy the in development is thymus the adult. Involved in a child, shows immune size sometimes it lobulated structures. mostly elderly In that organ, adult, fatty as consisting barely as two of tissue arranged an is is fatty the identifiable

originating Arteries of consist thoracic to from branches the internal arteries. small thymus the usually drainage into internal and Venous possibly thoracic brachiocephalic into vein veins. the is left the

Lymphatic along thoracic at (tracheobronchial); of at following to of of (parasternal); the in multiple more returns the the and the internal neck. or drainage arteries nodes groups bifurcation tracheal locations: one the root

the and brachiocephalic thymus. left to immediately posterior The located are right veins and form veins internal jugular Fig. subclavian the junction each side at between on They the (see 3.86). with (Fig. the midline The left the superior joins right crosses cava to form brachiocephalic and the vena vein vein brachiocephalic 3.88).

vein. is posterior superior downward, cava The brachiocephalic the joined brachiocephalic right to begins right forming vertically clavicle of medial by left end vena when passes the the it vein the and tributaries posterior intercostal, internal vertebral, the thoracic Venous first and veins. include The inferior it. thymic drain thyroid also veins into and may

medial begins posterior the left to vein The brachiocephalic end of the left clavicle. cava posterior right cartilage lower form the sternal right superior crosses to vein brachiocephalic to in first to border. inferior with to the vena It close the right edge right, the joins a slightly costal the the and of moving direction, thyroid, tributaries vertebral, superior include the Venous posterior thoracic internal and intercostal, veins. left inferior first intercostal, also pericardial and thymic veins. receive It may crosses midline adult. manubrium to vein the the The left posterior in the brachiocephalic children the rises the infants In the protected. therefore superior of and vein brachiocephalic left less above border manubrium is and

receives intercostal the The veins, sometimes bronchial the the third, usually left fourth second, pericardiacophrenic veins, left left intercostal sometimes and superior and vein vein. the posterior side It (Fig. passes the lateral aortic left nerve left to and the before the the over medial vein nerve, arch, the brachiocephalic to of vagus left entering left phrenic 3.89). accessory it vein). (superior the hemiazygos Inferiorly, with hemiazygos vein may connect

and costal right veins begins vena lower Fig. left the first right where where lower third posterior join, oriented brachiocephalic cava the superior vertically the the (see at and joins cartilage, it atrium the right terminates costal cartilage, of edge right The the to of edge 3.86).

within therefore sac superior The in contained pericardial cava half the the is of middle vena the lower and mediastinum. is

vein and before pericardial cava receives receive also immediately entering The the vena mediastinal pericardial and azygos sac may veins. the superior

can (see radiograph easily superolateral visualized The cava of Fig. the border be forming vena right part superior mediastinum a of the chest on 3.67A).

and branches its aorta of Arch

be thoracic the into aorta portion ascending can divided of (descending) thoracic arch of the aorta. and aorta, The aorta, in is superior mediastinum. aorta of the the Only arch the passes mediastinum, vertebral from level aorta the courses emerges TIV/V Fig. and pericardial the through sac ascending it at as the backward, on It and superior to ending left when left the side (see the upward, begins 3.86). is high initially lateral arch manubrium the of as anterior of sternum, to as the the finally the Extending midlevel trachea. the and

by their three superior Three from at origins, of crossed the all the border are left arch the the aorta; brachiocephalic branches of anteriorly arise vein.

first branch The

the trunk aorta right, of Beginning of the (Fig. branch the the brachiocephalic the on is first arch 3.90). to point is It largest sternum, branches. three the manubrium branches origin and, of at other of the is behind the its slightly the anterior of two the to It ascends slightly right. the and posteriorly right artery, into: artery edge right level of brachiocephalic the the the and (see sternoclavicular At of the common Fig. joint, trunk right carotid the subclavian the upper divides 3.86).

right the right The head supply side limb, respectively. the mainly of and neck arteries upper the and

contributes Occasionally, thyroid the the branch, vascular which gland. the to a ima has artery, of the supply brachiocephalic trunk thyroid small

branch The second

arch is The second the of of (Fig. common aorta the branch the carotid artery left 3.90). the the the side from trachea. the and immediately ascends the to posterior left mediastinum to along of arises the slightly and left brachiocephalic arch It superior trunk through

left of common artery carotid side left head supplies the The and neck. the

branch third The

aorta the subclavian (Fig. the artery third arch left the of branch is of The 3.90). to side ascends the arch the along left to, arises the trachea. from slightly left through superior of the posterior the carotid of, immediately and the mediastinum artery It the and of common left aorta

is left The left upper the to the supply artery blood subclavian major limb.

circulation, vessel embryonic important is ductus patent a is and in when in it the also ligamentum (the mediastinum superior arteriosum arteriosus). The is the connects (Fig. aorta blood and bypass It allows trunk to with the of the development pulmonary arch during lungs the 3.90). adult. The vessel the soon the forms ligamentous closes in observed and after connection birth

that midline the notch it a mediastinum. palpable the as trachea structure in is jugular The enters is superior

(Fig. immediately the it is esophagus, vertebral to column which Posterior to is anterior the see Figs. 3.92, and and 3.86 3.87). in of these as positioning superior they vertical the Significant structures through exists mediastinum. mobility the pass breathing and and positional may instrumentation. as shifts, of Swallowing specialized the use disease cause

the aorta side right esophagus the are and laterally the they the mediastinum, of by pass the the the arch and side. azygos superior left on vein on through As trachea crossed

the into inferior left and (Fig. sternal vertebral trachea and the transverse at, to, The level main angle right the divides between plane bronchi just TIV/V or the 3.93), posterior mediastinum. esophagus into whereas continues the

of mediastinum the Nerves superior

cavity. superior their divisions mediastinum to through of the pass nerves on the The abdominal the way and [X] posterior vagus from and As through viscera. thoracic innervation carry pass provide the visceral afferents viscera thorax, they they the the thoracic parasympathetic to

the nervous nerves system normal about to vagus physiological in the afferents Visceral relay reflex activities. central information processes and not sensation. pain They do transmit

brachiocephalic the the trunk. lies and brachiocephalic vein right vagus nerve the enters The between superior right and mediastinum toward trachea posterior in (Fig. the descends direction a It the lateral surface lung posteriorly trachea, the root the and crosses of of esophagus. 3.94), reach to to right the the passes by of before the esophagus, vein. azygos is Just crossed the arch it the

cardiac to plexus. the mediastinum, it the through superior right nerve plexus, branches pulmonary vagus and gives the As passes esophagus,

vein the enters The vagus the left carotid left and between to and left (Fig. posterior left arteries mediastinum subclavian brachiocephalic common superior the nerve 3.95). lies the and passes the As just the superior pleura of mediastinum, deep it the part arch side of of the it left mediastinal to crosses aorta. the parietal into left mediastinum. in of passes in to a esophagus the direction the lung to reach descend continues posterior posterior root It to and the posterior the

gives superior through the As cardiac passes mediastinum, the plexus. to left nerve plexus, the the it pulmonary esophagus, branches and the vagus

arises at the ligamentum inferior lateral laryngeal The to which the arteriosum. the nerve, it the also to just arch vagus gives of rise left aorta the margin left from nerve of recurrent its inferior medial arch nerve the passes The aorta surface. of to the before recurrent left laryngeal ascending on larynx the recurrent between enter left terminate and laryngeal in superiorly to the the nerve groove continues the trachea (Fig. and neck a Entering esophagus, 3.96).

cord nerves from cervical fifth, in segments. the cervical but and the The also from spinal arise the phrenic third region mainly fourth,

the membranes. thorax associated diaphragm to descend phrenic innervation sensory supply and The its to nerves through motor the and layer to innervation through mediastinal provide of As pleura, serous pass thorax, afferent and the fibers parietal pericardium. the pericardium, fibrous they they through somatic

enters beginning posterior superior and the slightly the to vagus vein nerve lateral the phrenic brachiocephalic (see of nerve right The and lateral the right mediastinum to Fig. right 3.94). It right the along this inferiorly the superior vein vena side of continues the right cava. of and side

root the sac, of right phrenic right On right entering fibrous anterior pericardium, the side to nerve the pericardial the the lung. the within middle along descends the mediastinum, of thorax (see vessels most it The of in Fig. its pericardiacophrenic accompany course through the 3.60). the leaves diaphragm thorax inferior through vena with the passing cava. by the It

in left superior by phrenic mediastinum phrenic enters position a nerve. taken to similar the The nerve the right path the to lateral the the Fig. of lies lateral posterior left vein and the slightly (see and vagus brachiocephalic beginning nerve left It to intercostal to and left of aorta, left surface across 3.89), the descend passing and the lateral the continues superior the to arch the nerve vagus superficially vein. left of

fibrous mediastinum, anterior of entering root within nerve the by side the to the left left the the of accompanied lung, On and middle left vessels pericardiacophrenic the the pericardium, is follows (see Fig. pericardial the phrenic sac, 3.60). the of the the near apex diaphragm piercing thorax heart. leaves the by It

superior Thoracic duct the in mediastinum

mediastinum The the the body, superior of is posterior in portion lymphatic which the duct, thoracic passes (see Figs. vessel through the major 3.92). 3.87 and the and to of to of esophagus the TIV/V; enters left through this between subclavian of mediastinum, It: the moved the superior vertebral just the midline, opposite parietal inferiorly, artery, mediastinum portion initial the arch position part aorta, and slightly the before the of continues pleura. mediastinal the posterior superior having left the left to level and leaving mediastinum the the posterior

is mid posterior to lower The vertebrae the the mediastinum the diaphragm and posterior (see anterior of to sac and bodies thoracic Fig. and pericardial 3.57).

sternal is a TIV plane from the passing the superior and angle Its between TV. disc boundary transverse to intervertebral vertebrae

boundary is the inferior Its diaphragm.

of by side. Laterally, it either mediastinal part pleura on bordered is parietal the

is it with continuous Superiorly, the mediastinum. superior

trunks, sympathetic include thoracic aorta in thoracic associated thoracic lymph nodes, branches, esophagus splanchnic the: the nerve nerves. and and its Major azygos structures its and veins, and mediastinum of plexus, posterior associated system duct

in tube between muscular a the the The and abdomen. is pharynx the stomach neck the esophagus passing in vertebra opposite It at the TXI. vertebra opening the border cricoid the opposite CVI, ends the at of inferior of cardiac and cartilage, begins stomach,

aspect on as the The of descends the a through the vertebrae, thorax position it moves (Fig. midline generally anterior of the esophagus in bodies 3.97). eventually crossing left, the side the thoracic the and the aorta assume to approaches it. to from a right As anteriorly diaphragm, to it anterior of moves position it It diaphragm, the in esophageal opening part of through passes the an vertebral TX. muscular the then level at hiatus,

the superiorly and pharynx and vertebral by of esophagus has anterior-to-posterior attachment a thoracic to to curvature secured the diaphragm. attachment The its inferiorly by is column, the the portion that slight parallels its

the important to in mediastinum structures Relationships posterior

In posterior related mediastinum, to the a is the esophagus number of structures. important the right side by part pleura. The parietal the of is covered mediastinal

crosses the but is to thoracic to duct inferiorly, right more the superiorly. esophagus, the the Posterior on side left the Also thoracic of the is aorta. on left esophagus side the

tracheal left the pulmonary the right level artery of are bifurcation, below and the bronchus. Anterior esophagus, the main the to atrium, pericardium. the passes it by to immediately only esophagus left separated posteriorly The then from related esophagus the diaphragm. to the is left the to atrium, Inferior

the include the thoracic vessels, posterior diaphragm, thoracic other hemiazygos duct portions right esophagus near veins, aorta. and, the intercostal to the the of posterior the Structures than

esophagus locations four flexible, can compressed tube a is that (Fig. muscular or be surrounding by The narrowed structures at compressed diaphragm. in in junction where the pharynx the the by mediastinum esophagus esophagus the the superior arch esophageal of is with the main crossed esophagus mediastinum by the of hiatus posterior in bronchus; 3.98): the the the the left in where posterior mediastinum neck; in the the the aorta; at is

These clinical have important consequences. constrictions a example, lodge likely object area. to a most For constricted at swallowed is this substance narrowed the corrosive move slowly esophagus. at site region, damage through ingested elsewhere would more An than causing along a more instruments. during constrictions medical passage problems Also, of the present

arterial posterior drainage the the supply and esophagus mediastinum venous of involve The in many vessels. arteries, left branches gastric ascending arise thoracic artery aorta, from the of bronchial the and arteries abdomen. the Esophageal in

vein, Venous the returning gastric involves and hemiazygos drainage esophageal abdomen. to to left vein, the the branches small azygos vessels vein in

the left mediastinal posterior of Lymphatic returns the in to drainage nodes. posterior mediastinum and gastric esophagus

in Innervation complex. of is the esophagus, general, and branches the from nerves vagus trunks. arise sympathetic Esophageal

muscle and nerves. arches by fibers Striated originate the superior innervated the the vagus portion from efferents are esophagus branchial of in the from branchial

the innervated the vagus nerves. by the of part of nervous of visceral system, from autonomic peripheral muscle fibers cranial division efferents components parasympathetic the Smooth are preganglionic fibers the and system the esophageal enteric plexuses wall. nervous submucosal in These of that are the myenteric in synapse

nerves. innervation and in afferent visceral nerves, originating Sensory vagus involves of the esophagus trunks, fibers sympathetic the splanchnic

visceral vagus processes information normal system nervous physiological nerves reflex in central back involved activities. about are The to relaying from and the afferents the pain involved in of are recognition. They relay not the

esophageal participants transmission are the information nervous splanchnic detection primary through to pain levels the system. sympathetic afferents the this of and central nerves visceral of various trunks The and pass the in that of

approach left the the to passing esophagus. root lungs, nerves the of right vagus and posteriorly After the forming that plexus (Fig. over esophagus, this esophageal they the the structure, into As branches nerve reach divides each spread several 3.99). on mixing is as nerves two the esophagus the continues diaphragm. fibers the of There from toward inferiorly some the plexus vagus the plexus the originally trunk the posterior Just two trunk vagal nerve; in trunks: in the fibers of above vagus the of esophagus, anterior from the posterior the left surface fibers vagus esophagus, on anterior the of the on to form from the originally nerve. fibers diaphragm, mainly right mainly surface vagal converge

the into on passes as the esophagus it continue surface diaphragm abdomen. the the The of trunks through vagal

of at aorta. continuous it edge of (thoracic aorta aorta) arch the descending TIV, thoracic of The the where the begins is portion with vertebra the lower ends of the to edge TXII, diaphragm. where aortic through anterior hiatus to passes lower posterior vertebra It the the it superiorly, it left bodies the the approaches thoracic the directly inferiorly, midline column lying vertebral Situated of to to the vertebral lower (Fig. anterior 3.101). off course, branches, number 3.3. a it of its Throughout Table which gives summarized in are

of Azygos system veins

of superior veins move of each from it system of the and vena superiorly to longitudinal blood of on cava. wall the that into azygos side empty The the consists body a body vessels drain series Blood abdominal may the veins. system, of with viscera are there anastomotic enter the from thoracic connections and some also

(Fig. to side at be are their may vessels throughout side and The from not to or various continuous course other each points connected longitudinal may 3.102).

the if from of serves inferior the blood capable an important as heart cava The to anastomotic the vena blocked. returning lower venous of system pathway azygos of the veins is part body

hemiazygos the vein, the hemiazygos The and are: accessory vein the in the the the major and veins on right; azygos system vein, left. on

variation anastomoses, There tributaries, termination vessels. of significant these is origin, in the and course,

LI ascending vein right or vertebra (Fig. subcostal the The and junction the vein azygos the opposite lumbar LII between arises vein right at 3.102). the a vein of the inferior subcostal ascending is also as a trunk direct vena cava, right the the which right joined It branch and arise vein. common junction by may lumbar of from

diaphragm, the aortic it of right hiatus thorax the of through the to through or azygos vein the The or the posterior diaphragm. crus enters enters usually to duct. the the of mediastinum, thoracic It right posterior the through ascends cava pericardial approximately to arches level root vena lung, superior cava before right the At vena join the of anteriorly, superior the enters the vertebral the TIV, it over sac.

veins, second, and (a vein the veins), vein, vein, right eleventh single the fourth accessory posterior right right hemiazygos Tributaries formed vessel veins, junction the hemiazygos mediastinal bronchial intercostal third, veins, the pericardial azygos vein of fifth the intercostal veins, esophageal veins. and the superior to by intercostal of include:

left hemiazygos and at junction lumbar (inferior arises the The ascending vein) left the vein (Fig. the between vein vein hemiazygos subcostal usually 3.102). renal It has connection alone from veins these arise often a the left vein. either may to of and also

enter thorax enters aortic of vein but through hemiazygos the hiatus. the usually The the through left crus the diaphragm, may It left the approximately on TIX. posterior through ascends mediastinum, level vertebral side, the to At this the vertebral esophagus, aorta, vein. duct, enter thoracic column, thoracic and crosses to point, to azygos posterior the the it

mediastinal and posterior hemiazygos veins. lowest joining four the five esophageal include: the vein left or veins, veins, Tributaries intercostal

side portion of (Fig. TVIII the approximately to posterior on accessory left the vertebral descends vein) hemiazygos level vein mediastinum from superior (superior The the hemiazygos 3.102). has At both the this veins. crosses connection or it a the hemiazygos vein, vein, in join ends to or to column the vertebral point, azygos vein. left a has to the superiorly superior it connection also Usually, intercostal

posterior intercostal fourth left that to eighth the and bronchial hemiazygos drain veins. veins, the left include: sometimes, vein the Vessels into accessory

duct Thoracic the posterior in mediastinum

the The from which the the thoracic body is of most to through lymph venous is duct returned channel system. principal referred It sometimes as confluence and dilation lymph forming chyli cisterna a as (chyle of in lower which the a perineum, cistern), drains trunks the begins limbs. and pelvis, saccular to viscera the abdomen, abdominal walls,

the the neck. to The thoracic LII duct of vertebra root from extends

on thoracic aorta, left the hiatus to the the to through ascends azygos of thorax, mediastinum the right the aorta midline posterior thoracic posterior the (Fig. the Entering aortic duct the between the through and right the vein of on the diaphragm, 3.103). and to lies posterior esophagus vertebrae. bodies the the anterior the the diaphragm and It to of

to mediastinum. duct level and TV, superior vertebral left midline the enters thoracic the At moves the of the and neck. into It superior continues the mediastinum through

the thoracic side which and junction duct the drains left and left subclavian drains the limb, of joined, the the into the trunk, jugular and left which head empties most the by jugular veins. cases, of left After left internal left being the upper trunk, subclavian neck, in

intercostal lymph receives the lymph nodes. The five usually of abdomen, the six the intercostal posterior seven from: and trunks trunks ducts the upper six lymph upper sides, mediastinal duct diaphragmatic trunks nodes, from or both descending thoracic confluence thoracic draining ducts spaces the or on in intercostal lower contents from spaces, posterior left draining

peripheral sympathetic through a usually division thorax. pass important part sympathetic the of considered the The autonomic the trunks of nervous system are an mediastinum posterior the of of and component as the component are they

parallel 11 consists by two of 12 sympathetic (Fig. portion of trunks This or cords the punctuated ganglia 3.104). nerves with thoracic The spinal which the to are to thoracic associated. connected numbered are and rami adjacent are ganglia and white by communicantes spinal gray they according nerve

of posterior In anterior to the portion are superior ribs. trunks mediastinum, the of the neck the the aspect until lie Inferiorly, on vertebral become the position medial the lateral of bodies. more in they they the through by medial trunks under the the or arcuate to The thorax posterior the passing the sympathetic ligament of diaphragm diaphragm. crura leave the pleura. covered course parietal trunks are by their Throughout

ganglia Branches from the

given the medial by off of ganglia: types are branches Two

first from type The includes the branches five ganglia. upper

ganglia. seven type includes branches from lower The the second

postganglionic includes the branches various of fibers, the thoracic which first type, upper from The five ganglia, consists supply mainly viscera. sympathetic which and also branches are relatively These afferent small, contain visceral fibers.

viscera. sympathetic consists ganglia, branches pelvic type, includes lower mainly from which preganglionic the which The various and fibers, seven abdominal of second the supply visceral carry the form and least afferent lesser, also These referred greater, as to branches large, nerves nerves thoracic fibers, splanchnic the and three are splanchnic (Fig. 3.104).

side on arises thoracic or greater ninth fifth usually from the tenth ganglia. each The to splanchnic nerve diaphragm, and bodies It through ganglion. into in direction, moving abdomen across crus a passes of celiac medial the the in the descends ends the vertebral the

tenth, usually or thoracic splanchnic eleventh tenth from and lesser the ninth arises nerve and ganglia. The medial ganglion. into to abdomen It aorticorenal bodies and end of moving diaphragm passes direction, in across crus a vertebral descends the the the the through the in

least nerve from thoracic the (lowest arises splanchnic The ganglion. nerve) usually splanchnic twelfth to the descends renal in end plexus. into of and crus abdomen It the diaphragm passes through the the

structures fundamental a to anatomical features surface related how visualize thorax are in physical to ability is the to The examination. assess body’s surface structures to function on the by to and can Landmarks deep percussion. auscultation and used locate be

count ribs to How

count deeper different structures. provide positions for palpable to of the how landmarks because important ribs is ribs Knowing the To notch superior sternum. manubrium of ribs, extent the of jugular location the palpate specific determine the at the of the until felt. Move sternum ridge is down a the articulation This of ridge the between and angle, manubrium is of the the sternum which the sternum. sternal identifies body the sternum of articulates this costal II rib The cartilage location. the with at rib Identify II. a continue direction counting (Fig. the Then in ribs, moving downward and lateral 3.105).

of women anatomy breast Surface in the

VI pectoralis major and overlie on thoracic in vary II breasts the wall size, they and are ribs between muscles. normally Although the positioned enters superolaterally major the pectoralis lower margin the and of axilla the (Fig. mammary Each around gland extends muscle 3.106). is gland the axillary This process. axillary of portion tail or the and positions wall on to relative size. breast of The areola the the nipple depending vary chest

Visualizing structures at the TIV/V

The angle the TIV transverse TIV/V posteriorly. that the between wall anterior disc chest is the on sternal and intervertebral and vertebral TV vertebrae level a through passes plane joint that be This of the distinct the between body can the of bony easily located, and protuberance sternum palpated. the the can plane be because sternum forms manubrium a At level the TIV/V (Fig. 3.107):

sternum. costal articulates The rib cartilage with II the of

inferior superior from the mediastinum mediastinum. is The separated

arch of begins. the and ascending the aorta ends The aorta

begins. thoracic ends the aorta aorta of and the arch The

The bifurcates. trachea

superior in mediastinum the structures Visualizing

structures based the number of relative palpated can be A skeletal visualized positions through mediastinum be that landmarks adults the (Fig. on superior skin can in their in to 3.108).

joints. veins of sternal brachiocephalic behind join near the subclavian the side, form the On clavicles sternoclavicular and the ends the internal to each veins jugular

sternum. manubrium brachiocephalic crosses vein to right left left of the The behind the from

The cava form vena unite lower border the the superior right brachiocephalic first of to costal rib. veins the cartilage of behind the

begins sternal level plane arch posteriorly. the between transverse the of and TIV/V The aorta the angle and anteriorly at ends vertebral reach as as sternum. manubrium midlevel the high of the the may arch The of

the heart the margins Visualizing of

be outline the Surface can landmarks to visualize heart of palpated (Fig. the 3.109).

the of and reaches on as The the side heart the of second cartilage side sternum the the as space left the high sternum. right intercostal costal upper the of on third limit

right costal margin cartilage. from right of to costal cartilage third near heart The right the the sixth the extends

the intercostal from located space. descends in the near fifth laterally the second The line space of apex the intercostal to the heart margin midclavicular left

margin The of the space costal line. the the right end the apex fifth midclavicular sternal intercostal in of heart lower sixth the the from near to cartilage extends

heart to listen Where for sounds

for valve blood downstream stethoscope of (Fig. To listen through the from valves the flow position the sounds, 3.110).

of the valve to of near space. is just the fifth sternum The tricuspid left the the lower part heard intercostal

space valve the left apex the mitral in over intercostal the the of at heard is heart midclavicular fifth The line.

left pulmonary second end the space. valve is the heard intercostal of medial over The

aortic over intercostal right heard end of The the medial the is space. second valve

the and cavities lungs, recesses, and lung and pleural fissures lobes Visualizing pleural

the fissures. cavities lobes pleural the the to to visualize can surface outlines the and be determine Palpable and the landmarks of of positions used and lungs normal pulmonary

Superiorly, projects the cartilage. pleura the parietal costal first above posterior the the midline of Anteriorly, upper portion pleura costal approaches sternum. to the the midline to pleura the the come Posterior it portion the to right does as as the close on left lower of does sternum, parietal side. not the the (Fig. left bulges the because onto This side is heart 3.111A).

in XII courses line, Inferiorly, wall thoracic around margin onto an rib costal midclavicular (i.e., contour reflects X, X posteriorly). the rib VIII the midaxillary VIII, diaphragm pleura in the line, and the vertebra TXII above following and the the

the completely lungs the The anteriorly do inferiorly. surrounded area particularly not by cavities, and fill pleural

Costomediastinal occur the the in recesses particularly left on anteriorly, to relationship bulge. side heart

pleural cavity. of the recesses between margin lower lung Costodiaphragmatic the and inferiorly the margin occur lower

the inferior line, margin VIII (i.e., following contour a and respiration, rib line, midclavicular wall rib VIII, midaxillary VI quiet the in of thoracic TX the lungs VI, vertebra X the in travels posteriorly). the around In

posterior In oblique (Figs. the fissure of near is the view, located midline on sides TIV the vertebra both in the spine and 3.112A). 3.111B rib intercostal moves and in fourth fifth direction, VI a laterally. It crossing and downward the reaches spaces laterally

and the of and cartilage cartilage on anterior contour the horizontal its costal rib follows the its contour both (Fig. of VI oblique fissures on costal fissure the sides IV side rib the In view, and right follow the 3.112B).

sounds listen for Where lung to

listening for are in lung placements for shown The sounds Fig. stethoscope 3.113.

Fig. 3.1 Thoracic cavity. and wall

columnRib of processInferior IRibsMediastinum Left of pleural thoracic sternumXiphoid cavitySternal angleManubrium apertureBody sternumRight apertureSuperior pleural thoracic cavityDiaphragmVertebral

Fig. and vertebrae. Joints 3.2 ribs between

Fig. thoracic 3.3 Superior aperture.

Manubriumof sternumEsophagusCommon veinTracheaVertebra thoracicapertureApex carotid of ISuperior right lungSubclavianarteryand jugular (lung)VeinsNervesArteriesEsophagus TIRib arteryInternal IITracheaPleauralcavity veinRib

Fig. 3.4 A. aperture. Inferior thoracic Diaphragm. B.

XIIVertebra thoracicapertureXiphoid XIDistal Rib TXIIAB X;costal domeRight VII marginsCentraltendonLeft ribs domeAortichiatusEsophagealhiatusInferior processRib to of cartilaginousends

Fig. of Subdivisions the 3.5 mediastinum.

Fig. cavities. 3.6 Pleural

pleuraVisceral pleural main pleural cavityParietal lungApex pleuraCostodiaphragmaticrecessDiaphragm lungMediastinumRight TracheaLeft bronchusRight of right left cavitysurrounding

Fig. inlet. thoracic and Superior 3.7 aperture axillary

Fig. thorax. 3.8 structures passing Major abdomen between and

Fig. breast. Right 3.9

and thoracicintercostal arteryInternalthoracic Fourth (pectoral) nodesLymphatic glandsLactiferousductsLactiferoussinusesPectoralis arteryParasternallymph third, internalthoracic vessel fasciaAxillary of fourth anteriorperforating majorDeep nerveMammary branches processAxillarylymph nodesSecond,

Fig. TIV/V. Vertebral 3.10 level

Fig. shunts. Left-to-right venous 3.11

Fig. wall. of 3.12 Segmental neurovascular supply thoracic A.

view spinal Anterior thoracic dermatomes nerves. associated of B. thoracic with C. associated dermatomes view thoracic spinal Lateral of nerves. with

of arteryAPosteriorintercostal aortaAnteriorcutaneous branchIntercostal branchAnteriorintercostal arteryArch arteriesRight Left arteryInternal thoracic subclavian carotid common nerve arteryLateralcutaneous

Fig. trunks. Sympathetic 3.13

Fig. inferior aperture. Flexible wall and thoracic thoracic 3.14

lateral aspectof descends ribs inspirationDiaphragm thoracic toincrease inspiration in elevationElevation Sternum inspiration forwardin of capacityin because moves ofrib

Fig. of diaphragm. the Innervation 3.15

Fig. 3.16 Breasts.

spaceSecretory processLateral partof venous part thoracic into lobulesPectoralis major arteryInternal from sinusesLactiferous axillaLymphatic venous and nodesCentral pass drainagepasses and arteryAreolaSecretorylobulesLymphatic thebreast thoracic lymphatic arteryAxillary nodesSuspensory parasternallySome thoracic ductsRetromammary breast ofinternal lateral branches ofthoracoacromial abdomenPectoral superiorpart axillary branch nodesApical of medial arteryLateral from nodesPectoral axillary of passes axillary the into Parasternal and axillary the nodes drainagemay the ligamentsLactiferous venousdrainage breast and inferior muscleMammary from

Fig. the pectoral of and region. 3.17 fascia Muscles

Fig. vertebra. 3.18 Typical thoracic

with ribSuperiorPosteriorInferiorAnteriorFacet of bodyPosteriorAnteriorVertebral articular LaminaSpinous view articular with for ribDemifacets processTransverse processPedicleVertebral articulation articulation ribsSuperior articulationwith viewSuperolateral processInferior for tubercle demifacetFacet processSuperior of for head of foramenSuperior tubercle

Fig. thoracic Atypical vertebrae. 3.19

costal TXISuperior costal Vertebra rib head TXVertebra XNo of head for transverse facet process on of TIVertebra facet facet complete costal ISingle for rib

Fig. Ribs. 3.20

Fig. rib. A typical 3.21 A. view. Anterior rib. B. of end Posterior view of proximal

Fig. ribs. 3.22 Atypical

Fig. Sternum. 3.23

Fig. Costovertebral joints. 3.24

capsuleVertebraVertebraDiscRibJoint vertebral bodyIntra-articular ligamentSuperolateral with costotransverseligamentJoint cavitiesCostotransverse jointCostotransverse viewSuperior view ligamentLateral ligamentSuperior Joint costotransverse

Fig. joints. 3.25 Sternocostal

Fig. space. 3.26 Intercostal view. Anterolateral A. B. of relationships. space and an intercostal Details

space. Intercostal section. Transverse C.

cavityLungIntercostal perforatingbranches fasciaPleural nerveLateral and intercostal nerveCostal and ofintercostal of nerve spinal muscleExternal ofintercostal pleuraEndothoracic branchesInternal veinCollateral muscleSuperficial Anterior artery Posterior intercostal artery and pleuraParietal Intercostal vesselsAnterior cutaneousbranch intercostal vessels nerveand fasciaSkinAB thoracic arteryVisceral branches veinIntercostal ofintercostal nerve intercostal muscleInnermost muscleSerratus ofintercostal ramus nerveCollateral veinAnterior anterior branches grooveAortaInternal vesselsIntercostal intercostal arteryand veinPosterior

Fig. Intercostal muscles. 3.27

Fig. 3.28 Subcostal muscles. A. Transversus muscles. thoracis B.

Fig. thoracic Arteries 3.29 the wall. of

thoracic perforatingbranchesAnterior arterySupreme branch arteryCollateral posteriorintercostal arteryInternal epigastric intercostal arteryPosterior of Superior arterySubclavian arteryMusculophrenic intercostal arteryCostocervical intercostal arteryAortaAnterior trunk

Fig. thoracic the wall. Veins of 3.30

Fig. Major 3.31 lymphatic nodes wall. vessels the of thoracic and

Fig. 3.32 nerves. Intercostal

Fig. drain. esophageal with large-bore for 3.33 Right intrathoracic cancer thoracotomy In been this case, from has stomach. neo-esophagus the a fashioned

Fig. 3.34 Diaphragm.

Fig. during 3.35 of breathing. Movement wall thoracic A. and handle ribs movement sternum. of Pump B. Bucket of handle ribs. movement

of and BuckethandlemovementElevation sternumBAPump handle of anteriormovement of lateralshaft ribSuperior

Fig. a an hemidiaphragm Chest 3.36 showing diaphragmatic in paralysis. patient with right-sided radiograph right elevated

Fig. 3.37 cavities. Pleural

Fig. pleura. Parietal 3.38

root ligamentMediastinal partPulmonary Costal membraneDiaphragmatic surroundingstructures lungCervical partPleura of pleuraSuprapleural in part

Fig. 3.39 reflections. Pleural

Fig. and reflections Parietal 3.40 recesses. pleural

Fig. CT left image 3.41 pleural of effusion.

level lungLeft with air-fluid lungRight AortaLeft empyema

Fig. subcutaneous 3.42 extensive a in patient with emphysema. Pneumothorax

Fig. Lungs. 3.43

Fig. the 3.44 Roots hila and lungs. of

Fig. 3.45 A. lung. Right B. structures related lung. right the to Major

arteryPulmonary to ISubclavian veinEsophagusPosteriorAnteriorInferior veinRight cavaOblique superior lobeMiddle lobePulmonary lobeSuperior veinsRib vena veinLeft arterySubclavian cavaAzygos brachiocephalic DiaphragmBronchusBronchus brachiocephalic fissureAB fissureHorizontal veinHeartInferior lobeSuperior vena

Fig. A. 3.46 Left lung. B. structures left lung. the Major related to

Fig. A. 3.47 tree. Bronchial Bronchopulmonary B. segments.

TracheaLeft bronchusCarinaRight bronchiSegmental bronchiof lungLateral lobe right arteryMedial bronchopulmonary lobeBranch main lobe of bronchiLobar segmentof middle segmentof right of of main bronchusLobar lungAB bronchopulmonary pulmonary middle middle

Fig. Bronchopulmonary 3.48 segments. A. Right lung. B. lung. Left named.) numbered segments are and (Bronchopulmonary

Fig. vessels. 3.49 Pulmonary A. an Diagram view. of anterior Axial B. image pulmonary tomography artery computed the the showing pulmonary trunk. branching left from computed inferior image to from pulmonary (just the the Axial branching pulmonary the trunk. artery in showing B) C. tomography right image

Fig. innervation. Pulmonary 3.50

Fig. drainage 3.51 Lymphatic of lungs.

Fig. emphysema. with HRCT patient 3.52 of

Fig. Bronchoscopic evaluation. 3.53 A. branches. the trachea Of main its the of lower and end B. bifurcation showing the a tracheal at carina. tumor Of

Fig. of Imaging the lungs. 3.54 A. right lung. the in of upper posteroanterior tumor view chest Standard showing of tumor image Axial CT lung. in right B. lungs showing image lung extending mediastinum. in Coronal left into tumor showing CT lungs C. of a tumor FDG study in using PET D. showing lung. right Radionuclide the

Fig. showing the of thorax mediastinum. of the 3.55 the Cross-section position

Fig. the 3.56 of Lateral mediastinum. view

Fig. 3.57 mediastinum. Subdivisions of the

Fig. Thymus. 3.58

Fig. pericardium. the of section 3.59 Sagittal

of between great vessels layerof serouspericardiumVisceral and fibrous FibrouspericardiumParietal serouspericardium(epicardium)PericardialcavityJunction layerof pericardium adventitia

Fig. nerves vessels. Phrenic and pericardiacophrenic 3.60

Fig. pericardium. showing reflections portion of sac serous of Posterior pericardial 3.61

pulmonary of pulmonary pericardial heart)Transverse arteryLeft vena aortaThoracic veins aortaCut of Arch from sinus(formed arteries edge pulmonary arteryAscending thepulmonary onto rightpulmonary of veinsOblique vena veinsLeft cavaBranch sinus(separates cavaInferior of veins) by aortaSuperior pericardiumRight reflection pericardial

Fig. CT pericardial 3.62 showing Coronal effusion.

Fig. illustration orientation, 3.63 surfaces, and Schematic heart of showing margins. the

Fig. 3.64 Base the heart. of

atriumLeft of pulmonary pulmonary superior artery sinusLeft ventricleCoronary atriumRight vena ventricleApexLeft Arch veinLeft pulmonary cavaInferior cavaRight terminalisRight veinsRight veinLeft aortaSuperior arterySulcus pulmonary inferior vena pulmonary

Fig. heart. Anterior the surface 3.65 of

marginAnterior RALABicuspidvalveTricuspid trunkPulmonary grooveGreat marginApexSmall artery vena cavaRight valveAortic trunkLeft vena of left of aortaInferior ventricleObtuse coronary branch veinPulmonary cardiac interventricular auricleLeft interventricular coronaryarteryRight cavaInferior aortaSuperior ventricleAscending veinAnterior atriumRight valvePulmonary valveAortaRVLVArch cardiac

Fig. heart. of surface Diaphragmatic the 3.66

pulmonary pulmonary coronaryartery cavaRight arteryApexLeft groovePosterior veinMarginal interventricular interventricularbranch arteryPosterior veinsLeft coronary vena pulmonary ofright Arch cardiac branch cavaInferior atriumRight veinsRight ventricleCoronary of ventricleMiddle pulmonary sinusLeft aortaSuperior of arteryRight atriumLeft right vena

Fig. 3.67 radiographs. Chest A. Standard the view of chest. posteroanterior B. heart. the lateral view Standard of

Apex heart cava Right of vena aortaInferior of auricleLeft atriumArch ventricle Superior ventricleLeft cavaABPulmonary trunkLeft vena Right atrium

Fig. 3.68 Sulci the of heart. surface of heart. the A. Anterior surface base of Diaphragmatic B. the and heart.

Fig. A. 3.69 pumps. The has two heart B. chambers all and resonance of four Magnetic image septa. showing midthorax

Fig. view of Internal 3.70 right atrium.

cava ventricleFossa terminalisMusculi of vena vena cavaInferior pectinatiRight Arch vena aortaSuperior of of of cavaLimbus sinusRight ovalisValve inferior fossa coronary auricleValve sinusOpening of ovalisCrista coronary

Fig. Internal ventricle. of view the 3.71 right

cuspConus semilunar auricleRight of papillary papillary muscleSeptomarginal muscleTrabeculae cuspPosterior cuspRight vena semilunar aortaSuperior semilunar tendineaePulmonary muscleChordae Arch trunkPulmonaryvalveLeft auricleSeptal cavaTricuspidvalveRight arteriosus carneaeAnterior cuspLeft atriumAnterior cuspSeptal cuspPosterior trabeculaAnterior papillary

Fig. the pulmonary of Posterior valve. view 3.72

Fig. 3.73 atrium. Left A. view. Internal the showing entering tomography computed veins Axial pulmonary B. atrium. the image left

pulmonary atriumEsophagusThoracic foramen arteriesPulmonary ovaleLeft Arch of aortaLeft aortaRight valveLeft ventricleRight auricleABPulmonary aortaMitral veinLeft of vein veinsValve ventricleLeft atriumAscending pulmonary

Fig. left view Internal 3.74 of ventricle. the

valve tendineaeTrabeculae aortaCoronary sinusMitral atrium Arch cuspPulmonary posterior papillarymuscleChordae of arteriesPulmonary anterior carneaeLeft papillarymuscleMitral veinsAnterior cuspPosterior valve

Fig. 3.75 Anterior valve. the aortic view of

Fig. skeleton removed). 3.76 (atria Cardiac

trigoneLeft ring of ringFibrous of ringFibrous trigoneLeft ring valveAtrioventricular atrioventricular aortic fibrous valveAntAntAntRtRtPostPostPostPosteriorAnteriorLeftRightSeptalLtLt bundleRight fibrous atrioventricular Right pulmonary

Fig. Cardiac vasculature. 3.77 Anterior A. view. B. view removed). (atria Superior

Fig. coronary view A. Anterior 3.78 arterial system. of Right artery. coronary dominant B. view Left anterior of right oblique coronary artery.

Right view coronary left C. anterior artery. oblique of

interventricular Right leftcoronary branchof Posterior ofanterior marginal interventricular branchAnterior coronary Right Left branchRight right artery coronary arteryCircumflex artery marginal branchof circumflex coronary arteryLeft branch ventricleSinu-atrial coronary marginal nodal right Left artery coronary interventricularbranch interventricularbranch branchLeft of left arteryABCPosterior coronary branchof Anterior branchDiagonal arteryRight auricleLeft atriumRight artery branchof interventricular Circumflex branchRight ventricle of branch branch marginal right coronary

Fig. Left 3.79 coronary artery. dominant

of circumflex branchof branch ofanterior left arteryPosterior nodal branch interventricular coronary branchof branch marginal interventricular branchDiagonal Left marginal artery branchof Right right coronary ofcircumflex left arteryRight left arteryLeft interventricularbranch arteryAnterior of coronary coronary branch arterySinu-atrial coronary left branchof arteryCircumflex coronary coronary

Fig. heart. CT maximum (MIP) projection A B. 3.80 and Axial intensity image the through A. (left Normal anterior descending) interventricular artery. anterior B. (left interventricular anterior descending) artery. anterior Stenotic (calcified) through multiplanar the CT image reformation (MRP) C Vertical D. heart. axis and long anterior C. anterior artery. descending) (left interventricular Normal artery. Stenotic anterior descending) D. interventricular (left (calcified) anterior

Fig. relate they to pressure. ventricular the and closure, sounds valve Heart 3.81 electrocardiogram and how (ECG),

tricuspid contractionClosure andpulmonary of mitraland valvesClosure of aortic valves"lub""lub""dub" RPQST1st2nd1stSYSTOLESYSTOLEDIASTOLEVentricularpressureECGHeartsoundsAtrial

Fig. veins. cardiac Major 3.82 major view Anterior veins. cardiac of A. view Posteroinferior veins. cardiac of major B.

Fig. system 3.83 heart. the of Conduction A. Right chambers. B. Left chambers.

Fig. plexus. Cardiac 3.84 Superficial. A. B. Deep.

recurrent vena nerves vagus cardiac nerveLeft cardiac trunkSuperior nerveCardiac fromsympathetic branchesVagal nerves of nerveRight laryngeal vagus trunkLeft plexusVagal nerveVagal cardiac from recurrent branchesAB aortaSuperficial trunkDeep cardiac nerveRight vagus cardiac cavaArch nerveRight plexusPulmonary sympathetic cardiac vagus branchesVagal branchesCardiac laryngeal Left

Fig. vessels Major mediastinum. within middle the 3.85 A. view. Anterior Posterior B. view.

cavaSuperior Ascending atriumLeft cavaOblique aortaAB trunkSuperiorvena cavaInferior aortaPulmonary of vena pulmonaryveinsRight sinusRight pulmonaryarteryRight vena pulmonaryveinsLeft pericardial pulmonaryarteryArch

Fig. superior Structures mediastinum. 3.86 in the

arteryLeft internal internal veinLeft common jugular cava veinRight arteryPulmonary veinLeft subclavian carotid veinRight brachiocephalic arteryLeft jugular brachiocephalic trunkLeft vena common aortaAscending pulmonary veinRight aortaThoracic bronchusRight arteryLeft pulmonary of arteryRight subclavian bronchusSuperior subclavian main main aortaLeft subclavian Right veinTracheaEsophagusEsophagusArch carotid arteryRight

Fig. of the Cross mediastinum TIII. section superior level 3.87 through vertebra at the A. Diagram. tomography image. B. Axial computed

carotid trunkRight veinBrachiocephalic sternumLeft brachiocephalic phrenic arteryLeft nerveRight vagus subclavian common nerveLeft recurrent arteryThoracic nerveLeft common vein vagus phrenic nerveLeft arteryEsophagusLeft trunkLeft brachiocephalic veinBrachiocephalic brachiocephalic brachiocephalic veinRight of arteryTracheaLeft subclavian nerveRight ThymusManubrium ductEsophagusTIIITracheaABLeft laryngeal carotid

Fig. with 3.88 mediastinum removed. Superior thymus

Fig. Left vein. 3.89 intercostal superior

Fig. Superior 3.90 thymus venous with and removed. channels mediastinum

Fig. aortic CT dissection. showing Axial 3.91

Fig. at of section through the mediastinum superior vertebra level 3.92 TIV. the Cross A. Diagram. image. Axial computed tomography B.

ofazygos Manubrium of recurrent phrenicnerveArch phrenic vagus of cavaTracheaArch nerveRight ofazygos veinArch ductTIVSuperior vagusnerveLeft nerveThoracic sternumThymusLeft aortaLeft aortaSuperior of laryngeal cava vena veinEsophagusBAEsophagusTracheaArch vena nerveRight

Fig. 3.93 in superior mediastinum. Trachea the

vertebrallevel aortaTIV/V trunkSuperior mainbronchusRight TracheaLeft bronchusPulmonary brachiocephalicveinBrachiocephalictrunkLeft venacavaArch of main

Fig. the nerve Right passing superior vagus 3.94 mediastinum. through

Fig. superior the mediastinum. Left nerve passing vagus through 3.95

Fig. passing Left the mediastinum. laryngeal superior through recurrent 3.96 nerve

aortaArch arteryLeft laryngeal vagus nerveRight nerveLeft subclavian of aorta bronchusLigamentum recurrent main mainbronchusTIV/VvertebrallevelLeft arteryPulmonary arteriosumLeft pulmonary Left trunkEsophagusEsophagusTracheaThoracic

Fig. Esophagus. 3.97

Right aortaBrachiocephalic of bronchusLeft arteryLeft aortaArch main arteryEsophagusEsophagusTracheaThoracic subclavian carotid trunkDiaphragm main bronchusLeft common

Fig. of 3.98 Sites constrictions. esophageal normal

toleft by iscrossed by bronchusAt the compressed left hiatusPosition ofesophagusposterior esophagus with atrium is arch esophagus esophageal of pharynxWhere ofaortaWhere esophagus main EsophagusTracheaPharynxDiaphragmJunction

Fig. plexus. Esophageal 3.99

Fig. Axial esophageal 3.100 cancer. CT showing

Fig. 3.101 Thoracic aorta and branches.

arterySuperior subclavian aortaPosteriorintercostalarteriesMediastinalbranchesEsophageal branches leftbronchialarteryRightbronchialarteryEsophagusEsophagusTracheaArch of Left arterySupremeintercostal

Fig. 3.102 of Azygos system veins.

veinOpening Left veinAzygos veinRight veinRight vena lumbar vena hemiazygos veinRight veinInferior intercostal veininto cava of lumbar veinHemiazygos cavaPosterior intercostal veinAscending azygos intercostal superior veinAccessory superior superior subcostal ascending

Fig. Thoracic duct. 3.103

Fig. trunks. sympathetic 3.104 portion of Thoracic

Fig. wall with chest skeletal of 3.105 shown. structures view Anterior locations the of A. women. In which breasts, to of symmetrical. not specific the location relative be on may the of a varies size the depending The intercostal nipple space B. men. In nipple the the the Note fourth space. of in location intercostal

marginJugular sternumRib processCostal IRib of cartilageCoracoid notchSternoclavicular XXiphoid ClavicleCostal jointManubrium of processASternal angleIIIIIIVVVIVIIVIIIIXBody sternum

jointManubrium cartilageCoracoid of sternumXiphoid of processBIIIIIIVVVIVIIVIIIIX IRib sternumRib notchSternoclavicular marginJugular ClavicleCostal processSternal angleCostal XBody

Fig. A. view nipple the areola Close-up surrounding of 3.106 and of breast. B. breast. axillary view process of of the chest the the showing Lateral a wall of woman

Fig. of the man level. various TIV/V of of locations to wall structures chest the showing 3.107 a related the view Anterior

Fig. of showing of of locations they structures as to a 3.108 Anterior superior view skeleton. the different the chest the wall mediastinum the relate in man

aortaAscending of arteryLeft arteryRight internal arteryLeft pulmonaryarteryPulmonary subclavian trunkLeft aortaLeft aortaThoracic common subclavian mainbronchusSuperiorvena carotid veinLeft Right veinRight jugular main veinLeft bronchusRight brachiocephalicveinRight common carotid veinTracheaEsophagusEsophagusArch brachiocephalic pulmonaryarteryLeft veinRight subclavian arteryRight cava jugular subclavian internal

Fig. a Anterior skeletal showing chest surface heart. the wall view of of the man the structures 3.109 and projection of

Fig. chest valves, points. wall heart, location showing structures, Anterior of of 3.110 heart of a the man skeletal the view auscultation and

Fig. lobes of chest wall surface the of showing lungs. the 3.111 of the the the projections and Views fissures view in woman. Anterior A. a superior, side, illustrated. right lobes the are inferior and On middle, the inferior lobes On the side, superior the are left illustrated. and

a in woman. Posterior view B. illustrated. superior On the sides, are lobes and inferior both lobe in on view. this visible the is The right not middle side

Fig. 3.112 chest of the Views wall. arms behind view a woman with A. in abducted positioned and Posterior her head. hands the On inferior both illustrated. lobes are sides, superior and lungs of the projection of the into parallels a and determining guide lungs. the the position, lobes rotated can border fissure this be as of of position the scapula the is oblique the the inferior superior and When of used the for medial scapula surface abducted. view man his right Lateral with B. arm in a the lung are of right middle, illustrated. and lobes The inferior superior, level intercostal VI. posteriorly crossing of continues oblique fissure space midaxillary at the and V. passes intercostal rib the anteriorly line contour the crosses spine the the TIV, space, rib the vertebra fifth The It along inferiorly at of fourth begins IV, rib of and continues contour and the anteriorly, crossing V space space in cartilage rib costal the the sternum. The following its and fissure IV and crosses of intercostal horizontal fourth rib to midaxillary the

Fig. man the the of of with for a stethoscope Views to chest lobes the of lungs. listening 3.113 placements wall Anterior A. views.

views. B. Posterior

lobe right lungABIIIIIIIVVVIVIIVIIIIXXXIXIIIIIIIIIVVVIVIIVIIIIXX right right of lungMiddle left left of lungApex of of lobe of lungInferior of of right lobe lobe Apex left lungSuperior lungSuperior lobe lungInferior

Fig. A. 3.114 coronary left Normal angiogram. artery B. Left blockages. flow coronary decreased artery angiogram showing due to

C. Mechanism dermatomes. pain T1–4 for heart in perceiving

Fig. 3.115 through projection (MIP) CT Axial image maximum heart. intensity the A. (left anterior Normal interventricular descending) artery. anterior Stenotic anterior (calcified) descending) artery. (left anterior interventricular B.

eFig. ribs. 3.116 Cervical A. ribs. demonstrating bilateral Neck radiograph cervical showing B. ribs. Coronal computed cervical tomography image

eFig. level an cavity. air/fluid in Chest the pleural radiograph 3.117 demonstrating

eFig. 3.118 with pacemaker. Chest individual of an a radiograph seen ends one the the the wires right (2) The to where in in through be can the the venous pacemaker ventricle. ends right other traveling and atrium system heart

eFig. ribs 3.119 radiograph III along demonstrating Chest of the border notches inferior to VI. translucent

eFig. of aortic 3.120 dissection. image A. CT B. and aorta dissection Normal aortic (left) (right). an shown the A. right line plane in figure scan the The in the CT indicates of

mediaCollapsed true surroundedby the lumen false and eFig. The intima false collapsed lumenAscendingaortaThoracic and true mediaABThe aortaThe intima lumenThe lumenEntrypointReturnpoint radiograph 3.121 lobe upper Chest left infection. showing

3.1 region the Muscles pectoral of Table

3.2 Table wall thoracic the Muscles of

of the 3.3 aorta thoracic Table Branches

clinic the In

Axillary tail of breast

is the the for upper that muscle lateral remember clinicians when for can lateral pectoralis into region project the to pathology the the important major axilla. the evaluating of and It breast of breast margin around and the fascia perforate (axillary tail) axillary of process axilla. far apex may as as extend the deep This superiorly

clinic the In

cancer in malignancies most is one of common Breast the women. of the breast. in develops and acini, of ducts, cells lactiferous It the the lobules spread cancer. and cellular the on site Tumor of of growth depends the exact origin to affect factors surgery, the These and radiotherapy. response chemotherapy, spread invasion. Breast the or direct veins, via and by lymphatics tumors

is has biopsy breast confirmed patient a cancer and a a breast, by diagnosis of a lump When evaluation. the in histological tumor. the the confirmed, clinician must attempt stage Once to

of of the sites which may spread, tumor the the the: organs and lymph Staging tumor, defining primary the size spread. site exact number tumor and have means to node tumor, primary of

be liver look the any Computed out (hepatic of carried the for scanning tomography (bony to metastases), (pulmonary (CT) spread to metastases), may body lungs metastases). or bone

bone, can disease Further are in isotopes, body. imaging which metastases up taken visualize scanning using include of in the the by avidly PET-CT, bone the radioactive which active and tumor foci metastatic may

drainage the is breast of Lymph complex. and parasternal nodes opposite lymph supraclavicular, axillary, abdominal pass vessels to even as the to as may Lymph pass to well breast. and nodes, cancer potentially spread of breast nodal node Containment it because therefore difficult lymph many through metastatic groups. can is

surface resulting tumor and obstruction connective ligaments Subcutaneous d’orange) orange texture in breast, of appearance growth breast. tissue an (peau pull of the on on in the the the peel lymphatic of woody that skin hard, can en texture to cancer the a Further a manifestation (cancer cuirasse). rare induce spread breast subcutaneous produces

breast of involves tissue. mastectomy A of excision breast) (surgical removal the axillary axilla the Within medial the breast be tissue must wall. removed the from to is axillary Closely long wall nerve. the thoracic medial the applied the Damage characteristic serratus paralysis producing scapula. to nerve a this muscle, result in of anterior can “winged” nerve also of dorsi adduction It the extension, rotation, humerus. this possible is and affect the medial to damage muscle, and latissimus to may the

In clinic the

ribs in present 1% the Cervical approximately are population. of

with A anterior of accessory articulating border the the rib cervical superior vertebra I. end is rib to the rib of an anterior CVII; attaches aspect

radiographs Plain as structures (see horn-like ribs demonstrate small cervical Fig. may 3.106).

not to a on by band that producing of from I, tip commonly ribs band” a is appreciated often visualized is radiography. fibrous the “cervical clinicians small rib cervical the It that not anterior extends cervical with (see I normally structures and that patients over pass rib bands, ribs cervical In Fig. pass the over, and and cervical by, rib are 3.7) band. elevated

from used resulting the the as upper over and passes axillary brachial first nerves “thoracic outlet symptoms through of into rib it Clinically, syndrome” the describe plexus of inlet compression the abnormal is to limb. part to of ramus of plexus. the anterior aperture T1 and superior of The become the superiorly out passes brachial join thoracic outlet the thoracic parts cervical one over plexus cause on syndrome putting rib of band cervical The lower and by is as a rib. the brachial band cervical upward stresses of cervical from the they pass related

In clinic the

of sternal bone marrow Collection

containing sternum the a makes possible subcutaneous (or bone cavity the needle position of hard to place internal cortex marrow. medullary) The the into through outer it aspirated. in is be can bone needle this the position, marrow Once helps microscope clinicians the certain such diseases material under of this leukemia. diagnose as blood Evaluation

In clinic the

of consequence, are though painful. extremely rib fractures Single little

broken be severe or in places. trauma, two more After may ribs wall, loose segment a enough chest flail chest), are segment of a ribs produced. broken, If is (flail takes the moves direction lung inspiration, When chest and the segment. paradoxically wall, preventing opposite full patient to in expansion a the segment flail a the creating deep moving required ventilation is be may a affected, large of and may ventilation wall segment have impaired the healed. ribs If assisted be chest until enough

In clinic the

the to access Surgical chest

A rigid of surgical the potentially access in nature cage. given challenging more chest the the thoracic is organ upon neck. dependent and operated also and relationships structures access is that Moreover, upon to subdiaphragmatic the its in structures is the

median The common most are lateral sternotomy thoracotomy. a and a approaches

A below sternum sternotomy sternal vertical incision the the median just a the making involves notch of process. xiphoid in from to distal end the to to Care to cause particular taken be must vessels, the the not brachiocephalic in veins. injury controlled. branches to internal the from the be of artery Bleeding can needs occur thoracic and rib lead ribs upper and on may causes fractures. to traction sternum the the Opening with sternum or level and the the of manubriosternal incision partial performed just involving the the below. Sometimes ending part of upper is at sternotomy junction only coronary well and trachea. as pericardium, including access valves, sternotomy thymus, the to vessels, heart, median and great mediastinum, the A as to allows anterior arteries lower removal esophagectomy. or can for used retrosternal be goiter of during also It The the incision laterally region, carotid and subclavian the into arteries. extended access to be giving can supraclavicular

the contents lateral ipsilateral and (left its mediastinum, esophagus, A (Fig. thoracotomy) lateral heart hemithorax thoracotomy to including the and gives lung, access 3.33).

avoid lung well involves be thoracic it postoperative leads controlled which of division function. to restricted that significant of pain to the However, needs wall to muscles border is scapula anterior and the incision and below the scapula. at passes between The superiorly medial and of starts extended midline tip of posterior the the axillary then line the cavity pleural intercostal The through is space. an entered to of with minimize rib fracture. often a older short the of osteoporosis, rib those segment is and In a patients risk resected

thoracic involves intercostal [VATS]) incisions invasive small spaces, on (1-cm) placing manipulating camera surgery incisions. the making small a (video-assisted surgery small additional in Minimally through and thoracic instruments telescope, a other lung performed A biopsy, in procedures be and esophagectomy. lobectomy, this can including of manner, number

In the clinic

and (pleural cavity). fluid commonly chest the thorax between tube in procedure indicated a and of to lung the air the chest or is a wall trapped performed is Insertion relieve hemopneumothorax, pneumothorax, and for effusion done pleural procedure chylothorax, after and is This also empyema, malignant thoracic hydrothorax, hemothorax, surgery.

fourth anterior either lines tube The is the from or anterior thoracostomy and and the fifth posterior axillary usually space. between to midaxillary in of the anatomical position intercostal clearly in ribs of region be position this The the should marked. applied aspect border inferior rib and rib below. of rib to space the the and Anesthetic the above and one and of the one space, should space be intercostal including superior hence, runs of superior of space aspect the (just positioning in in at space). The lies border the the the rib); neurovascular intercostal the bundle (i.e., for reason rib intercostal the below which on the lowest the superior tube position a in the plane, neurovascular

Chest ultrasound tube done direct is with now guidance. commonly insertion and the is entering assess both the to select whether allows the effusion safest pleural for the site simple or and physician complex to This approach pleural space. loculated, In with cases a bulla inserted differentiate where computed the is pleural from drain some it lung pneumothorax, in to patients can space. of a large difficult disease under be air in underlying chest tomography-guidance, free especially

In the clinic

surgical thoracotomy, procedures. anesthesia of requiring and mastectomy, with a intercostal excellent Local or for upper abdominal in analgesia trauma nerves chest patients produces in patients anesthesia those

the are situated The intercostal inferior borders the neurovascular rib bundle. to in nerves muscle neurovascular bundle Each situated and deep the internal is groups. to external intercostal

The “blind” imaging under using direct undertaken a guidance. nerve or technique be block may

access patient is the The to the appropriate in rib. position placed of advanced under with may subcostal region groove, ultrasound Typically, guidance, anesthetic. followed a injection be local a needle an the into the by anesthetic be long-acting. type may on the shortor analgesia Depending used, of

pleura bundle ensuing and position neurovascular Given of pneumothorax. of parietal the the subcostal may the an groove, puncture complications include and the occur Bleeding or during may also if is the artery vein procedure. the damaged

clinic the In

on paralysis the by is of side phrenic manifested the palsy, nerve elevation diaphragm diaphragmatic which ensues, the muscle (Fig. affected cases of In 3.36). infiltration is important never palsy most nerve nerve be by the cause the of phrenic of overlooked malignant The cancer. should that lung injury and Other iatrogenic the postviral compression virus), include during in particular, C3–C5 spine cervical surgery, the thoracic (in related changes with causes trauma, roots. of nerve to zoster degenerative varicella neuropathy

require diaphragmatic paralysis treatment. Most are with no and unilateral patients asymptomatic particularly report Some exertion. of shortness may breath, on cause can is respiratory of paralysis the distress. rare diaphragm significant Bilateral but

and compromise with respiratory Surgical of laparoscopically. in be the often done performed is cases can diaphragm plication mobility in diaphragmatic them paralyzed folds surgeon muscle. and creates of The place, reducing sutures the in the diaphragm the of usually procedure. tolerance, after function, good shortness There improvement the breath in is lung exercise and

the clinic In

A effusion within space. when fluid accumulates pleural occurs pleural excess the fluid compromised as the collapse As may fluid pleural of the lung within is space and accumulates increases. underlying the volume the effusion determine pleural been fluid diagnosed, will malignancy, include can cardiac Once aspirated a and which pulmonary has infection, the embolism. disease, hepatic cause, failure, be often to part be lung effusion collapsed drained and the improve to reexpand pleural breathing allow to of needs to A the large (Fig. 3.41).

In the clinic

(Fig. pneumothorax within is gas air collection cavity a of A the pleural or 3.42). When the within pleural causes impairing parenchyma chest, of enters collapse the the lung the the to the elasticity function. cavity lung tissue air pleural to opposite may lung. gas extent the the the to mediastinum “pushed” is cavity accumulate an other compromising that side, Occasionally, the such within the treatment. is and tension requires termed pneumothorax a This urgent

(i.e., spontaneous no of lung pathology no the occur disease). known and Most are absence known pneumothoraces they in other diseases. inflammation, a as of occur pneumothoraces underlying addition, may and result pulmonary smoking, In trauma, cause spontaneous especially may patients pulmonary with Certain such osteosarcoma, in after as metastases, pneumothorax chemotherapy. treatment occurrence and cancer of increases mortality. The interferes with pneumothorax

leak the are the symptoms which and air occurs of of lung The of determined often pneumothorax rate and collapses. at ensuing gas the degree accumulation the by collapse, of and severe. shortness if cardiorespiratory They include breath, pain,

the In clinic

lungs Imaging the

the sites because in imaging important Medical is the body. disease the they for one of commonest of lungs are air elements minute, may While potentially contain body at and L pathogens the other of harmful allergens). exchange up (e.g., and to this is per 5 rest, lungs the lesion range precise which computed chest to Techniques radiographs to of visualize the a lung. the localization high-resolution lung plain enables within (CT), from tomography

In the clinic

the method more tomography specifically computed High-resolution but for assessing lungs. the (HRCT) of interstitium is the a lungs diagnostic 2 mm. narrow slices obtaining involves of 1 to technique The cross-sectional and the radiologist These view their to patterns disease enable the distribution. scans and physician of using Diseases may be this demonstrated (Fig. procedure that include emphysema easily asbestosis. worker’s pneumoconiosis pneumoconiosis), (coal 3.52), and disease patients also with progression. monitor useful regular follow-ups disease of to in interstitial HRCT is

In clinic the

an of branches main (Fig. within (i.e., lesion may a lesion endobronchial who bronchus) its trachea bronchoscopic evaluation the and a have Patients undergo 3.53). and a the past trachea. nose then by passed bronchoscope oropharynx directed into through system is control is The the cords the vocal into the if and, inspected The small obtained. are bronchi necessary, are biopsies technique EBUS, ultrasound can known Bronchoscopy as endobronchial (a used with ultrasound). be in also combination working walls adjacent to the a channel probe the airway structures. inserted through is visualize and An of ultrasound bronchoscope an provides a therefore localization accurate and EBUS higher yield. the diagnostic of allows lesion mediastinal of lymph can nodules. and nodes to biopsy assist sampling used hilar for or It transbronchial pulmonary be in of

clinic the In

the lung on cancer It to depends important is stage its treatment stage. because

If it excellent. lung, nodule is can the sometimes small malignant the is found within a and excised prognosis be with mediastinum patients many or the has a has pleurae or present mass invaded in metastasized. Unfortunately, structures that the tumor and treated may then The inoperable with chemotherapy. and radiotherapy is be tumor

within the hila, the Spread by the of to neck. root lymph and tumor of nodes mediastinum, lymphatics is

A and the metastases. spread distant affecting is the to factor key of disease cure the ability prognosis assess methods (Fig. spread radiography to plain Imaging include 3.54A), tomography computed (CT; Fig. and (MRI). 3.54B,C), magnetic resonance imaging studies fluorodeoxyglucose tomography using emission PET; Fig. Increasingly, radionuclide positron (FDG used. being 3.54D) are

molecule. attached is FDG gamma In a emitter to glucose radiation PET a In high is camera. the areas and recorded excessive uptake by activity (i.e., tumor), metabolic a of occurs gamma

In clinic the

Pericarditis inflammatory the condition an pericardium. of is Common after viral infections, bacterial systemic are illnesses (e.g., renal causes myocardial and infarction. chronic failure), and

Pericarditis myocardial the must from are treatment be because different. distinguished prognosis quite infarction and chest pain continuous in As both with or radiate myocardial one with pericarditis central infarction, patients arms. that to complain may of patients be infarction, relieved pain sitting forward. may by the Unlike however, pericarditis from myocardial conditions. help An is two used differentiate to between (ECG) electrocardiogram the diffuse ST shows usually elevation. It performed or clinical pericardial be Echocardiography of there is radiographic also can if suspicion effusion.

the In clinic

layers of is present between visceral of Normally, fluid a parietal only tiny and the serous the pericardium. amount In situations, with be can filled certain space (Fig. effusion) this fluid excess (pericardial 3.62).

the accumulation that heart expand is the sac easily, compresses resulting pericardium cannot fibrous structure “relatively the biventricular pericardial a in fluid (cardiac failure. excess rapid of Because within fixed” a tamponade), a Removing pericardial relieve can symptoms. fluid the into needle the with sac the inserted

In the clinic

pericarditis), thickening heart, which involve the function usually (constrictive less of can and the failure. resulting pericardial the frequently Abnormal visceral the can heart in but sac pericardium, also only impairing heart parietal layer, compress involves and thickened to in causes results a chronic present calcification. often pericardial It can leading with inflammation, acutely but pericardial condition deposits scarring pericardium fibrin chronic when cycle cardiac a severely phase filling of the result, the diastolic As during is restricted. normal neck. by diagnosis the is the The made inspecting pulse in jugular venous the pulse In individuals, drops jugular venous on normal inspiration. this with pericarditis, In patients called happens reverse and is the sign. Kussmaul’s constrictive Treatment sac. the often of surgical involves opening pericardial

the clinic In

inability types: stenosis, of to incompetence poorly Valve (insufficiency), valves; functioning the which and basic from results by two fully. the a orifice, consist caused problems of valve’s narrowing open

and one incompetence, is Mitral pattern predominates. usually which valve of stenosis a usually disease of mixed which less enlargement pressure; and ventricular valve increased and the poorly in patients functioning hypertrophy pulmonary and a hypertrophy left heart is left of appreciably marked include: (this venous stenosis); Both with mitral to (dilation) and pulmonary edema; stenosis atrium. lead changes, subsequent incompetence

stenosis common acquired; Mitral valve fever. or cause in rheumatic the congenital most latter, can the be is an of Stenosis decades episode rheumatic usually endocarditis. after occurs acute

Aortic aortic stenosis (backflow), heart aortic valve failure. and produce marked regurgitation disease, can both the of from cardiac causing atherosclerosis stenosis valve most common the of calcification type valve and disease results is valve Aortic leaflets. by It or caused postrheumatic can be also postinflammatory conditions. disease, trauma. valve may regurgitation These to infective or fever, degenerative endocarditis, such aortic rheumatic lead as

or of infection. in side most heart tricuspid disease caused pulmonary likely Valve is the by the right the valve) (affecting and Intravenous drug the use, extensive particularly catheters, to the predispose of valve. infection alcoholism, valves, tricuspid indwelling burns produces abnormal cardiac changes ventricle, the dysfunction and can these induce valve right in failure. The resulting atrium pressure right and

clinic In the

physicians vessels. use practice, alternative names In for coronary the artery coronary left vessel. to as is stem The main short left the referred termed left One anterior the interventricular is its primary the descending anterior branches, artery of artery, (LAD). right coronary posterior (PDA). posterior termed is the artery descending of branch artery, interventricular artery, the terminal the the Similarly,

In clinic the

the to A when needs of meet the attack metabolic perfusion insufficient damage. leading myocardium tissue, to heart occurs is to tissue irreversible the the of cause total a occlusion common major most The is artery. coronary a

usually to and area due oxygenation coronary cell inadequate of artery, (Fig. leads to an a Occlusion myocardium atherosclerosis, major of of death 3.80). problem severity the size collateral the is the location artery to related or be other the vessels. will blockage The whether and to of of whether involved, from vessels perfusion to provide territory there the are and not complete, (MI). patients develop can myocardial infarction the on pain severity, or a (angina) Depending

iliac the tube the is aorta. femoral the arteries technique (a and and thigh through inserted a fine passed abdominal and into into artery is in This external common the which catheter) long a in arteries. thoracic to through of origins upward continues to the the coronary moved It be aorta the coronaries the may The approached arteries. or radial be via also brachial coronary the is then wire is to cross passed artery A the fine used and stenosis. into may A is then inflated level balloon is fine wire at widening over and angioplasty. the termed thus of obstruction, the this it; be passed the augmented by obstruction to inside (a mesh commonly, fine of wire hold More is it this open. a placement stent) the coronary thrombus interventions rotary percutaneous are of extraction Other of ablation a and a plaque. suction

be If too may coronary to percutaneous intervention, extensive artery be disease coronary grafting artery necessary. is treated by surgical bypass the is saphenous great as harvested lower a limb, used The graft. and in vein,

which sections of the divided each is It to bypass several of is blocked used arteries. into pieces, coronary can arteries internal used. The be thoracic also and radial

the In clinic

the those by abnormalities development a septa. ventricular The in atrial that common most during occur and produced defect are

the higher pass the side referred the in septum pressure; the chamber allows lower one the A the is this from to interatrial chamber blood to with with the other a to to defect clinically pressure of heart as shunt. from resulting from in atrium in circulation. a (ASD) (lower atrium ASD flow septal to and volume overload the shunt right defect pressure), blood pressure) into An allows (higher atrial oxygenated to right-sided the across left the right the left symptoms are devices. but by surgically cases needs Many be asymptomatic, may ASD in closed cause patients to the with endovascular some ASD or and many to years ventricular enlargement Occasionally, the blood trunk, increased pulmonary over and right in resulting hypertrophy right leads and right atrium the flow hypertension. into arterial atrial pulmonary of the cases, palpitations, with failure. patients present breath, shortness heart such can and tiredness, episodes of fainting In increasing ventricle enlarged as it left is volume. the ASD, affected by not increased returning is blood not In

heart defects defect occur in the are most that all those (VSD). common congenital The ventricular septum—ventriculoseptal of to an blood pressure), in are pulmonary (higher to and the the leading These lesions communication septum from the portion the right ventricle to between most frequent membranous systemic left pressure) and ventricle (lower allow flow of the abnormal they circulation. to ventricular flow, volume left hypertrophy, and to pressure, elevated This returning dilation. its ventricle, causing arterial blood the pulmonary pulmonary increased right leads increased blood in Increased pressure pulmonary most may pulmonary edema. severe cases cause clinical left might and VSDs require problems untreated, If can produce marked surgery. large that enough or constellation, Fallot. as isolated abnormality tetralogy of be of an may part syndromic the VSD a such

pulmonary ventricle), a disorder hypertrophy. consists most Fallot, of after to four classically VSD, the birth, right soon (originating right abnormalities: overriding from heart aorta ventricular cyanotic varying The and degree of common stenosis, congenital the diagnosed tetralogy the lungs, volume the blood to of The right the flow stenosis returning blood leading reduce oxygenated underdevelopment to of reduced and to heart. ventricle pulmonary oxygenated in septum of interventricular nonoxygenated mixing the causes blood. defect The and in is mixed resulting the then oxygenation cyanosis. blood and to major the by The organs, poor delivered aorta spells). of birth Infants feeding can at develop cyanosis or (tet episodes present with while cyanosis or crying surgical infants require affected Most intervention. results. advent surgical cardiopulmonary bypass in The crucial of satisfactory highly delivering was

the connects which of to the the arteriosus, fails branch the left inferior of pulmonary birth. Occasionally, close the arch, at aortic artery to aspect ductus termed patent This is arteriosus a or ductus persistent (PDA). arch occurs, the this (lower of enlargement. left in the aortic pressure) hypertension into blood the and the When pulmonary atrial artery and branch pulmonary oxygenated produces pressure) ventricular (higher and left passes in major PDA do with isolated surgical not closure. patients The extremely as good, any after is sequelae prognosis have most

being blood before the that circulation. defects the a indicating All produce of side of left-to-right shunt, oxygenated the the right blood from is heart mixed left the heart pulmonary of recirculated from these with into being side deoxygenated surgery life, These treatment are shunts may necessary. endovascular with be compatible or but normally

shunt is right-to-left. Rarely, a blood circulation. is this often and the returned however, is systemic associated deoxygenated to some other lungs so anomalies, fatal; type with isolation, of the this In is shunt

In the clinic

assess cycle, heart clinician rhythm, and the the allows heart reveals regularity. of rate, Auscultation the to cardiac normal audible which the phases cardiac cardiac demonstrated have that cycle sounds Furthermore, within of murmurs characteristic be can the (Fig. 3.81).

clinic In the

attack heart symptoms of Classic

The sweating. can chest 20 often be pressure, typical lasting are which than with and heaviness minutes, associated symptoms or severe, more be pain “elephant be more often (which describe to may the than the pain common the sitting [Levine with fist an by can associated nausea. the using chest sign]) my in The described or to (left arms chest” and right), on radiates as clenched a at collateral rate or the and not the The had whether depends ischemia infarction of have chance and channels has develop. a stenosis occlusion which occurred to on severity or

clinic the In

in attack the Are and same women? men symptoms heart

women symptoms sweats, pain typical recognizable are can men subtler, to severe and and in likely cold have symptoms. more men chest Although the than pain, arm, the less women left of experience or pain, simply may the jaw shortness These include breath, in back, achiness abdominal of nausea, fatigue. or to it wide but of of symptoms. consider not this for mechanism important The range understood, is difference a cardiac ischemia is

the clinic In

The affected cardiac coronary can system disease. conduction by artery be to rhythm if is normal be the disrupted. may coronary conduction supply blood The disturbed system the the in or affects a heart ensue. may dysrhythmia which order rate If failure chambers the the heart and contract, death

clinic the In

the parathyroid in thymus glands Ectopic

The pharyngeal parathyroid third the pouch, which also develop from forms thymus. glands the ectopic production. potentially, parathyroid therefore ectopic for a glands is and, thymus parathyroid The hormone site common

clinic the In

Large blood. used are fluid, access to amounts veins of drugs, large administering central venous establish and for systemic veins. puncture tubes) or Most introduced subclavian, are through into venous jugular of (small-bore lines these internal axillary, the are the superior atrium. The of the with then or of the vena of main residing veins passed through distal in in mediastinum, tips lines the cava lines usually the portion the right the superior

one have who can patients a be devices, so second and channel. that blood Similar lines, large such as channel volume reinfused failure, into inserted renal a of dialysis through are aspirated through

In clinic the

superior the to cava inferior Using cava vena the access vena

be and cavae inferior cava. superior the cava or line are Because a oriented vertical and superior venae vena passed inferior vena guidewire, same into right from the catheter, the through the can atrium axis, along the filter limb insertion [DVT]). portosystemic inferior such a veins for common from biopsy, is lower of as: route cava catch vein This procedures and and in (TIPS), dislodged transjugular intrahepatic (i.e., of to patients thrombosis with the an emboli vena access shunts liver pelvis deep transjugular

the In clinic

the aorta Coarctation of

is to origin a the is the which subclavian aortic lumen congenital the Coarctation aorta of constricted distal in just artery. of the abnormality left the is and significantly blood limbs the this becomes aorta the diminished. supply and point, to abdomen At narrowed lower Over abdomen wall the develop the vessels body. collateral time, around and to lower supply chest may bypass of to a margins supply tortuous and vessels, thoracic the descending aorta, lead of ribs. intercostal form Dilated to which erosions inferior the the appreciated be This can chest on notching seen long in cases. inferior as radiographs rib usually and standing is maintain which affects heart, pump to to the has higher perfusion. coarctation also The pressure peripheral at blood the produce failure. in turn This may cardiac

the clinic In

atherosclerosis Diffuse vascular rarely occur in patients this produces with the aorta thoracic of may disease, symptoms. but clinical produce pathology situations life-threatening aortic two situations. can There however, are, in which

ligamentum enter aorta aortic the the the point attachment: behind and to three fixed arcuate the The diaphragm the passing abdomen. the of has points median of arteriosum, of valve, ligament

the from of to the is free relatively The structures other aorta attachment rest of mediastinum. deceleration A a trauma cause aortic at road (e.g., these to injury accident) in points. is serious fixed most likely traffic

as the lumen which (Fig. arteriovascular the or channel, aorta disease, of can In creating the split severe not a may rejoin conditions, true may longitudinally, certain distally in wall such false into 3.91). aortic occurs length. along media intima its and the dissection This between anywhere resulting be ascending aorta and aorta, the If in blood myocardial in in disrupted, the infarction coronary occurs stroke. arteries arch the or or cerebral it may flow of to be the ischemia vessels the producing the or abdomen may disrupted, In kidneys. gut visceral

In clinic the

courses aortic over left arch the passes of The to normal and the the trachea bronchus. left main vessel of right-sided main passes aortic the the the bronchus. occurs and arch over right right A the to courses when trachea arch asymptomatic. is may A of be and aorta rare right-sided of be (right-sided situs inversus and, the associated body’s complete dextrocardia can instances, with some heart) It (left-to-right with inversion organs). in with with branching great abnormal particularly can subclavian of the It aberrant also artery. associated left vessels, be an

the clinic In

vessels of origin Abnormal great

subclavian originating right right originating a left including: a potentially the esophagus vascular abnormal the supply vessels the aortic artery result, from have origin, the and vertebral left aortic Great and ring trunk artery, form occasionally behind produce the the vessels and difficulty the from arch and of brachiocephalic origin carotid the of to the common artery passing a great around an the arch, can distal arm—as the common swallowing. trachea esophagus, portion the which is aortic arch This abnormalities. configuration one of the most common

the clinic In

The laryngeal recurrent vagus nerves, nerves,

branch left recurrent The the of vagus nerve. a is laryngeal nerve left clinically in the window, passes be aortopulmonary mass in any pulmonary as and and pathological the region with this a the artery a region. compressed between aorta, known may It patient vocal cord paralysis This hoarseness of in voice. and left results compression the lung produce with cancer, common enlargement, Lymph node associated spread compression. the of a condition that is often may all whose for symptoms hoarse patients out a carried therefore radiography Chest voice. is usually include

gives recurrent the the the it nerve nerve, right neck, subclavian the passes root laryngeal over artery More “hooks” around the right which as cervical of off the pleura. right vagus in superiorly, should view an is apical the tumor). chest right demonstrated patient hoarse lordotic for vocal voice assess a has be a with cord If (Pancoast’s lung apex laryngoscopy, palsy cancer and a radiography in obtained right to at

clinic the In

determines contains the which sites tumor of disease the to spread esophagus is which patients to location note (Fig. cancer, esophageal the with When portion it because tumor the important present will 3.100).

draining artery. Esophageal celiac lymph nodes neck quickly the lymphatics, spreads around to in and cancer the to Endoscopy barium or the swallow used assess is to site. and stage MRI disease. be to may CT the necessary

Once planned. disease extent can has been assessed, of treatment the the be

the clinic In

of was described case in esophageal rupture Boerhaave 1724. by first Herman The up has case early the was fatal, increased survival diagnosis rate This 65%. but to is untreated, 100%. the If is mortality left disease

Typically, failure esophageal third sudden of to cricopharyngeus lower rupture the and the to intraluminal occurs vomiting with pressure an of uncoordination in rise by the produced in relax. muscle a esophagus secondary the left, with effusion occur the tears on the large contents. gastric left typically the a they associated Because pleural that often are contains demonstrated. be In some patients, subcutaneous may emphysema

is urgent with surgical Treatment repair. optimal

radiated pain that the A to room was emergency severe the man central with chest and predominantly 65-year-old to to admitted neck arm. the left heavy smoker. a known was overweight and He

he On examination gray appeared and sweaty. Hg pressure Hg). was blood (normal range mm 120/80 mm 74/40 His infarction. performed (ECG) myocardial and demonstrated was anterior An electrocardiogram poor An ventricular left function. demonstrated echocardiograph urgent cardiac The occluded an revealed vessel angiogram (Fig. 3.114A,B). perform evaluating projection Another in is to intensity maximum patients (MIP) coronary arteries to studies approach CT (Fig. 3.115A,B).

artery underwent an coronary and excellent bypass an emergency graft patient made recovery. This He stopped exercises regularly. has lost weight, and smoking, now

are stimulated. myocardial pain When (visceral fibers infarction, cardiac during afferents) a cells die sensory enter between the TIV and cord of innervate fibers the spinal course that fibers follow visceral sympathetic heart TI These the and levels. the T4 from At enter cord the level, nerves posterior nerves this somatic afferent spinal to spinal T1 also roots. the via the whose second T1 represent synapse areas Both of cord that synapse the the levels. brain the with and to across types pass afferents to ascend somatic) with interneurons, and (visceral then neurons which of somatosensory T4 fibers then between regions to the and the as the organ sensory the distribution visceral Fig. The heart; somatic unable brain pain the therefore from somatic than is is rather interpreted arising the visceral (i.e., clearly sensory distinguish distribution and 3.114C).

because was left breathless his was patient function The poor. ventricular

produces When two the left fails, effects. ventricle it

the is reduced. force contractile First, blood and the lowers pressure pressure. reduces the of This ejected blood the

has the fill left The atrium harder to to left ventricle. work failing reflected a which pressure the an pulmonary This in atrial increased creates higher is veins, pulmonary work in extra and subsequently increases venular pressure, left pressure. this fluid alveoli. pressure leak This pulmonary the and the interstitium the into then from will cause capillaries rise in to into fluid edema called pulmonary gas Such and restricts markedly it is exchange. in results breath. shortness of This

blocked as Fig. coronary This a had man left artery, shown in 3.114B.

artery which important know to It coronary is blocked. is

artery coronary the left of heart. side supplies the the of The majority left between sulcus, often into left main 2 interventricular in to the The descending coronary is and which atrium the is cm long the and left ventricle divides artery, anterior referred the as which approximately artery, circumflex (LAD). and anterior the the lies stem artery vessel

nodes cardiac coronary right the associated involved artery atrioventricular the result rhythm coronary the disease supplies of because derive disorders with arterial right the their blood When is and often from predominantly and sinu-atrial occludes, artery.

using medical myocardial sought function this his assessed When care, patient angiography. ECG, echocardiography, and was

During examination, the assess will physician usually patient’s a myocardial initial function.

made. and differential malfunctioning carrying diagnosis heart is a history cause the clinical a physical a out the for examination, of obtaining After is ways: myocardial assessment following obtained function valve Objective and in the of

rhythm heart electrical rate and of of the axes long reveal ECG/EKG that short traces series and (electrocardiography)—a around defects. taken and conduction the heart of the the function sides and In overall heart and of it the of points left demonstrates dysfunction. right addition, areas changes a heart the in relate myocardial Specific that in of infarction. to involved the been the ECG have supplies, coronary infarct myocardial occlusion an artery therefore For infarction aspect; myocardium which it called right in is is infarction. of the area inferior example, the predominantly inferior the produces a visualize III, II, that the aspect (namely, changes the demonstrated and are leads the of The inferior aVF). ECG in leads myocardium

heart the enlargement. Chest the and radiography—reveals size of chamber excess can fluid treated. builds fails Careful and observation edema), the lungs (pulmonary marked produce up ventricle which death of when respiratory the demonstrate will left compromise unless promptly and

namely (LDH), infarction, kinase (AST). and aspartate lactate creatine heart myocardial during (CK), transaminase enzymes dehydrogenase tests—the Blood releases easily at plasma measured used in These the early the enzymes diagnosis hospital an laboratory determine and to are stage. specific also Further isoenzyme be enzymes (creatine termed isoenzymes [CKMB]). determined kinase MB can myocardial include component an infarction. myocardium), which cells of released (a Newer die tests troponin specific is when cardiac during for the assessment

exercised ECG testing—patients are a connected Exercise to an treadmill. and monitor on flow, can the abnormality. blood so localizing vascular poor be demonstrated, of ischemia, Areas or

and (a emitter) analogs. are derivatives Nuclear its X-ray radioactive potassium medicine—thallium They coronary are of used areas determine ischemia. to patient to of demonstrated is uptake administered If are when the areas substances myocardium are a myocardial these dead. no

puncture a up and femoral aorta the to the femoral vessels. site angiography—small from catheters Coronary maneuvered artery are arterial coronary artery origins through the and of branches. contrast to then important demonstrate vessels medium and the coronary X-ray injected is their (stenosis), angioplasty is may carried any out. narrowing there be If inflated the balloons and refashion passed ischemia angioplasty coronary narrowed so myocardial are areas the across and infarction. vessel tiny further to In and prevent

53-year-old pleuritic 5-hour and of a the A with breath. to department sharp shortness emergency presented man history pain of chest day returning haul holidays. he before was The from his flight, long a on climber. was mountain and He usually a fit keen and was well no significant history. medical previous He had

24/min, clear, he to air. were his On and at room was physical reduced was lungs saturation tachypneic 92% his on examination angiogram. for Pulmonary and a patient referred was the CT embolism suspected was pulmonary and demonstrated left the right The pulmonary main within clots study arteries. was consolidation. or There lung collapse, effusion, no pleural

subcutaneous was started over course days. enoxaparin of the to He converted oral of on and immediately anticoagulation couple a haul factors The a months immobilization during identified. no were 6 lasted other treatment risk (except whole as flight) long no There sequelae. permanent were

limbs in renal, of lower the veins. embolic limb and The or in deep the the peripheral commonly veins originates deep less upper usually material pelvic, or veins pulmonary central pulmonary main the embolism giving the lodge travels can peripheral rise in where pulmonary either in into and giving arteries, pulmonary lobar, the circulation, segmental, subsegmental rise branches, it The deep the trunk from thrombus detached or the material gets and to to embolism. in main

is part affected. and is tree of gravity pulmonary The on the dependent symptoms load partly arterial which the of on thrombus arteries). severe and both pulmonary pulmonary embolisms the can to trunk (e.g., and death hemodynamic a in respiratory lead compromise and saddle Large main in pulmonary thrombus lodged

oral risk immobilization, pregnancy, include hereditary and trauma, factors Common factors. malignancy, contraceptives, surgery,

on A tips has of black areas the left his of his of skin man fingers young hand. of a emboli source made A sought. emboli was of platelet clinical and diagnosis the

can Emboli many arise from sources. clots and source to are occlude. carried from vessels in usually reside are of plugs They which may eventually they a that small tissue, platelets, the supply that affected. or in may Arterial the arise the region arteries in heart emboli the into emboli, infected and are of bacteria off on valve showered grow cases the circulation. In peripheral

neck cervical coronal demonstrates and radiograph (eFig. a of A rib CT the image neck 3.116).

Cervical entities: distinct produce may ribs three disease

(or portion reduces on the the of cervical currents the of the artery vessel and diameter band) Arterial allows distal the of embolization—the compression to rib undersurface eddy form. subclavian and region. this develop in atheroma and Platelets may aggregate be the debris to the a blood dislodged distally off flow fingers can embolization. distal hand, vessels within called and flow the limb block and condition upper to This

sensory normally develop and the over a rib; Tension is passes disturbance aspect thus of nerve, elevated the of presence the hand. rib of nerve—the muscles a patient also forearm, which the I, of the over may by wasting medial T1 intrinsic T1 the experience cervical on the

the of subclavian vein—this axillary vein may Compression thrombosis. induce

A outer marked with the Doppler the distal border narrowing. ultrasound the subclavian of stenosis abnormal the of revealed scan to artery flow at rib flow thrombus of abnormal adherent this evidence the region vessel Within of was to there wall.

no excision had This surgical and the rib patient symptoms. of cervical underwent further

man headaches shortness with and presented A breath. 52-year-old of also blood. of complained small He coughing volumes up of revealed multiple examination the neck. Clinical veins around dilated and was to an mass, carcinoma. diaphragm radiograph which bronchogenic demonstrated A a right on believed elevated chest primary the a be tumor

tumor By knowledge, site the observing the applying of anatomical inferred. the can and clinical findings be

The multiple veins the of dilated are indicative obstruction. around neck venous are veins cava. superior be neck, that implying must dilated a vessel, obstruction the sides both the on common vena within the The of vena to is the the Anterior phrenic supplies in chest the superior which nerve, of the cava right the diaphragm. side clear elevated, involved nerve Because is is tumor. phrenic paralysis, that the suggesting it diaphragm been the has the with

during shot an was A armed man 35-year-old robbery. bullet above was space, right fourth the The entry the intercostal wound nipple. in the obtained the lung. complete emergency radiograph demonstrated of chest room admission collapse to A on

the radiograph 20 A minutes level in pleural air/fluid chest cavity performed an further demonstrated (eFig. later 3.117).

Three in occur cavity. pathological processes the common pleural may

its recoil. into pneumothorax of elastic introduced lung because the develops pleural own and the If air is collapses a cavity, compress The air, pleural lung. may with further which fills space the a have with unlikely are Most to patients respiratory impairment. lung collapsed the that at such conditions, to the Under and enter it pushes opposite may of pleural rate certain side a the chest. cavity shifts mediastinum air the treatment urgent intercostal requiring and to insertion tube pneumothorax of air. by tension is is This called the potentially an lethal, remove fractures commonest pneumothorax damage. and ventilation of The positive causes rib are lung pressure

pleural diseases fluid cavity be infection, with effusion) The this may pleural with abdominal sepsis). (e.g., many can cancer, (a and fill lung associated these out tests patients to any from is to respiratory to It fluid important its fluid nature. and aspirate carry relieve impairment on laboratory determine the to

trauma to of hemopneumothorax. development can Severe chest lead and inserted tube that must air respiratory impairment. A has space be entered prevent the remove the to and pleural blood

treatment the man either or to both. or fluid needs This air drain

The into the needle cavity. be accessed between by a the pleural ribs pleural can space passing to pleural normal space damage underlying needle nonexistent; attempt into adult, a lung. a is space procedure to any In healthy the and may is introduce this the therefore, succeed unlikely virtually the

is chest periosteum form the its anesthetized infiltration must of because inserted, any extremely be well sensitive. by is Before rib tube should on intercostal the rib. drain of directly top pass The bundle. to the artery, adjacent of the and neurovascular which damage the may the rib lie Insertion vein, within part lower nerve,

or axillary the fifth and sites Appropriate space intercostal midaxillary insertion anterior either chest between of are a lines. the fourth anatomical for drain in

is articulation which angle, This the of of is sternal point position II. rib the determined by palpating Counting determine axillary observation the simple lines. anterior the and midaxillary will determine and the number will positions rib inferiorly of Insertion appreciable side the fifth liver drain needle either and is placing the runs into of the interspace or recesses of pleural the below needle an upon or any crossing the the the spleen, depending needle or which tube inserted. risk

was failure. cardiac to An elderly woman room with the admitted severe emergency been (fast box, disorder a inserted years rhythm atrial She pacemaker a cardiac fibrillation) many previously. for had left-sided which had atrial demonstrated fast An fibrillation. ECG under wire A showed the had from chest the broken that radiograph the pacemaker clavicle.

of broke. explains knowledge this chest the Anatomical the of why wire region

pacemakers. cardiac Many have patients the pectoralis to the the tissue muscle just lateral axillary skin the subcutaneous arises over within to from which wire travels the from muscle. lies the clavicle, pierce subclavius A pacemaker pacemaker, under major and vein beneath the the heart (where the the ventricle right and lies subclavian to brachiocephalic vein, wall vein, passes the on then and cava, the the can (eFig. contract) wire stimulate the it The vena right the superior atrium, of through 3.118). wire, many causing possible adjacent the after the years the vein it stresses the of the to shoulder wire subclavius is axillary and the subclavius directly breaks muscle to muscle, pierces If that fail. pacemaker movement within as the made first feasible the as of effort point the laterally wire of vein. is the Every axillary insertion to far part place

visited he because his a 20-year-old cough. man A doctor family had radiograph VI notches along A translucent demonstrated (eFig. of to ribs inferior border chest the III 3.119). of was and aorta the a coarctation of referred was to made. a diagnosis cardiologist He The rib collateral dilated arteries. caused was notching intercostal by

the to the distal subclavian a left aorta of aorta narrowing of Coarctation artery. is the markedly narrowing body. to can flow lower reduce This the blood reach narrowing vessels pressure level so narrowing. blood due enlarge the Many the that of the to the can of below increased aorta the above therefore the internal and musculophrenic Commonly, arteries enlarge epigastric, anteriorly. thoracic, superior the flow anastomose arteries, that anterior supply retrogradely These intercostal with aorta. allow which the arteries into the intercostal posterior arteries to the blood in Enlargement the of ribs. of the intertcostal vessels results notching

enlarge notching. artery from The the rib not trunk, from which coarctation, supplied the posterior the costocervical intercostal second are induce so and not vessels do and arises do proximal subclavian to first

admitted with interscapular severe room the 62-year-old was to man emergency pain. A dislocating that was 9” previous eye past surgery had he 6’ however, he was noted lenses. medical undergone otherwise and it history indicated fit His for well; and was

and pale, examination the On clammy, man was hypotensive. right The was groin weak. his in pulse infarction. An ECG demonstrated an myocardial inferior tests and kidney acidosis. Serum poor marked function revealed blood

the was to dissection of patient diagnosis a transferred made. The aortic scanner and CT was

an the within is which wall small dissection aortic a tear in disorder occurs (eFig. Aortic uncommon 3.120). contains and media, The three an aortic wall adventitia. an layers, intima, a channel tear of the forming it the a A away, and the peels into within the extends wall in vessel. intima media point its vessel wall entry. of Usually reenters the main to distal blood the

myocardial infarction The

right coronary Aortic the extend may involve of the retrogradely coronary to dissection artery. sinus passed dissection as the became right Unfortunately, occluded patient’s origin. coronary into artery the case the this in anterior myocardium, anterior coronary as inferior supplies on right aspect the an an and ECG. is of In normal this artery myocardial individuals infarct the evident the

left The ischemic leg

two iliac to length level throughout right channels into aorta right the and the of of the The artery. the aorta the system extended have the within femoral it these Although flows reduced often causes through blood blood flow. structures flow blood renders the into Hence left it ischemic. reduced limb the lower

acidotic. The became patient

the with of which removed in or cells which carbon is in water the produce the urine converted production ventilation. acid, into excreted body All is dioxide, with when amounts hydrogen they Unfortunately, organs ions. ischemic significant release extremely become of becomes when Typically, occurs this ischemic. the gut pattern be the (2) ion levels. can hydrogen and impeded, the blood flow mesenteric dissection, significantly (1) and high the mesenteric rendering removed artery, With of circulation or from can ischemic relatively accounting the for trunk, artery the effectively superior hence vessels gut these be within celiac inferior the

to impair can decreases the Similarly the blood their function. kidneys, ability to dissection which flow

The underwent emergency patient and survived. surgery suggest this would review the of a series of and previous Interestingly, lens of tests of the Marfan the history syndrome, patient the was and so. and family blood surgery height diagnosis revealed a

practitioner the 2 presented weight lb because of family 35-year-old recent to A patient (14 loss over months). previous his male streaks with blood He and (hemoptysis) of in left-sided a pain. of chest sputum the complained also cough his necessitated especially significant sheets. sweating, Recently, which noticed night, he at changing

had patient and fast). tachypneic was On temperature the low-grade examination a (breathing side There left chest. expansion was reduced the of the of of to chest remainder percussed the compared dull, of the note percussion When left resonant that the anterior aspect the was the the was chest it was chest. noted of breathing). sounds, breath a hoarse were (listening with Auscultation nature (bronchial which stethoscope) decreased revealed in

infection made. of A chest was diagnosis

is common Chest a disease. infection the airways In patients affects the large bronchi. infection most and filling the produced, are continues, the If transudates infection lobules. and secondary and pulmonary alveoli exudates the nature diffuse patchy is type termed of The bronchial pneumonia. this of infection

specific Given clinical bronchial findings, unlikely. the pneumonia patient’s was

From lobe. have a patient the was findings to pneumonia clinical was it the a likely to confined that clear likely there was only diagnosis Because two pneumonia. the lobes lobe left left upper lung, a are the in

(eFig. chest radiograph A was obtained 3.121). demonstrated view the whole of throughout veil-like opacification the the an posteroanterior area of chest The left of lung.

shadowing. within upper the any oblique produce this Knowing of the lobe veil-like left the will fissure, consolidation position are demonstrate and at fissure. that would usually opacification superiorly ends not anteriorly the abruptly Lateral but necessary oblique radiographs

gravity-dependent are patients most because unusual infection. lobe pneumonias develop Upper commonly, and lobes, middle upper and infections, typical within the however, histoplasmosis. are Certain tuberculosis (TB)

serious was the and patient hospital. history admitted of and A patient’s the to review illness a suggested chronic

was carried and lobe out sputum was admission left from a the After bronchus. upper bronchoscopy aspirated under the were This laboratory the cultured tuberculous and viewed microscope and also bacilli in (TB) identified. was

his came discomfort to of family complaining 68-year-old A swallowing man (dysphagia). when physician over approximately and had physician lost examined he his 18 visit patient lb last months. The the noted 6 since tests to Routine revealed unit. referred patient blood was and gastroenterology the the he was anemic esophageal was the a involved abdominal made patient diagnosis resection, and incision. a which A and of chest cancer underwent years follow-up. patient 4 remains still the well though subject After to

of on and tube the underwent examination flexible is placed The which the endoscopic mouth into camera esophagus tube. the a the in a placed patient and esophagus end through is of a the forceps to also It tissue adequate small portions biopsy of use to possible diagnosis. obtain for is

esophageal type) made and patient of a carcinoma underwent The was (squamous the staging diagnosis procedure. cell

it and prognosis. the to malignancy allows treatment the Staging any of determine of the extent because is patient’s physician determines important our CT the underwent which abdomen, nodes significant revealed esophageal scan no of third lower and patient around a In the this lymph chest tumor. case

around of liver. of evidence the spread evidence The trunk celiac abdominal and to to nodes the the scan revealed spread no no

the cause the was of Bleeding anemia.

friable, bleeding occurs. passage are low-grade Many tumors digested of of and system across the tumor, with remarkably the material the chronic gastrointestinal asymptomatic; which be is instance can time is first a patient it tests. however, the anemic, Over blood in of on period diagnosed rendered routine the

planned. Complex surgery is

22 of is approximately length the esophagus cm. The nodes. through spread and route can the lymph occur submucosal through also locoregional Tumor thyroid the which esophageal The along branches the gastric supply thoracic left artery. aorta, the from nodes by is predominantly supplied to and inferior artery, from esophagus, the the drain arterial branches lymph The transthoracic involves the placing procedure patient supine. esophagectomy disease performed to assess evidence in any laparotomy A is for the of abdominal cavity. the mobilized, stomach with is and gastro-omental The gastric right of arteries. preservation right vessels and and short a also pyloromyotomy is are gastric performed. vessels The left divided, gastric

closed The is patient abdominal position. and lateral in then the left is placed wound the A thoracotomy is to length azygos divided esophagus. access fifth through provide the vein full space, performed the posterolateral right and to intercostal of the the is whole the delivered stomach The through hiatus. is diaphragmatic is is to cervical the esophagus. anastomosed esophagus the stomach and resected The

recovery. patient made uneventful The an

node have Most late esophageal spread. diagnosed metastatic relatively often and cancers lymph are A of liver. have also tumor a patients the spread will number of to approximately overall for prognosis a is cancer 5-year The esophageal survival rate. 25%, with poor,

in lymph spread curative is early procedure. Diagnosing can cancer ideal its before esophageal produce node and stages a

and his chemotherapy life good Our years patient enjoys 4 to quality operation. on of after a went have

in breast, physician. the with a to left history breast of woman, returned her 45-year-old cancer A metastatic to had nodes bones spread the disease disease). lymph Unfortunately and (bony axillary the duly clearance. with wide performed local primary a tumor surgeon excision the an then nodal breast and resected A axillary then was The to for oncologist an chemotherapy. patient referred into internal skin from subcutaneous the the which jugular a passes under which Chemotherapy small through portacath, a is reservoir a vein. delivered was catheter The a insertion well chemotherapy, years patient 5 is doing duly of and course without completed later. complication, currently her underwent portacath

was portacath was on the anterior patient’s placed right jugular The the into and the right internal placed vein. chest line wall internal The left subcutaneous were jugular used. tissues vein and not and and lymph using on lymphatics previously had removed. not left, dissection The the the was an the reason this undergone site that patient nodes for were axillary this in infected. and an may portacath response Placement may produce inflammatory get region of even a to there and remove infection lymphatics because are no Unfortunately, and ensue. severe infected to bacteria, life-threatening away may sepsis drain material

it placed? How was

shows and the an demonstrating carotid internal root right jugular the of image on The neck axial the right right common ultrasound vein. the the across artery respiratory variation, (when makes The head-down the jugular patient in size vein a and internal two dependence structures generally position the demonstrates position, compressibility, and puncture larger upon the the easy). normal the is patient’s fills and the vein placed of is

of The the procedure risks

with a risk As all always of there complication. procedures is and small operations potential always balanced These the against benefits the risks of procedure. are performed Placing risk under needle the carotid the artery. can internal the guidance, reduces the jugular puncturing ultrasound vein of be which into common likely that fascia, the by may under hit apex direct operator pierce lung less produce a and which will is puncturing vision Furthermore, it the the pneumothorax. superior pleural

position catheter of the indwelling The

into the internal the right right and catheter jugular vein. placed brachiocephalic is The through vein tip catheter and cava. the of placed inferiorly of vena right The the the atrium the at junction then superior more is relates a position catheter The for the infused. in the such that reason placing are agents to wall the irritation. cells), severely (kill agents mixing prevents thrombosis blood vein and good with Most enabling and cytotoxic chemotherapeutic are

family girl her a around response 1-week fatigue, of purulent shortness and increasing presented sputum, by to the productive amoxicillin history with department 38.5° fever physician. a emergency cough to to oral copious C, of with prescribed 15-year-old breath, A no the the and had and diagnosed birth hospital was with The gastrointestinal for multiple fibrosis to pulmonary admissions patient cystic manifestations after disease. of shortly

38.2° bronchiectasis ER revealed Physical the admission of infective of on 105/min, examination tachycardia was made. C. and the Diagnosis crackles, current fever to of inspiratory widespread exacerbation of mild later was for common isolated patients. sent aeruginosa, positive such back pathogen a for microbiology, came which in Pseudomonas Sputum

them rendering thick a autosomal of in disorder exocrine secretions, function to the Cystic of an sticky. low an and concentration glands mutation, leading fibrosis gene recessive exocrine abnormally to is due chloride affecting and tract. secretions reproductive blockage subsequent liver, to the damage airways, and bowel, Thick cause pancreas, secretions lead condition known nonclearing resulting the In and distortion as distal inflammation, bronchi, a bronchiectasis. lungs, to infections and permanent the recurrent persistent thick in dilation of radiographs affecting the structures, (tram be seen can Bronchiectasis plain as lobes. particularly upper track like) tubular chest on cystic extent the to or lobar of and tomography due pulmonary Computed potential airway easily hypertension. can fibrosis pulmonary as trunk identify enlargement pulmonary of of demonstrate complications damage pneumothorax, collapse, such the

recovery course physiotherapy made patient chest acute broad-spectrum from a antibiotics was intensive satisfactory for and of the episode. and admitted The intravenous home ongoing She oral was discharged prophylactic with on antibiotics program. physiotherapy an

247.e1 247.e2

Relationship Other Overview to Conceptual • Regions

Fig. cont’d 3.12,

Fig. cont’d 3.26,

the clinic—cont’d In

the and Anatomy of During Wall Regional Breathing Movements Diaphragm • Thoracic

clinic—cont’d the In

• Vertebral Surface the at TIV/V Visualizing Anatomy Structures Level

Heart of Anatomy the Margins Surface Visualizing the •

• Lobes Surface Lung the and Fissures and and Recesses, Anatomy Pleural Lungs, Visualizing Pleural Cavities

Listen • for Lung Sounds to Where Anatomy Surface

Fig. cont’d 3.114,

(Fig. The from pelvis cylindrical the abdomen the the superior margin is to chamber extending the thorax lower of roughly margin of and a limb the inferior 4.1A).

is thoracic forms superior by The and diaphragm. inferior opening the closed the aperture the abdomen to inlet. the pelvic the abdominal pelvic deep continuous the with is wall Inferiorly, at wall margin the the limit superior of inferior of abdominal is limb. the lower the wall Superficially,

The cavity, chamber enclosed contains the freely the pelvic a with large cavity. abdominal wall peritoneal which single communicates by

and cavity are by in or the positioned (Fig. cavity mesenteries the between viscera peritoneal the musculoskeletal wall either Abdominal suspended 4.1B).

gallbladder; large viscera glands; elements neurovascular components of liver, system—the esophagus, caudal the urinary ureters; the system—kidneys end and major spleen; and and the of major small the pancreas, Abdominal stomach, gastrointestinal intestines, and of suprarenal the structures. include:

major the (Fig. elements of abdomen system The houses gastrointestinal and urinary of system. spleen, parts 4.2), the the

liver, viscera abdominal the costal the and of spleen Much margin which these wall, thoracic diaphragm, are are thoracic colon as domes stomach, superiorly above of the the the of a gallbladder, and by of and parts the project result under protected wall. the are ribs. superior deep the poles lower the to The of kidneys

and are the not by under domes muscular predominantly diaphragm Viscera protected abdomen. the the supported walls of of the

important breathing: of roles wall of most in assist the the One to is abdominal

during cavity It viscera to abdominal displacement of the the (Fig. relaxes thoracic inferior contraction inspiration expansion and of accommodate of the during diaphragm 4.3).

thus reducing assist contracts expiration, it the in thoracic elevating During the domes volume. of to diaphragm,

expiration in Material coughing muscles, be by abdominal using as from expelled forced the the airway or can sneezing.

intraabdominal wall muscles dramatically increase can abdominal when (Fig. in position a fixed pressure the of Contraction diaphragm is 4.4). is the closing neck. retained by Air lungs in larynx in the in the valves of giving contents in assists birth. the pressure and in Increased voiding and the intra-abdominal rectum bladder

consists abdominal of bone wall The muscle (Fig. but partly mainly of 4.5). (Fig. The of wall elements skeletal the the the lumbar vertebrae end XI, of pelvic the the parts inferior superior discs, including thoracic rib bony rib are: bones, expanded and the five costal process. components of margin, and XII, 4.5A) intervertebral intervening of the their and wall, the xiphoid

wall rest make Muscles (Fig. the of the up abdominal 4.5B):

Lateral the the of column, to aspect psoas major, posterior wall. quadratus the muscles the and vertebral iliacus lumborum, reinforce of flexors distal iliacus joint. of major hip psoas The the the thigh major into pass and are muscles ends the and

of the in are oblique, by of formed thorax—transversus and to layers the abdominis, three internal the external muscles, which intercostal muscles Lateral predominantly abdominal parts similar are wall oblique. orientation of

between Anteriorly, the the and distance each on side inferior muscle wall abdominis) segmented spans rectus a thoracic pelvis. (the the

derived from lateral wall. the of continuity and muscles lateral, parts between provided abdominal (aponeuroses) Structural posterior, is by the wall of anterior thickness from abdominal abdominal separates of the the peritoneum, which wall varying A fascial the lines layer cavity.

Fig. from abdominal tube sheets cavity wall is general from (gastrointestinal which thin a abdominal gut suspended The system) (mesenteries; partly the posterior is of and central anterior organization the the tissue abdominal wall one by in of the (anterior) mesentery proximal ventral the (posterior) dorsal a tube; a system. along gut for of length mesentery regions of 4.6): the entire

these associated. organs parts are to the two Different suspend are according which of they with they named or mesenteries

kidneys, with not the suspended that are mesenteries in the are such abdominal as abdominal Major wall. associated cavity the by viscera,

together of layer epithelial-like The abdominal with an peritoneum, connective by supportive of consists is cells tissue. lined single of (the cavity a which mesothelium) layer similar the the to Peritoneum thorax. pericardium in serous is pleura and

peritoneum of component viscera. reflects off the that mesenteries become wall suspend a The abdominal the to the

wall. peritoneum lines Parietal abdominal the

organs. covers suspended Visceral peritoneum

Normally, cavity tract the elements cavity, a peritoneal its making wall one the and and the potential slide adjacent gastrointestinal completely fill abdominal against of another. derivatives on freely space, abdominal the

are retroperitoneal: either intraperitoneal or viscera Abdominal

such Intraperitoneal structures, of by elements system, as the gastrointestinal suspended are wall mesenteries; the from abdominal

and a Structures in in and wall the between position. parietal suspended that peritoneum not abdominal cavity are are retroperitoneal that lie mesentery abdominal by the

between abdominal include ureters, peritoneum in kidneys Retroperitoneal and wall and region the in the structures the position adult. in the the this which and remain develop

a and the retroperitoneal parts abdominal large (Fig. secondarily organs, later During cavity of suspended fusing some the as with are development, such by the in intestines, by small and abdominal become wall initially mesentery, 4.7).

mesentery, region the associated development, peritoneum lymphatics abdominal during wall axis with of the the the body gut supports dorsal nerves, the as the developing which tube. wall are the posterior where, vessels, in Large along the off reflects and median neurovascular or parts to the a structures, of that system consequence, aspects the structures mesenteries where secondarily the branches in the unpaired, anterior parent pass originate from travel of are wall. mesenteries retroperitoneally of their the pass and areas to in As gastrointestinal fuse

the one that to branch retroperitoneal Generally, from as central vessels, side. organs wall and the neurovascular to on structures paired, and usually nerves, lymphatics each structures abdominal are and originate laterally

abdomen the The the (see is of is thoracic aperture, the inferior superior pp. by diaphragm closed which aperture 126-127). process The end vertebra margin, and the costal of the TXII, the of consists XII, rib XI, thoracic of distal sternum. rib margin xiphoid of the the inferior aperture

diaphragm from thorax. separates the abdomen The musculotendinous the

(Fig. is the aperture, of lumbar into to of column thoracic the posteriorly attaches margin but complex attachment vertebral extends and The area the inferior the the diaphragm 4.8). on the LIII extension and On surface on left. diaphragm LII the the the side, to a firmly far vertebra down (crus) vertebral vertebra the right anchors as column each muscular of as anterolateral

distance intervening span margin points costal and tissues: the diaphragm ligaments, Because soft available complete the not bony to between (arcuate) is is the arch-shaped the posteriorly, which anchored

of rib posterior lateral to transverse vertebrae, wall and and vertebra the XII, cross muscles and abdominal respectively. arcuate the LI of ligaments processes Medial attach

and arcuate side. is crosses crus continuous aorta A ligament on the median each the with

extends attachment. attachment The diaphragm much the inferiorly farther of anterior posterior than the diaphragm of related. posterior is abdominal component the to Consequently, wall, the an a viscera number which are of important

cavity. pelvic pelvic the wall continuous continuous pelvic the wall the with is abdominal cavity abdominal is and with inlet, at the The

bone is anteriorly pelvic rim bony the pelvic by bone: on posteriorly a margin inlet each formed laterally, by the entirely sacrum, and of pubic the circular side, (Fig. The distinct on by by symphysis, the 4.9).

sacrum pelvic oriented column, Because cavity. in the pelvic as the in not the are plane way vertebral vertical attached and the posteriorly angled bones the the of same on cavity is abdominal which cavity pelvic somewhat projects opens the and anteriorly the (Fig. and inlet posteriorly, superiorly Instead, 4.10).

The abdomen the the thorax is separated by diaphragm. from through the Structures pass Fig. to (see the regions two or posterior between diaphragm 4.8).

abdomen between the structures through and and the pelvic opens inlet directly pass it. into The pelvis abdomen

the in peritoneum the The peritoneum cavity lining is pelvis. with abdominal the continuous cavity pelvic with continuous the abdominal cavity Consequently, is (Fig. the entirely 4.11). can in the other. one Infections spread into therefore freely region

superiorly of and, from pregnancy, superiorly bladder expands into into The out freely pelvic the cavity abdominal the uterus abdominal cavity the the cavity. expands during cavity the pelvic

the bone pelvic and anteriorly abdominal The formed the the the directly the by wall abdomen ligament) of (marked inferior inguinal communicates thigh aperture an between with (Fig. margin through 4.12). the limb; innervates thigh major lower iliacus of this at the the the quadriceps and aperture muscles, and vein the that distal the the nerve, knee; muscle, ends through major lymphatics; extends Structures which femoral which pass femoris joint. which and artery psoas are: the flex hip of

femoral change—the of names become As ligament, inguinal of and artery vein their and the vessels artery the the thigh. external to abdomen vein pass iliac the inferior

Arrangement adult of the in viscera abdominal

and A mesenteries (Fig. the abdomen the of to the viscera basic needed arrangement development tract the in of of is knowledge understand gastrointestinal 4.13).

the large cavity mesentery. is early much tract gastrointestinal and ventral from mesentery oriented smaller in The a walls a and dorsal suspended is by surrounding longitudinally body

to anchored the ventral are the Superiorly, mesenteries diaphragm. dorsal and

the tube The of and consists the gut hindgut. midgut, foregut, the primitive associated arrangement the of of mesenteries and abdominal of body the gut some participate the adult tube, wall selected viscera tube, generating of Massive in organs. rotation the fusion secondary of their growth parts to and longitudinal

of the Development foregut

to the of the foregut In regions, proximal rise the end esophagus, and abdominal the the gives of the duodenum. stomach, part distal foregut both from by wall and is dorsal ventral mesenteries. part the suspended the only The the of gut tube the

grows the ventral anterior foregut of and A aspect from the ultimately, diverticulum and, mesentery, the the into ventral to part of liver gallbladder, to pancreas. the the rise giving

foregut dorsal the from of mesentery. the pancreas outgrowth part dorsal of develops into The the an the between The the spleen stomach. develops in wall mesentery and dorsal region body the in presumptive

the and left developing associated containing foregut, to spleen, expands. the dorsal and the In the greatly rotates the clockwise mesentery, moves stomach with, part body side the this During secondarily process, with, becomes of the wall. fuses mesentery left and associated the of

and the the with time, and to wall. its same mesentery an the part the of appreciable right duodenum, dorsal body to pancreas, fuses At together swings the

growth associated the fusion mesentery, fusion the mesentery of surface of to duodenum with wall, diaphragm space restrict and the body ballooned to to of liver massive stomach. of the the ventral the in the liver the enclosed opening the by the the superior Secondary dorsal is (epiploic the opening foramen). This omental foramen restricted

bursa the part The expanded abdominal of by mesentery, posterior sac). omental is dorsal cavity (lesser to enclosed the the stomach, the and from of to rest the the cavity Access, free is the peritoneal the ventral omental this the of sac) mesentery. space inferior foramen, to edge (greater through

in enlarges to an form of initially Part omentum). and direction, apron-like sac opposing structure the that part an of the mesentery surfaces greater mesentery greatly the the inferior two dorsal forms of lesser (the fuse and greater the omentum observed greater structure cavity, is curvature anteriorly. lies other of the The cavity stomach, in when viscera over first is suspended the the abdominal abdominal from the is opened

the of Development midgut

jejunum, of the the the proximal develops and colon, part The transverse midgut the into distal and ileum, colon. two-thirds duodenum ascending of the developing sac midgut yolk small anteriorly umbilicus. the A projects from into

gastrointestinal the of the cord. the umbilical the midgut of loop of cavity and herniating abdominal into out growth in a system Rapid results the As and is lost, cavity. to the the with returns grows connection abdominal in sac yolk size the midgut body the of aspect While axis, process part that the cavity. cecum the occurring, around of into limbs descends is the combined two their midgut this rotate loop central inferior becomes right of loop counterclockwise the and the the the mesenteric of rotation. The the is superior the midgut, artery, supplies center axis which the of at

remains mesentery its colon The the ascending body and cecum the colon intraperitoneal, dorsal becoming remains secondarily suspended (transverse retroperitoneal, mesocolon). by fuses transverse wall the with over with structures. the hangs the transverse fuses and mesocolon The colon omentum usually these and greater

the Development hindgut of

The of rectum from develop transverse colon, descending one-third and the the hindgut. colon, superior sigmoid distal colon, of the part

left parts swing descending become sigmoid of Proximal and the the hindgut the and colon colon. to the while sigmoid The colon its body and remains the mesentery intraperitoneal. dorsal fuse to descending wall, colon sigmoid through is The colon rectum and the the level with SIII. vertebra inlet of passes at continuous pelvic the

anterior of the and muscles Skin

(Fig. of The ribs and lateral of spinal costal enter follow cross the margin T12 parts thoracic nerves of to slope anterior the the abdominal rami inferior wall the to the T7 4.14). of wall, supply as subcostal the abdominal nerves muscle does T7 the nerve Intercostal T11 skin to T12. and of the T5 T6 muscle the supply parts and wall; In external of addition, upper oblique abdominal

to supplies the skin also innervation T6 xiphoid. cutaneous over

by not muscle the suprapubic innervated and in and are abdominal regions nerves. thoracic the of wall L1 Skin inguinal and by

indicated are wall of in Figure abdominal the 4.14. anterior Dermatomes is the around skin that T10. the midline, and angle T6 umbilicus infrasternal In is the over L1 innervates suprapubic and regions. the skin inguinal in

Muscles dermatomes. segmentally are abdominal patterns generally that the the innervated reflect of the in of wall patterns overlying

weak anterior The abdominal wall groin the in a is area

(Fig. developing gonads pelvic their in scrotum posterior the of into both wall development, in origin sites from women sexes During the cavity on and in abdominal descend the the men 4.15).

and (labioscrotal Before the inferior with labia abdominal a gonad of men primordia passes descent, swellings). the anterior connects of in the through tissue pole the scrotum cord of and majora each women in wall gubernaculum) (the

layers the project cavity the extension of tubular accompanying each abdominal anterior vaginalis) side A and (the muscular processus into on the the of wall peritoneal along labioscrotal swellings. gubernaculum the

the the initially between its accompanying derived path, and gubernaculum, by deferens) efferent wall. with along structures defined abdominal together descends the and the men, processus In the from testis, ductus coverings (the into duct scrotum the its a neurovascular vaginalis pole the to All caudal the that the attaches tissue of connective gubernaculum of that is remains remnant testis the a scrotum.

processus inguinal the through The wall created the abdominal the is by vaginalis. anterior canal passage abdominal wall the the and spermatic all of layers of extension tubular structures the the contains the abdomen. The passing is between testis scrotum that into cord the

the structures, end vaginalis). and (the testis, cord The terminal distal associated isolated the the side tunica the part on cavity the now of sac-like peritoneal of each spermatic of contains cavity

never In women, a and gonads position through descend to the abdominal anterior the wall. pass cavity inside just the pelvic major (the only of inguinal structure canal is gubernaculum the uterus). the passing As through result, the derivative a round the of a ligament

weak In wall both groin women, men area abdominal region) the the and (inguinal (Fig. in is a 4.15) site is of and inguinal hernias. the

vertebra through body The LI transects horizontal that of plane transpyloric is the the lower (Fig. aspect a plane 4.16). LI; body costal the side superior hilum of abdominal the because crosses left; the LII, wall is the into pancreas the hila (the plane the and slightly makes the pubic and to jugular is the the the which the the pancreas; at the crosses the kidneys; and of the the duodenum ninth higher than of open jejunum and the by inferior the duodenum to between through symphysis, the the about hilum. left left to opening through the of the right duodenum, notch the extends right pyloric the into left body of of is the vertebra of midline approximates posterior costal head the of the a cartilage; through each stomach loop crosses of transpyloric the margin and the the midway on orifice), characteristic just the pancreas of kidney body midline enclosed roughly crosses C-shaped It: on the the the loop and crosses whereas aspect of position across of to then of is the body just part right, though

major and supplied by system are its The derivatives gastrointestinal three arteries

the branch the gallbladder) all of to the during supply arteries rise from to of anterior aorta part abdominal development abdominal gut unpaired of gives structures the tract the and which surface and of (Fig. gastrointestinal large Three (liver, part this pancreas, the 4.17). reach the through pass mesenteries derivatives arteries target the viscera. to dorsal and of These ventral lymph structures the spleen such therefore in also mesenteries. that as the These supply develop vessels nodes and supplies aorta These from at which hindgut. LI three midgut; aorta the LI vertebra lower abdominal the abdominal at artery, inferior which celiac the artery, the artery, from and are: and LIII border which branches superior arises the the level and the and the upper mesenteric the vertebral approximately the of arteries branches aorta at border supplies foregut; from mesenteric of vertebra the supplies abdominal

from Venous to right left shunts

into atrium the the All heart the heart. of the than the of right regions other blood to from body flows lungs returning with and lower the systemic and major together vein (Fig. limbs the is region The pelvis, abdomen inferior cava vena in perineum, both drains the this 4.18).

at penetrates vertebral central cava of diaphragm lies TVIII. vertebral the right the The approximately column to and vena the the tendon level inferior of large left A body vena deliver inferior side from of to the cross of blood midline to the vessels number the cava. the

is gland, which kidney, and drains the significant the left of same suprarenal the the side. renal gonad on vein, most One

right vena the crosses to join common to its midline on with vertebral iliac the Another is cava. partner LV inferior left form which approximately the vein, level the at parts wall. and the the the pelvis, the lower abdominal perineum, drain veins of limbs, These

the posterior which veins, wall Other midline the and drain lumbar the the left left crossing back include vessels side. abdominal on

drainage the All through liver the from venous

and (Fig. system returning parts second passes gastrointestinal heart the from before spleen in bed, Blood ultimately the through abdominal vascular of a liver, the to the 4.19).

pancreas, through spleen digestive surface enters the hepatic the vein. from Venous inferior of gallbladder, liver blood the and large portal tract, the network the This artery vascular then an which to small distribute sinusoids, the form vein liver. ramifies to blood exchange of endothelial-lined like hepatic

veins, number of a hepatic right After drain collects short heart. through inferior the enters sinusoids, the inferior into blood which just diaphragm the the in passing vena cava penetrates the the before cava vena the and atrium of

drained small systemic inferior vessels, either the with by beds directly portal through interconnect, drained system beds hepatic veins, cava. ultimately vena or which the superior by connect vascular with Normally,

inferior regions of important the of rectum. the esophagus; the the abdominal the around of the portal gastrointestinal part system: clinically are overlap part Among end each systems the most around caval and those end at of the between inferior of

veins another important (round ligament vein anastomosis. Small degenerate the the establish liver) of umbilical that portacaval accompany

anterior vein as left the it umbilicus liver of liver. enters The the branch connects of the the portal of the with wall abdominal ligament round the that veins and veins. para-umbilical abdominal regions ligament accompany the the a The wall, portal into small system between systemic of form this connection drain which

Other in systems the is of where posterior retroperitoneal). the of liver intestine); and (retroperitoneal with the surface interconnect large contact of and direct (much caval is of bare where wall where area the include: direct liver); portal pancreas secondarily is the pancreas wall of tract areas gastrointestinal and the the regions posterior contact with small in the diaphragm the abdominal (the the

of Blockage liver channels hepatic in or the the of vein portal vascular

of Blockage portal vascular the in vein liver of hepatic gastrointestinal affect of from return can channels pattern the the parts the of venous or abdominal system. can caval portal the and in of the enter return allowing and become caval to and thereby tortuous, liver, the greatly the systems to heart. enlarged blood the system, bypass system Vessels tributaries that interconnect portal hypertension in that enlarge radiate result abdominal which from in and Portal vessels can veins become para-umbilical esophageal on the wall. and varices visible medusae and in caput systemic rectal

a large Abdominal by supplied viscera are plexus prevertebral

anterior surfaces abdominal plexus of associated with a the lateral is mainly viscera and from Innervation the the large prevertebral aorta derived of (Fig. 4.20). Branches along that distributed target abdominal from originate aorta. are the tissues to vessels

visceral sympathetic, sensory The prevertebral components: and parasympathetic, plexus contains

components Sympathetic to spinal L2. originate T5 levels cord from

to S2 nerve are components S4. from cord Parasympathetic [X] levels the vagus and spinal

Visceral the generally pathways. fibers sensory motor parallel

abdomen to part inferior trunk is the (Fig. of the The thorax the 4.21). inlet. surround superiorly Its inferiorly which large cavity by a abdominal pelvic musculomembranous walls (the bounded by diaphragm the the cavity), is and

abdominal continuous pelvic the is The the high may with cavity. superiorly fourth space, cavity intercostal as and extend inferiorly as contains It abdominal peritoneal the viscera. cavity the and

describe location the abdomen abdominal of the and associated to problems. used divisions organs Topographical are with the abdominal pain of four-quadrant and pattern nine-region pattern. used two often a The are: a schemes most

and median and the and vertical left into umbilicus disc plane with horizontal quadrants—the between intersecting (Fig. lower, passing intervertebral and upper, LIV right the through the the left A right plane lower divides upper, quadrants four abdomen transumbilical LIII vertebrae 4.22).

horizontal pattern The and (Fig. vertical based two is on two nine-region planes 4.23).

body costal the of and (the at costal to posteriorly of immediately vertebra passing is horizontal through it which the plane cartilage places X the the margins, The superior inferior LIII. rib of plane) lower subcostal border sometimes of and the passing the symphysis inferior (Note, and ends instead.) through LI umbilicus the margin the between cartilages, of the and costal the lower with notch posteriorly border of at halfway costal end the transpyloric used of is halfway the the however, vertebra that body ninth or plane, pubis the the sternum, intersecting jugular between

iliac (the to anterior inferior the horizontal cm body structures superior palpable which plane of of connects are plane) and crests, part upper through iliac vertebra intertubercular of posterior the the passes 5 the spines, tubercles LV. the The

between to planes the spine point inferiorly iliac superior clavicles symphysis. from The midway of pubic pass vertical the a midpoint anterior the and

establish the divisions planes These four topographical the in organization. nine-region each the region, flank umbilical in region), middle superiorly and the (lateral The hypochondrium, right flank pubic following (lateral for region, the hypochondrium; region), the epigastric and region) right the (inguinal inferiorly region, left (Fig. region: groin region); designations the and are left right used the and the (inguinal groin left 4.23).

area. large abdominal covers wall a The pelvic inferiorly costal bounded by process by the is by xiphoid bones. posteriorly column, upper and superiorly margins, It the of the and parts vertebral the (Fig. fascias, fascia, of consist peritoneum extraperitoneal and Its muscles layers superficial fascia their deep associated parietal and tissue), skin, (subcutaneous 4.24).

fascia of tissue is of superficial of tissue. a abdomen) layer fatty wall (subcutaneous connective The the abdominal the single and continuous It a to, other is body. fascia layer usually throughout with, of similar superficial the regions forms region wall, below anterior the However, and of a the deeper abdominal layers: part it in layer membranous the fatty a layer. two superficial of lower the umbilicus,

and The in (Camper’s varies fatty fascia) superficial thickness superficial fat fascia of contains (Figs. layer and 4.26). 4.25 the inguinal with superficial the a is ligament It similar with in of the layer continuous the fascia perineum. thigh over and

layer penis smooth this forms layer it dartos its over containing (the men, fusing and superficial superficial scrotum specialized continues fascia). with the of In fibers fascial a fat the continues deeper into the layer where fascia, losing and, after muscle the layer majora. a component retains this In is some of and superficial fat labia women,

fascia is contains and and thin little (Scarpa’s (Fig. of The fat membranous membranous, fascia) deeper layer or no superficial 4.25). it with fuses thigh deep the Inferiorly, the the but fascia (the just it below Fig. thigh, fascia into inguinal of ligament, the continues lata; 4.26). In to midline, pubis. symphysis the the and it attached linea the alba is firmly is of membrane. to margin the It the firmly and where of the the to anterior rami it attached part into perineum the continues ischiopubic perineal posterior superficial it the fascia). perineal is fascia as referred (Colles’ to Here,

the penis, of men, the where superficial fascia (Fig. In membranous they the layer the dartos into the they before superficial continue fascia superficial fascia deeper pass layer as over scrotum form forming blends both with of the penis, they the 4.25). to ligament in of penis. onto pubic to the men, sides penis the layer dorsum superficial form attached fundiform the of of symphysis fascia the of deeper pass and inferiorly extensions the Also membranous majora the and layer of superficial fascia into part perineum. continues the the women, anterior labia In membranous of the the

are are abdominis an aponeurosis of pyramidalis transversus muscles the anteriorly, muscles—the posterolaterally, flat external group of formed a toward as aponeuroses and near whose begin muscles; the replaced wall are by abdominis midline, muscles: and anterolateral muscles rectus muscles. midline—the oblique, tendinous continues which enclosed There oblique, sheath pass five the in by vertical two flat and muscles, abdominal three the muscle the internal fibers the within

muscles actions, together Each normal functions. for of are of many specific critical muscles the maintenance five but the these has physiological from posture within cavity, of protects they injury, action viscera of the form viscera keeps a the abdominal against wall in the their gravity. positioning, abdominal maintain and but By position the the the flexible, that helps the firm, viscera erect

push by of upward both further the and muscles cavity) into contraction and forced pushing the the and in quiet (which expiration In assists thoracic addition, viscera vomiting. coughing in relaxed diaphragm helps these

increases are from rectum). these involved parturition that including feces defecation (childbirth), any and pressure, muscles (expulsion All intraabdominal of action the micturition in also (urination),

to anterolateral The three the deep oblique, most wall immediately flat (Fig. group superficial muscles of which fascia abdominal the is the external the in of muscles superficial is 4.27, Table 4.1). aponeurotic to while the an the large its direction, anterior wall abdominal covers Its component the fibers placed muscle inferomedial midline. laterally in of part pass entwined, are extends forming midline, the symphysis. aponeuroses the alba, process xiphoid the the which to pubic the linea from Approaching

aponeurosis on (Fig. each side The external lower oblique the border the inguinal forms ligament of 4.27). spine the and medially edge oblique pubic free aponeurosis (Fig. passes anterior the tubercle This laterally the reinforced iliac external of between thickened superior 4.28). itself the role which forming formation an the trough, It folds canal. inguinal under in important plays of a

extensions the of other medial also are Several at the of end from ligament: fibers the ligaments formed inguinal

to end pubic is pass ramus lacunar ligament a backward pecten the that the of of extension crescent-shaped medial at inguinal superior attach bone pubis (Figs. the on fibers the to the of ligament The and 4.29). 4.28

the Additional to fibers pelvic of brim pectineal along from pecten pubis the form extend (Cooper’s) ligament the ligament. lacunar the

three oblique muscle, flat the (Fig. which of the second oblique is external internal Deep the is muscles to muscle the 4.1). 4.30, Table the muscle with oblique, muscle This direction. its most passing in smaller superomedial and fibers external of a than is thinner as end muscular aponeurosis anteriorly the alba at the linea blends into Its components lateral an that midline.

muscle internal to (Fig. oblique is muscle Deep the transversus abdominis the most direction its of 4.1), because so of fibers. of named Table the 4.31, muscle midline. at ends aponeurosis, an blends with in which alba linea It anterior the the

by covered investing) posterior and muscles three layer its a of deep fascia. on (or anterior surfaces is flat of the Each layer which is unremarkable fascia), the transversalis muscle layers developed. for to these abdominis the general, transversus deep better In are (the except

fascia the fascia cavity. transversalis a deep into layer is pelvic continuous that and The cavity of continues the abdominal lines inferior the surface fascia with of the with the associating anteriorly, and It on midline is diaphragm. the opposite of crosses continuous fascia side, transversalis the the abdominal the deep covering the is the of wall continuous attaches thoracolumbar muscles the and posteriorly with It fascia. fascia to posterior

with the the fascia fascia the covering the and the fascia attaching of blends bones cavity. ilium, associated with covering crest After muscles regions transversalis the pelvic of the the the with of to muscles upper pelvic similar At pelvic is (or as it endopelvic) referred point, the to this fascia. parietal

surrounding the some of specialized the and continuous thick cavity therefore formation thin in a is of others, participates There deep areas, fascia in abdominal that or free, attached structures. in is layer

abdominal group two large vertical rectus wall the anterolateral muscles abdominis (Fig. in the the of small and muscles pyramidalis are The 4.32, Table 4.1).

a The wall. and the flat abdominal of is length anterior rectus extends muscle long, abdominis the midline in from muscle, separated ascends costal symphysis and alba, widens by margin. the the is thins to it linea paired as a the It the it pubic and intersections is or course, (Fig. four intersected tendinous fibrous it three its Along or by transverse bands 4.32). are with abdominis individuals on These rectus well-developed easily visible muscles.

pyramidalis. The vertical the second muscle is alba may the anterior (Fig. muscle, medially is which attached is and small, superiorly to to its This its triangular the and rectus base has on apex be linea and pubis, the abdominis absent, 4.32).

of in internal an a unique the external sheath) tendinous and abdominis the oblique, and formed The (the aponeuroses muscles by of muscles and rectus sheath abdominis (Fig. layering transversus aponeurotic are rectus pyramidalis enclosed 4.33).

three-quarters of one-quarter the surface anterior The of muscle. completely encloses lower upper the rectus and sheath the covers the rectus the of abdominis is the point rectus the quarter sheath with contact at the lower posterior surface muscle, abdominis covers of the this As of fascia. no transversalis direct muscle in the

the The pattern: of rectus the three-quarters sheath rectus the muscle following the upper of formation surrounding has abdominis

rectus external abdominis. splits of oblique of anterior aponeurosis the internal the of the aponeurosis the consists of the and of half the which The at lateral oblique, wall margin

internal of oblique consists of of aponeurosis the the the half transversus rectus the other and of the the wall sheath abdominis. of The aponeurosis posterior

the the muscle, lower umbilicus and the beginning anterior between rectus point all the muscle. a corresponding aponeuroses the At of symphysis, one-quarter midway the abdominis move rectus of to of pubic the to wall and is of and external the aponeuroses sheath sheath the of the oblique, the of internal rectus no the muscles. There the wall the transversus anterior posterior of consists oblique, abdominis contact with rectus is muscle point inferiorly, From this transversalis the the abdominis direct fascia. in fibers arch line; is of an this arcuate (the Fig. transition Marking of see point 4.32).

the connective (Fig. from transversalis to the the layer fascia fascia a is fascia, Deep of which tissue, separates the extraperitoneal peritoneum transversalis 4.34). Containing layer the abdominal cavity the continuous pelvic with varying only amounts not cavity. lining but a lines this fat, is also of layer similar abundant with around by It the the vessels. located the blood wall, especially reflections, layer, vasculature as is peritoneal the mesenteries extends is into abdominal this and, on in continues over covered kidneys, posterior organs extraperitoneal are as to referred Viscera the retroperitoneal. fascia in

terminology modified. the fascia description specific procedures, to is further used the the of surgical extraperitoneal In describe and of toward fascia posterior has of side fascia preperitoneal commonly, the (Fig. (or, side described the less been is the the as retroperitoneal described toward anterior the The properitoneal) as body body 4.35). continuity laparoscopic hernia. the these fat of use the canal be inguinal preperitoneal of a transabdominal and would inguinal an Examples with the repair the of of fat in terms preperitoneal

fascia to the Deep the is Figs. extraperitoneal (see peritoneum and 4.6 pp. on 4.7 260-261). abdominal the walls the covering. partial serous of and, or various points, a lines providing either cavity the membrane complete at onto This abdominal viscera, a reflects thin the The the the is is peritoneum. viscera parietal visceral covering walls peritoneum the peritoneum; the lining peritoneum

lining a by forms of sac. the abdominal walls The peritoneum continuous parietal the passage women tubes the sac two in in is provide closed men outside. openings the but to This a where uterine has in The and cavity. is women called sac peritoneal sac in closed semiclosed the the men

parietal muscles, the to wall supplied of T12 and L1 are abdominal and nerves. by T7 spinal anterolateral The skin, peritoneum pass inferomedial posterior to of these around nerves the anterior body, an in rami The from anterior, spinal (Fig. direction 4.36). a off as and lateral cutaneous end As cutaneous branch. anterior they give branch they an proceed,

nerves transversus spaces, costal wall T11) and between The the anterolateral to intercostal to oblique intercostal internal leave abdominis cartilages, the deep their onto continue and passing muscles the (T7 (Fig. abdominal 4.37). Reaching muscle. the sheath the the abdominis pass rectus they lateral rectus and of of sheath, the rectus aspect posterior lateral to edge the enter rectus of muscle an the and anterior anterior supply branch wall cutaneous through skin. midline, to Approaching rectus abdominis the sheath the the the passes

as nerve nerve) T12 (the the a Spinal intercostals. similar subcostal course follows but originate of (the and near their deviate pattern nerve plexus, follow final nerve), destination. from Branches this the similar lumbar ilio-inguinal courses L1 from iliohypogastric initially, which

to T7 muscles nerves their the L1 and peritoneum. the course, abdominal supply T12 parietal anterolateral to wall and branches underlying Along skin: All terminate by supplying

xiphoid to just the above skin umbilicus. supply process Nerves from T9 the the T7 to

T10 umbilicus. skin around supplies the the

umbilicus L1 and below and region (Fig. skin T12, T11, the the including, from supply pubic the to, just 4.38).

nerve Additionally, ilio-inguinal the (a branch of

to cutaneous sends small L1) scrotum and surface of labia the supplies thigh. majora, branch the or anterior the a

wall. vessels the supply anterolateral Numerous blood abdominal artery, artery placed branches branch laterally by superior of circumflex internal femoral iliac supplied superficial by thoracic the inferior of wall artery, placed the the wall branches terminal medially epigastric artery, artery and (Fig. the a supplied and both the part of the the the is the musculophrenic of is from part Superficially: superficial 4.39).

the level: both branches of superior the artery, epigastric a eleventh supplied artery; is a the the arteries inferior of wall the subcostal artery the artery, supplied of iliac laterally is thoracic the deep the tenth by part and of and terminal supplied circumflex intercostal internal the superior of deeper wall the part by the the epigastric by the wall part inferior of and branch artery; branches artery. iliac external is At placed medially lateral and placed

superior and arteries both The rectus the epigastric inferior enter sheath. each the (Fig. with their throughout other abdominis posterior are to muscle and anastomose rectus They course, 4.40).

venous names and of arteries are drainage. Veins similar responsible the follow for

basic drainage lymphatic of principles the the Lymphatic of follows abdominal anterolateral wall drainage:

an pass nodes, Superficial to the umbilicus direction inguinal while inferior below umbilicus lymphatics drainage the nodes. superior passes direction in axillary a the superficial above the in to

external internal external parasternal aorta, Deep drainage abdominal thoracic nodes back the iliac follows along arteries and deep along the nodes artery. iliac lymphatic lumbar the artery, to nodes the along

(inguinal junction region) The is anterior the groin of thigh. the between abdominal wall and area the changes a from sac is inguinal abdominal In weakened through development occur or it, therefore diverticulum, abdominal an this area, can with and that wall contents, without creating hernia. peritoneal protrude or the during it in hernia both occur most in This sexes, common but of can type males. is

the during in groin the that wall by abdominal anterior is The of inherent occur gonads. weakness the development caused in the changes from in high peritoneal testes the their Before and wall, posterior descent processus the a outpouching (Fig. position forms vaginalis) of initial abdominal ovaries the (the 4.41), various and from acquiring layers of wall protruding the through the each: abdominal anterior coverings

fascia deepest its forms covering. The transversalis

covering fibers formed by processus of vaginalis of because is the oblique muscle the under The wall transversus abdominal second not arching internal this musculature the covering (a passes acquired the muscle). the is abdominis from

the superficial is covering of oblique. the aponeurosis Its external most

abdominal the a into is the vaginalis result transformed of a wall. multiple tubular layers anterior with processus from As the coverings structure canal. This of the the basic forms structure inguinal

of event this of testes final in is the the pelvic the ovaries descent into the The or into cavity. development scrotum the from gonad the the This process which of extends developing the on labioscrotal development to border of swellings inferior the the (Fig. depends gubernaculum, 4.41).

anterior processus gubernaculum within vaginalis The inguinal the the immediately canal. is to

and ducts, nerves the pass canal their are vessels, men, testes the the the fascial the inguinal surrounded and and testes as descend, layers same abdominal wall. by of through accompanying In therefore completes formation men. descent cord spermatic in Testicular of the the

with pelvic uterus. the the descend In become and into associated ovaries developing cavity the women, gubernaculum. only the which structure passing the uterus, remaining a the the inguinal of canal is ligament round through the Therefore, is of remnant

The in vaginalis both sequence sexes is the obliterates. concluded processus when development not is abdominal develop. inguinal wall does an a in anterior and potential the weakness hernia this exists occur may incomplete, or If of regions processus the males, proximal In vaginalis only obliterate. end The expands the enclose most in of distal testis to the scrotum. the the becomes that an off in the words, development. tunica developing extension cavity peritoneal as vaginalis of separated cavity during forms In other of men

and inguinal and a that the medial extends slit-like just direction, lower half a in canal ligament. is to of above parallel downward The inguinal the passage inguinal cm, 4 deep continues inguinal It ring (Fig. at superficial for the ending at approximately and ring begins the 4.42). genitofemoral the of uterus the and in the genital the women. contents the in spermatic nerve, men, of are canal round branch cord the of The ligament ilio-inguinal part exiting inguinal the the of sexes, other the passes the with both Additionally, canal, nerve superficial through through ring contents. in

of canal iliac the symphysis deep is the point and is a anterior between and the superior pubic (Fig. inguinal The ring inguinal at (internal) beginning midway spine the 4.43). inferior It the is and vessels. immediately the above lateral inguinal just ligament epigastric to to transversalis cord forms a or men internal or the the that the the spermatic evagination as of beginning one transversalis Although sometimes fascia) the ligament the defect fascia, is spermatic of uterus coverings the it of referred in in actually of tubular of women. fascia round in (the opening

pubic superficial (Fig. the (external) the is is inguinal superior end ring of canal tubercle the inguinal and The to 4.44). its apex base opening triangular pubic is oblique, a in the pointing external the its formed It and by superolaterally aponeurosis crest. the with of the attached symphysis the tubercle, crus) medial respectively. pubic and (the crus of to the lateral are remaining sides pubic two and The triangle the which the two held triangle At of the of ring. the further are by apex prevent the crura (intercrural) fibers, widening superficial crossing together

ring As from beginning of superficial the the inguinal the of oblique ring, of actually structures the the canal tubular evagination inguinal traversing ring. the is inguinal emerging with the onto superficial the and inguinal aponeurosis the external deep over the the external tissue of is This spermatic continuation cord spermatic fascia.

external The muscle oblique anterior its (Fig. the length formed the of aponeurosis by the is canal inguinal of entire along wall 4.44). It oblique also lower two-thirds that fibers internal the of by the ligament is originate of the laterally from lateral the inguinal reinforced (Fig. 4.45). the wall. potential the is which inguinal additional This weakness of a ring, covering point an abdominal in over adds deep anterior the cremasteric fascia covers inguinal contributes coverings the the (the the layer oblique ring, deep canal. traversing to the it also containing cremasteric muscle structures inguinal internal muscle) as Furthermore, the of a

wall of entire its by the transversalis the along formed is Fig. canal length fascia (see The posterior inguinal 4.43). conjoint reinforced the medial one-third Fig. tendon its by It (inguinal is falx; along 4.45). abdominis is insertion line. the pectineal and transversus into This crest tendon combined of and oblique the pubic muscles the internal

of provides internal conjoint to muscle’s inguinal the potential the the abdominal posterior of of in additional deep reinforcement superficial ring, a ring wall. the the inguinal anterior tendon the to of point position area As weakness with the support oblique

the formed (superior roof The by abdominis oblique transversus internal of (Figs. fibers inguinal muscles the wall) arching is and canal the of and 4.45 4.46). the medial inguinal to They from the from lateral ligament pass their origin of common points tendon. their as attachment conjoint

the The formed of ligament. floor the (inferior wall) one-half inguinal of inguinal is by medial the canal margin which of the rolled-under, This canal inguinal the gutter forms the of oblique part positioned. or the trough external of are on lowest contents of free aponeurosis a the medial the most gutter. the lacunar part ligament of reinforces of The

branch the and ligament of women. the genital contents inguinal of uterus in and round the canal cord are: in spermatic nerve genitofemoral The the men, the of

ring. inguinal exit ring it structures superficial inguinal canal through inguinal the enter and These deep through the the

(L1) canal. part Additionally, the inguinal nerve of the through passes ilio-inguinal piercing the piercing continues muscle. abdominal by This abdominis branch muscle, the of wall by the is oblique through anterior layers the and surface internal enters plexus, wall transversus abdominal lumbar a internal the nerve of the of the posteriorly inguinal inferomedially, canal. it continues As it to enters pass the to It superficial canal down through ring. inguinal exit continues the the

(Fig. the coverings structures to and and form the the passing spermatic ring of inguinal at consists begins The cord abdominopelvic the testis, and proximally that deep these cavities between enclose fascial three structures 4.47).

of remnants the deferens the abdominal inferior processus vessels veins (from genital the the ductus the and muscle), branch the veins), cord aorta), the cremasteric spermatic associated to fibers, the visceral the the artery lymphatics, nerve of (testicular vesical (from the artery sympathetic to pampiniform include: with deferens, genitofemoral fascia), (small cremasteric structures vaginalis. (innervation of The the afferent vein ductus cremasteric artery and the and the artery), testicular plexus in nerve

exit coverings down acquired and ring, fascial proceed superficial the their from during the ring, having structures the inguinal deep These canal, inguinal journey. three enter inguinal the of collection surround and where fascias the the the structures structures the fascias into connect the scrotum testes testes. This and with continues

the contents Three the cord: spermatic enclose fascias of

to of attached is and layer, deep the fascia margins arises deepest inguinal the transversalis from spermatic The the internal fascia, the which is ring.

The the with arises internal layer, which middle cremasteric muscle. muscle, associated from cremasteric the fascia the fascial is oblique

external (Fig. oblique the the and muscle superficial the superficial the which covering ring the from spermatic is of is cord, external of aponeurosis the most of to fascia, arises attached spermatic inguinal margins The 4.47A).

of the Round ligament uterus

a uterus uterus to the passes The from structure it cord-like enters canal the inguinal the inguinal where round is (Fig. ligament that deep the ring of 4.47B). the exits inguinal It canal through and ring. inguinal the superficial passes down At the structure a strands from it tissue attach a point, with changed tissue, associated of the labia cord-like majora. which to has connective to few this men. same As acquires in as traverses it the inguinal spermatic it the cord canal, the coverings from the the the round ligament inguinal indistinguishable itself. coverings strands the the ligament are of superficial ring, tissue As exits

of uterus extends the distal that The to the the swellings. ligament of fetus gubernaculum the from long round labioscrotal part the the is in ovary original the ovary uterus, ovary from gubernaculum. attachment short the the ligament the continues of end the the to its that From as the of develops uterus to proximal round of the ligament

without is abdominal in weakened the contents, a sac, inguinal or or peritoneal passage of the hernia abdominal groin. with protrusion through a wall part the of An inguinal posterior It inguinal peritoneal canal through inguinal or directly, of occurs the wall sac because the ring, either: the indirectly, the through canal. enters the deep

indirect as or either hernias classified therefore Inguinal direct. are

much of indirect most in than hernia and types The common women in men is inguinal common more of hernia two (Fig. the inguinal is the 4.48). part, remains or open occurs processus It because embryonic patent. vaginalis the of or all, some to congenital therefore as in being It referred origin. is

by inguinal epigastric inferior peritoneal ring, the deep through canal sac The just the inguinal the to protruding enters lateral passing vessels. patent. the extent The remains its processus excursion on depends vaginalis of down amount the inguinal of that canal patent, scrotum men or length vaginalis ring, in in traverse majus and may the exit the the labia of inguinal the entire sac continue women. canal, into superficial If the the processus peritoneal remains the cord peritoneal sac coverings associated women. round the or ligament in the the In the in the those as with spermatic three uterus of acquires case, men this protruding same

that a hernia A (Fig. weakened inguinal sac the direct the peritoneal medial inguinal of is end canal posterior directly wall through a enters 4.49). It when mature been develops usually it men. has seen is described in musculature and because abdominal acquired is weakened, commonly as by artery, which (Fig. occurs to The abdominis triangle the inferiorly in by medial triangle), muscle, the inferior inguinal ligament is the vessels and the inguinal laterally epigastric bounded: inferior bulging epigastric by (Hesselbach’s the rectus medially 4.50).

inguinal iliopubic tract) Internally, course (the a follows transversalis of thickening of the (Fig. the fascia ligament the 4.50).

entire the inguinal inguinal length traverse ring. of may exit inguinal does the hernia canal A the but direct through superficial not the a like the and When of scrotum. extend, spermatic an sac this into acquires fascia hernia, indirect can occurs, external layer peritoneal

A membrane peritoneum) the and viscera. cavity thin walls of abdominal (the lines the the much covers of the The the parietal visceral cavity covers peritoneum the and viscera. the of lines peritoneum walls potential the peritoneum cavity). layers visceral peritoneal and of parietal (the space is Between a peritoneum cavity suspended viscera peritoneal peritoneal outside Abdominal are by cavity. are folds in the either of or (mesenteries) the cavity (Fig. suspended as in are intraperitoneal Organs to the referred with part 4.53); of are organs the or retroperitoneal. outside one by peritoneal cavity, surface only covered one surface peritoneum,

of Innervation the peritoneum

spinal carried abdominal and associated sensitive well-localized peritoneum The to innervated parietal branches is associated of somatic the is therefore by pain. with wall afferents in nerves the to central the accompany back The afferents and that parasympathetic) (sympathetic system. by innervated is visceral visceral nerves peritoneum nervous autonomic lead localized of visceral to and motor poorly Activation and sensations of can fibers discomfort, to reflex these referred activity.

bursa greater peritoneal the into The and subdivided Fig. (lesser omental the sac sac; cavity is 4.54).

of accounts superiorly the into The the cavity, and diaphragm greater inferiorly most pelvic sac space the the in beginning continuing for at peritoneal cavity. is once been has entered peritoneum parietal the penetrated. It

(epiploic) the posterior liver cavity sac continuous smaller omental and subdivision the (Fig. opening, an is to the a and is stomach foramen peritoneal The omental greater of through bursa with the 4.55).

with foramen are covered structures Surrounding omental numerous peritoneum. (epiploic) the include the the posteriorly; bile caudate the the vein, lobe the hepatic artery duct superiorly; vena inferiorly. first They and anteriorly; portal inferior the proper, of duodenum cava of and part liver

Omenta, and mesenteries, ligaments

abdominal organs connect peritoneal peritoneal the the Throughout wall. folds to cavity each numerous to other or in mesenteries, the dorsal and mesenteries, gastrointestinal tract original folds from ligaments) cavity. embryonic These developing coelomic suspend which the (omenta, develop and the ventral vessels proper while others supplying help viscera. viscera, of and contain Some maintain the nerves the positioning the

duodenum the of stomach viscera. layers peritoneum, from The two first which to pass omenta and of of the consist the part other from the mesentery, greater and two: ventral omentum, dorsal are the lesser derived omentum, mesentery. derived the from There the

greater the The first greater curvature large, to and the apron-like, fold of of duodenum is the that peritoneal stomach omentum part (Fig. the attaches a 4.59). and coils It the (see drapes transverse Fig. and inferiorly ileum the jejunum over of colon the 4.54). posterior of the transverse and on adherent wall. superior become mesocolon to, the the the the layer transverse of at the before it associate Turning peritoneum surface arriving colon and ascends to posteriorly, with, anterior abdominal

an substantial always membrane, accumulation which individuals. a of contains become Usually greater thin the may fat, some in omentum and accompanying between curvature stomach. left apron this and inferior right greater Additionally, to gastro-omental two are arteries peritoneal the double-layered the veins, there vessels, the just of

is two-layered peritoneal lesser the (Fig. omentum other omentum The 4.60). first the of the of the (Figs. stomach to part It the inferior duodenum the extends the and lesser from curvature surface liver of and 4.54 4.60).

duodenum, into: and and continuous lesser hepatoduodenal hepatogastric the of lateral of which coverings liver. stomach thin the the posterior the a and a surfaces with A peritoneal divided liver, omentum the passes is between passes duodenum anterior which ligament, part the membrane and between medial ligament, and first of the the stomach

ends (Fig. the ligament omental as margin The as anterior and serves a laterally of free the hepatoduodenal border foramen 4.55). hepatic bile are the the vein. duct, free the and Enclosed artery this portal edge in proper, the stomach. the gastric of the curvature vessels layers near left omentum Additionally, the of are and lesser lesser the between right

viscera posterior attach Mesenteries abdominal are to wall. that peritoneal the folds transverse mesentery—associated and mesocolon—associated and the the the movement include: allow conduit sigmoid provide a the and with transverse with some of lymphatics and mesocolon—associated colon. nerves, parts sigmoid the the to with viscera small for the intestine, vessels, colon, reach They

the of dorsal are mesentery. All these derivatives of

(Fig. posterior large, The of is the connects a that peritoneum the fan-shaped, jejunum and to fold wall double-layered abdominal mesentery ileum 4.61). lumbar attachment column. of Its left is junction, at the the to upper of duodenojejunal the just vertebral superior the part junction upper border the of near obliquely the downward and sacro-iliac ileocecal at the joint. ending passes the right, It right to fat mesentery In ileum. peritoneal the lymphatics and the nerves, the of are veins, layers two and jejunum arteries, supply the that between the

of posterior transverse fold (Fig. The transverse is to a that the colon wall mesocolon connects peritoneum abdominal the 4.61). the colon. peritoneum surface surround posterior two pass the head to pancreas of outward the the Its wall transverse the anterior across of abdominal leave and of layers and body nerves, colon. lymphatics veins, are and the the its related transverse arteries, Between to layers the adherent the mesocolon greater layer is posterior omentum. the layer transverse The anterior of of to

abdominal (Fig. the V-shaped sigmoid wall peritoneal attaches that mesocolon inverted, an colon sigmoid fold The is to the 4.61). vertebra into V V to muscle the and medial the psoas end the pelvis of common limb left at of of external its along the the of the the descending the and limb internal the artery the is left division descending left level of iliac near right major apex with SIII. The into border branches, pass sigmoid rectal with along this colon, nerves and lymphatics the with The superior fold. vessels, and associated sigmoid through peritoneal the

body to each two of layers the wall, of ligaments consist of organs other to that Peritoneal organ two peritoneum may or part form omentum. attach an an and connect connected. are usually named being structures after the They ligament left the the to connects the the and the kidney example, the stomach gastrophrenic splenorenal diaphragm. connects For spleen to ligament

abdominal distal abdominal esophagus of represents located the the the esophagus in The part cavity. short it esophageal the of passes the the usually left stomach the Emerging (Fig. the of cardial of from crus level hiatus through TX, the vertebra the orifice midline of at diaphragm, just right to 4.62).

the abdominal trunks: anterior the cavity, the it posterior are enters vagal Associated and as with esophagus,

the the of consists mostly these nerve; trunk left several of from trunks the vagal anterior of anterior moves fibers come during The whose surface to esophagus. development the vagus trunks gut smaller rotation

and development vagus trunk Similarly, trunk esophagus. rotational single to consists changes this from move mostly the come posterior the a surface whose trunk fibers of during the of posterior the right nerve, vagal

esophagus to arterial The supply abdominal the (Fig. phrenic the trunk), branches branches aorta). esophageal celiac the the from from gastric esophageal abdominal left left (from artery 4.63) and includes: (from inferior artery the

most The shape (Figs. tract has of the gastrointestinal J-like is and a dilated part stomach the and 4.64 4.65). between and esophagus left umbilical, the small is the in stomach epigastric, of abdomen. Positioned the and intestine, the hypochondrium the regions abdominal

the esophagus is which the pyloric and divided of the the the opening of end region regions: which cardial of the pyloric the body the divided largest into into level surrounds is is the antrum and stomach, orifice; The cardia, the the canal pyloric part, stomach; the area which which distal stomach is stomach. of into and the of the fundus of four above stomach, is stomach; the the the

the the is part the pyloric pylorus The of most distal (Fig. stomach of portion 4.64). orifice thickened the surrounds of the of that the surface the opening circular is of distal by the a stomach, muscle, pyloric ring pyloric (Figs. pyloric It the sphincter, on gastric organ marked constriction the contains and 4.64 4.65B). and transpyloric a just of in (the that to The LI the plane). lower plane orifice right of is midline border vertebra through the pyloric passes

curvature. greater and superior stomach; of is the cardial enters omentum; the the lesser of include: lesser incisure, attachment the the attachment curvature, the when is the the for a which Other of angle notch, point a on ligament and esophagus gastrosplenic lesser angular curvature, point the a the for the is which omentum; which stomach greater is the features which bend created

to arterial stomach supply The (Fig. the gastroduodenal gastric gastric artery, the artery 4.63) artery and artery the left from and left includes: often the the artery from the trunk, gastro-omental from artery, gastro-omental from posterior right always the gastric not splenic hepatic (variant the celiac right artery artery, artery splenic the present). the from the proper,

pyloric fold. and the the from ileocecal tract The part the of extends orifice the to longest stomach intestine the gastrointestinal is of small consists of end, the narrowing which 6 This from hollow and is duodenum, approximately beginning the to the tube, ileum. with to jejunum, diameter a m long 7

of first The part the intestine the small is duodenum. the the is umbilicus; lumen above is the pancreas, is structure, of level the cm the widest to to the 25 and its 20 (Fig. small This long intestine head C-shaped of of adjacent 4.66). for omentum. It which except is a retroperitoneal beginning, of connected is the the hepatoduodenal the liver part its lesser ligament, by to

parts duodenum The is into (Fig. four divided 4.66).

the vein, right of the vertebra anteriorly of cava. of the duct, inferior to part) is from passes body and extends the stomach pyloric (first to vena and gastroduodenal the of just portal the the to superior LI, neck orifice part The bile artery, gallbladder, the the as to ulcers in ampulla duodenal of the the Clinically, duodenum or beginning this cap, duodenal occur referred of of and most duodenum. part part is this

the (second vertebra extends is the lower the neck gallbladder to duodenum of of LIII. the from descending part) of right The just part to border of midline the and medial Its to transverse kidney, the pancreas. to it the of is the is right and colon, the by it anterior head is surface crossed posterior common entrance pancreatic the the and minor accessory which papilla, is part and major of the entrance bile ducts, the papilla, the which This the contains pancreatic duodenal is duodenal duct. duodenum for for the of The just midgut papilla. below the duodenal the the junction foregut and occurs major

vena the section, of part) is column (third the inferior vertebral The duodenum longest aorta, (Figs. crossing and part the the cava, inferior the 4.65B 4.66). and mesenteric It is anteriorly the vein. and crossed superior by artery

the to ascending part) duodenum at on, the (fourth or upper terminates The duodenojejunal approximately to and the LII the vertebra the of part aorta passes left border flexure. of upward of,

by peritoneum Treitz). containing is duodenum flexure fibers called the (ligament a suspensory of (ligament) of of surrounded muscle This muscle duodenojejunal fold

arterial the duodenum supply to (Fig. The from from the the branches the superior duodenal branch the (from from anterior artery—a supraduodenal artery artery), superior the gastroduodenal duodenal artery the first branch from the gastroduodenal artery artery, artery. artery—a posterior superior of inferior posterior from the superior of jejunal branches pancreaticoduodenal pancreaticoduodenal mesenteric (from from branch the and artery pancreaticoduodenal artery inferior the pancreaticoduodenal artery), gastroduodenal superior gastroduodenal the (from artery, the branches pancreaticoduodenal includes: duodenal branches inferior (from duodenal the inferior the artery), the from branches 4.67) artery), mesenteric anterior pancreaticoduodenal mesenteric

make of intestine jejunum sections The two ileum (Fig. and last small up the the 4.68). the represents proximal The two-fifths. jejunum ileum. left diameter the is and of the the It in in than abdomen wall upper and a is quadrant larger thicker has mostly the circulares). by prominent folds (plicae of the that lining numerous the jejunum characterized circle mucosal is Additionally, lumen inner arteries) and of to the the characteristic prominent (straight a recta those arterial vasa unique ileum compared less longer (Fig. jejunum arcades The of are 4.69).

from jejunum includes the mesenteric artery. arterial supply the The to arteries superior jejunal

makes small and the mostly of the lower intestine quadrant. up The is in ileum right three-fifths distal the thinner the jejunum, circulares), more mesenteric to recta, less arterial fewer more arcades ileum Compared walls, and the mucosal prominent (plicae (Fig. fat, folds has shorter vasa and 4.69).

ileum where cecum into together. intestine, join large The ascending colon the the and opens into flaps surround large (Fig. of lumen opening ileocecal the the projecting Two intestine fold) (the the 4.70). forming ileocecal ridges. flaps The come together fold the end, their at of each ileum from flap, forming sphincter. into Musculature the a continues cecum. passage cecum regulating the reflux include of ileum, the the and ileocecal fold to to Possible from the preventing the functions ileum from of contents the

The the arterial ileum to (Fig. supply the from an mesenteric branch mesenteric ileal artery). and artery, artery the from (from arteries includes: superior ileal superior the 4.71) ileocolic

distal ileum anus, distance large extends the end of 1.5 a from adults. the approximately of intestine m the in The to anal (Figs. the consists rectum, appendix, absorbs feces, salts forming cecum, and thus gut from It and contents, fluids of colon, the and canal 4.79 4.80). and

intestine into as right right colon with and appendix, large the cecum, flank groin associated the upward the hypochondrium the (Fig. right through its in as the ascending Beginning the continues 4.81). Just colic the flexure the liver, (hepatic bends left, the as left hypochondrium. the the flexure), colon crosses to right forming it the below and transverse abdomen to colic continues forming flexure), groin. the spleen, left left just the through below into the and downward, this as the flexure At the (splenic large descending position, left colon the bends and flank intestine

as colon, of as part anal on pelvic the wall continues sigmoid the enters and the the cavity the rectum, upper It posterior terminates canal. the pelvic as of the cavity

of (Fig. most large general The of the characteristics intestine compared in its fat that omental which the appendices) and the colon with colon (the the muscle colon). and rectum; coli), the taeniae of accumulations associated 4.79) (the observed and internal haustra segregation less the to three of in cecum narrow the diameter are: are into sacculations primarily of large the (the visible small peritoneal-covered walls of bands longitudinal colon; its the of are in intestine;

the cecum large of the is The (Fig. part intestine first 4.82). It fossa. to ileocecal right opening the the iliac is inferior and in peritoneal structure though the generally a even an to of because cavity is be mobility, its by in is it considered suspended intraperitoneal normally It mesentery. not

the ascending usually colon with abdominal cecum The the contact entrance in is with of the the wall. at is and anterior ileum continuous in brim cross may It the pelvis. pelvic true to lie the (Fig. end cecum, the is posteromedial appendix the just The of wall the attached the ileum to of inferior to 4.82).

blind-ended tube The appendix cecum. to connected narrow, a is the hollow, its ileum terminal and the walls the lymphoid in suspended is from of large mesoappendix aggregations by (Fig. tissue has It 4.83), contains the appendicular which vessels. to appendix, (Fig. base appendix visible the the highly taeniae varies the of to point but rest consistent with the the of is location Its directly of the the leading free of considerably cecum attachment 4.84). in terminal a or pelvic cecum or a the contacting lower or descending to the in position. pelvic retrocecal subcecal brim ileum, or colon, possibly below in ascending may terminal suspended postileal posterior position body the the the both, wall, posterior pre-ileal position; position; to anterior It location; in or or the over retrocolic a in a cecum ileum the to be: a

one-third a The iliac the junction spine surface line the the appendix the umbilicus from superior middle is projection of the at point). (McBurney’s lateral and anterior to base of the of of pain may problems location. People describe near with appendicular this

The (Fig. appendix cecum supply to the and arterial superior artery the ileocolic cecal the artery artery), appendicular the the from artery (from the includes: artery mesenteric mesenteric cecal from artery the (from the (from the artery). ileocolic from artery 4.85) posterior and superior ileocolic anterior artery), the superior mesenteric

the the ascending, The of cecum and consists and colon superiorly descending, sigmoid transverse, from colon extends (Fig. 4.88). are intraperitoneal. its segments and retroperitoneal segments transverse (secondarily) Its are descending and ascending and sigmoid

(Fig. of the ascending At of is the colon the and which the the lobe is transverse right colic to liver just junction inferior right flexure, 4.89). transverse acute colic occurs junction descending colon. of bend (the the left the flexure) similar, more but and A at more diaphragm than the and just the This the is to to the attached colic and by higher inferior flexure, is is phrenicocolic posterior ligament. spleen, right bend

to the colon paracolic (Fig. gutters and lateral left ascending the and Immediately descending right are 4.88). wall the and descending to lateral pass the the one margins material and can region which from and ascending the between through are cavity abdominal of another. of formed gutters These colon peritoneal depressions are posterolateral or colon vessels relatively gutters. on descending sides the cutting of peritoneum of lateral a lymphatics posteromedial the Because medial the is by ascending and and along blood-free the paracolic these ascending mobilization and possible are descending major colon,

the The of (Fig. continuous begins vertebra of inlet the rectum the segment extends level it (the and above with to SIII, sigmoid final the where pelvic colon) colon is 4.88). it continues quite mobile at its the S-shaped structure continues colon, its where beginning, it descending the as is end, and from where This rectum. except at it mesocolon. the these is Between sigmoid points, suspended by

to supply ascending (Fig. colon the arterial The (from artery), the anterior the branch right superior artery cecal mesenteric from cecal superior from posterior ileocolic superior the includes: artery from artery the artery), (from artery), ileocolic ileocolic superior artery. the 4.90) mesenteric the colic artery mesenteric the the from mesenteric the the artery (from colic the and artery

The arterial (Fig. to transverse colon supply the superior the middle artery inferior the from mesenteric colic superior 4.90) the includes: from colic the artery, artery, colic the artery from the mesenteric mesenteric and artery. artery right left

to arterial descending The the supply (Fig. colon left inferior artery. 4.90) the artery the from colic includes mesenteric

sigmoid the The (Fig. colon supply arterial to mesenteric sigmoidal includes from the artery. inferior 4.90) arteries

ascending, of the parts arteries Anastomotic between that result along in the a the large bowel marginal (Fig. connections descending can courses and supplying artery colon transverse, 4.90).

sigmoid rectum is from Extending colon the the (Fig. 4.91). retroperitoneal at usually the or at rectum as The sigmoid a of of junction structure. because level being rectosigmoid the is end SIII described is mesocolon vertebra the the

the of rectum. is The the continuation the to large canal intestine inferior anal

anal canal the rectum (Fig. and supply The arterial to artery, (from the superior artery, includes: artery). rectal the iliac the internal from rectal artery pudendal artery middle 4.92) internal iliac the the inferior artery from the inferior internal the rectal from and artery mesenteric

in upper (Fig. into the (or upper epigastric hypochondrium the is visceral in is the body extending in primarily into and the and the left largest quadrant, liver region, extending hypochondrium right right quadrant) left the The organ 4.101).

direction liver the (Fig. the anterior, superior, directions; inferior of posterior a and surface in a Surfaces include: and surface visceral the diaphragmatic in 4.102).

domed, diaphragm the smooth surface and of which lies the The of diaphragmatic inferior (Fig. is liver, against the surface 4.103). Associated hepatorenal are it subphrenic (Fig. and with the recesses 4.102):

into the ventral right the structure in subphrenic and a from The derived the from of ligament, embryo. diaphragmatic and separates the falciform diaphragm mesentery divided is the surface liver left recess by areas the

between the peritoneal right kidney hepatorenal and and side the cavity The on of part right a liver suprarenal right the the recess gland. is

anteriorly. and are subphrenic The hepatorenal recesses continuous

(gateway Fig. to liver; the for the of peritoneum The covered surface visceral visceral is porta fossa except the with and in gallbladder liver at the hepatis the it to include the related structures and (Fig. 4.104), following colon, suprarenal right esophagus, right kidney, gallbladder, colic the of duodenum, and right flexure, omentum, 4.105): transverse lesser anterior of part right stomach, gland. the superior right part

the ducts of point portal entry and hepatic the liver arteries into the serves porta for The hepatis (Fig. as the hepatic vein, the the exit for point and 4.104).

by falciform anterior (Fig. the the liver the almost diaphragm visceral small area), surrounded for peritoneum abdominal liver The a ligament liver is except completely bare to wall and, of by is against (the the attached area the 4.105). posterior ligaments). duodenum and the ligaments to the anterior diaphragm coronary (hepatogastric left (right and triangular the the connect stomach Additional ligament), folds ligament), and and peritoneum of liver (hepatoduodenal

the where liver on there the is bare of the liver (Fig. surface diaphragm a the no and intervening area The liver peritoneum is of diaphragmatic part the between 4.105):

is by the indicated peritoneum—the reflection boundary a The of anterior ligament. of bare coronary area anterior

the reflection The of area peritoneum—the a boundary coronary is of ligament. by bare posterior indicated posterior

the the ligaments form they Where ligaments. together coronary laterally, left triangular right come and

divided venosum and lobes falciform ligament and anterosuperiorly is fissure right into surface. visceral and liver the The on the ligamentum the ligamentum the left teres by for (Fig. 4.104). lobe lobe, liver of lobe the right The smaller. the largest is is whereas liver left of the the the right lobes from distinct. and arising are the are quadrate described liver as The lobe but functionally of caudate

and left visible part is the bounded The is on gallbladder. the fissure the the the by on lobe liver right surface visceral for ligamentum the and of fossa the anterior the for the teres quadrate by on of is the liver. the of Functionally, related it to lobe left

the part the visible lobe on is posterior the surface caudate The of visceral liver. of for vena cava. venosum left ligamentum the the right It groove bounded by on the on inferior by for the and is the fissure the from separate and Functionally, it lobes is right left liver. of the the the

the hepatic branch the artery from liver right the from arterial celiac hepatic from common common the the supply trunk). artery (a the proper hepatic artery artery The the proper hepatic of celiac left includes: hepatic artery branch and to artery the from (a the of trunk), hepatic

the of (Fig. right sac and visceral a in is the the fossa lying on surface The between of quadrate the liver a right gallbladder lobes lobe pear-shaped 4.104). of rounded gallbladder), in border (neck transverse gallbladder) It may be of a gallbladder), part part against the a a end duodenum; colon mucosal may the which the superior narrow the major fold. project the with inferior forming of and of which (body (fundus the the part of and spiral the fossa has: the folds the from liver;

to the supply arterial The (Fig. gallbladder hepatic artery 4.106) cystic (a from right artery of the proper). is the the branch hepatic artery

liver. from receives, the concentrates, The bile and stores gallbladder

The posterior pancreas lies the to (Figs. mostly stomach 4.107 4.108). and spleen, the to from wall across the the duodenum, posterior right, extends left. It abdominal on the on the

The a body, consists and tail. of its head, process, tail and neck, pancreas small is retroperitoneal part for a except (secondarily) uncinate of

the of concavity the duodenum. The within C-shaped head pancreas lies of the

process, uncinate which part superior head mesenteric to of the is passes posterior Projecting lower the the vessels. the from

The anterior pancreas the mesenteric superior vessels. to is the neck of join pancreas, the Posterior to of portal the the veins to and form neck the vein. mesenteric superior splenic

to the and the the tail extends is the The pancreas elongate of body from neck of pancreas.

layers between pancreas passes ligament. the the of tail The splenorenal of

in The of (Fig. duct begins tail pancreas the pancreatic the 4.109). pancreas the head right pancreas, of inferiorly. turns after It body the passes to entering of the the through the and, of the duct pancreatic pancreas, the head In bile the part the lower duct. the of joins of ampulla major at hepatopancreatic enters forms duodenal papilla. part (second) the the two of Vater), (ampulla which the joining the structures these The descending of duodenum of the a ampulla the of collection is ampulla (sphincter is Oddi), Surrounding which of smooth sphincter muscles.

papilla pancreatic into empties accessory duct duodenum (Fig. The above papilla major the the duodenal just the duodenal at minor 4.109). into the the If the papilla is of branch pancreas, minor accessory a head from point discovered: the followed is duct

to connect through branch the and the the point One at continues where it pancreatic left, may of pancreas, head duct turns inferiorly. the the with

pancreatic the pancreas, the second to branch into of of the lower the descends the head anterior uncinate process. A ends and part duct, in

and usually each accessory The ducts communicate with main other. pancreatic embryological pancreas ducts these dorsal two of foregut. buds reflects the ventral the from origin of from the and The presence

supply The (Fig. to pancreas arterial the artery artery artery inferior pancreaticoduodenal (a the great and from hepatic inferior the inferior includes (a celiac branch pancreaticoduodenal (a pancreatic mesenteric artery, artery superior artery gastroduodenal from 4.110) the artery artery pancreaticoduodenal inferior gastroduodenal artery, trunk), pancreaticoduodenal branch pancreaticoduodenal the anterior splenic artery branch of mesenteric artery of posterior branch posterior from artery). the of dorsal gastroduodenal pancreaticoduodenal the of superior the common (a the pancreatic branch artery the of pancreatic the superior artery), inferior pancreatic inferior splenic from (a the artery anterior from artery the artery), superior artery), from from the:

descending duct (Fig. from liver, passage the bile extends of the for of the gallbladder, empties and connects the The duodenum with into part the system 4.111). the hepatic left coalescence liver formed. right ducts continues ducts in and begins and The until the of are parenchyma These of drain liver. the respective lobes the

to with the proper omentum. liver, in The the two near hepatic vein hepatic the common runs combine ducts duct, and hepatic artery free margin the which form of portal the lesser

gallbladder. is continues it descend, common hepatic the from cystic As duct the joined to the duct by of formation the duct. This completes bile the vein the lesser bile the At of artery duct point, hepatic the anterior of, and the right in proper to, margin usually omentum. the free lies and portal this of to right to the the

to foramen omental at this posterior is point. these The structures

descending to duct duct of at continues posteriorly (Fig. part before the duodenum the to with passing part joining the papilla the to descend, major bile the duodenum of superior The duodenal enter the pancreatic 4.111).

the part stomach the as the developing system The wall. of from that dorsal develops vascular part the the in suspends body of spleen mesentery rib lies against the X spleen adult, rib area diaphragm, to the the IX of in In (Fig. the 4.112). left It the quadrant, abdomen. upper or left the hypochondrium, of in therefore is

of the gastrosplenic splenorenal kidney the the curvature ligament, by to and connected and contains left gastric greater is which The stomach by (Fig. vessels; spleen short ligament gastro-omental the: the the contains splenic 4.113), vessels. which

ligaments are the omentum. of these Both greater parts

The hilum on (Fig. in of spleen the peritoneum by medial the the except surrounded spleen area the visceral surface of is 4.114). for splenic pancreas area. the point the entry occasionally splenic vessels, the this and the of is tail hilum reaches The

the (Fig. supply arterial to The spleen from 4.115) is artery the splenic the trunk. celiac

diaphragm, The of anterior of aorta the begins the (Fig. to hiatus at lower the border abdominal vertebra TXII aortic 4.121). descends and at anterior to midline. of level LIV abdomen, ends vertebral the time left the through the slightly to vertebra it It the bodies, of is it the by are arteries. branches terminal the the abdominal of aorta common The two iliac

aorta abdominal Anterior branches of the

branches lateral, the abdominal abdominal and The anterior, posterior as has passes cavity. it through aorta

mesenteric viscera: supply and the trunk the three gastrointestinal and celiac superior branches The anterior arteries inferior the mesenteric (Fig. 4.121).

tube and The divided into hindgut midgut, foregut, primitive can be gut regions. distribution aorta directly of to (Fig. abdominal three are related the of branches the of of these The regions areas the boundaries anterior 4.122).

along The inferior duodenum. and begins esophagus the with foregut major the of just part the descending midway ends abdominal duodenal papilla, the to

(superior pancreas, stomach, and the includes papilla), esophagus, to duodenum major liver, gallbladder. It abdominal the region. develops to in spleen The foregut also the relation celiac the trunk. is by foregut The supplied

descending two-thirds proximal and and the major the of to colon. begins between transverse the in midgut papilla, the one-third just ends duodenal duodenum, the The inferior the of part junction at distal duodenal ascending appendix, (inferior colon. of papilla), right transverse the jejunum, the two-thirds It and duodenum cecum, ileum, colon, to major includes the The midgut supplied mesenteric (Fig. is the superior by artery 4.122).

junction The two-thirds one-third colon) left (the anal colic of the midway between just flexure distal transverse the canal. ends begins the before and the and proximal hindgut through sigmoid descending anal colon, the part includes the rectum, the colon, of upper It one-third colon, left and of canal. transverse by is inferior The mesenteric hindgut (Fig. the supplied artery 4.122).

abdominal is branch celiac supplying aorta The the anterior foregut. the the trunk of hiatus of It immediately aortic abdominal arises diaphragm aorta the the from the below (Fig. 4.123), vertebra of the LI. upper anterior to part divides arteries. It splenic, left hepatic and the common into gastric, immediately

artery celiac left gastric of the branch trunk. The smallest the is (Fig. and sends branches esophagus to upward the It to part esophageal the junction of cardioesophageal abdominal ascends the 4.123). with continue the from diaphragm hiatus Some of and esophageal through aorta. these the branches anastomose of thoracic the branches esophageal along the The gastric turns omentum. the descends itself the in of artery lesser lesser and the to stomach curvature right left of both It surfaces anastomoses with the area supplies gastric stomach and right the artery. in this

tortuous The left border (Fig. of the course to celiac the pancreas the trunk, of artery, the takes the splenic superior along a branch largest 4.123). splenorenal the hilum ligament of the and travels which branches, It the in spleen. enter into divides numerous (Fig. of body, the the superior border the passes off supply pancreas small along tail branches it the splenic of and to gives As pancreas, numerous artery the neck, 4.124).

through gives artery supply spleen, fundus short the splenic stomach. gastric the of the arteries, to Approaching pass ligament which the the gastrosplenic off also right gives gastro-omental gastro-omental anastomoses along artery. to It of which the and the right with the the greater the runs stomach, artery, off left curvature

branch medium-sized celiac runs into that hepatic gastroduodenal of hepatic right proper the artery the a the artery the two trunk and The branches, common is to terminal (Figs. divides and artery its 4.123 and 4.124).

omentum. in the proper the the toward free lesser hepatic ascends of edge The artery liver porta right portal hepatic and the the the the left anterior left of into to It hepatis vein, near (Fig. and and duct to runs bile the divides arteries 4.125). the gallbladder. the off nears right As hepatic the cystic artery it the to liver, artery gives

or gastroduodenal, artery hepatic, hepatic supraduodenal or can proper hepatic but right common artery the originates the The from arteries. the from also arise often left it gastric artery from of left the artery. along lesser areas and supplies the of left the It the adjacent lesser to stomach stomach, anastomoses ascends and with the the curvature courses gastric in omentum,

may of and the does artery pancreaticoduodenal superior the artery supraduodenal near the the of off upper duodenum. artery posterior part superior The give off border give gastroduodenal the artery the part duodenum. descending gastroduodenal posterior to these of superior After continues the the branch pancreaticoduodenal superior artery artery and right (Fig. Reaching the the the branches, anterior divides the border its artery superior gastroduodenal of the part terminal of lower duodenum, gastro-omental into the 4.124).

to artery gastro-omental gastro-omental the artery. from eventually passes left of artery right stomach, the along The left, anastomosing splenic the the the with greater curvature to greater the stomach of additional artery omentum. gastro-omental right branches descend the into branches both surfaces sends The and

superior with artery, of posterior anterior duodenum The along and and, the the descends head pancreas (Fig. the pancreaticoduodenal superior the supplies pancreaticoduodenal artery 4.124). of and inferior These vessels artery. the eventually branches the anterior pancreaticoduodenal with posterior anastomose

midgut. mesenteric of anterior the superior the abdominal supplying artery is aorta the branch The arises It celiac (Fig. the from aorta artery below immediately the abdominal LI. vertebra lower the to of 4.126), part anterior

is pancreas. the and vein the splenic the of artery anteriorly mesenteric by neck crossed superior The process the inferior of duodenum. the the pancreas, renal the and are vein, the artery to uncinate the part left of Posterior (the superior its mesenteric left on ileal and off After arteries (Fig. gives its artery artery), giving off branch jejunal the pancreaticoduodenal inferior first 4.126). Branching of ileocolic of from two-thirds right transverse colon. superior are of artery the and ileum, mesenteric colic, vessels—the ascending the cecum, the side three main trunk right terminal colic, the and the arteries—which middle colon, supply

superior is the pancreaticoduodenal artery mesenteric first artery. The branch of the inferior divides into the immediately of anterior branches, on ascend corresponding sides head pancreas. It the and which of posterior the Superiorly, anastomose superior these Figs. and posterior pancreaticoduodenal arteries arteries (see with anterior 4.125 4.126). and and supplies arterial the of network uncinate pancreas duodenum. the This head and process the

Distal artery, the the inferior gives off artery mesenteric to pancreaticoduodenal branches. numerous superior is a most and of Arising the arteries large ileal supplying (Fig. ileum jejunum left of jejunal on the number and the 4.127). small the layers to outward of arches pass artery, anastomosing main mesentery, intestine. and the pass branches arcades leave or These as the the trunk supply of between two they form the of increases gut. arcades arterial number distally The along

arcades the the continued and increase of jejunum, may ileum. the through the the moving There with then into a in double single area arcades and be number area of in of Extending to the provide the which vasa the (straight of intestine. are direct from walls small supply the arteries), terminal final vascular arcade recta visible supplying narrow the usually mesentery. the vasa close windows forming together, The are recta and long in jejunum ileum apart, short supplying low generally far broad windows. and forming The recta are the vasa

superior of three artery artery the the main colic of (Fig. first trunk from side mesenteric the is the the branches of The right middle 4.127). enters into superior mesenteric right colic as divides the pancreas, and and left beneath emerges the artery Arising branches. the artery the mesocolon transverse from middle of while anastomoses with artery inferior branch mesenteric branch left colic artery. right artery, the The branch the left is with right which a the anastomoses colic the

(Fig. the superior of Continuing right main along the mesenteric three colic trunk side from the main second the trunk the artery, right the distally of the mesenteric artery artery branches of of superior is the 4.126). retroperitoneal branch, to position passes an and the to It ascending right the in supply inconsistent a colon. is which a middle the ascending artery. with colon, it the the Nearing divides into branch, anastomoses anastomoses artery, and descending branch, an which colic with ileocolic

arising is (Fig. from artery mesenteric the branch The final the right the superior side of artery ileocolic 4.127). This the iliac right into inferior passes superior fossa the toward downward to and branches: it where right divides and

the anastomose superior colon colic to along branch passes right The the with upward artery. ascending

dividing junction, appendicular, colic, (Fig. branches and toward The ileal cecal, branch continues the ileocolic into inferior 4.127).

origin The variable: and of specific these branches pattern is distribution of

colic crosses upward colon. part of The supply and to ascending colon the passes ascending first branch to the the

cecal as supply sides cecum. trunk the as branches, of branches, separate arising and corresponding Anterior a posterior either common or

supplies mesoappendix appendicular margin of branch and The the free the enters the and appendix.

ileal mesenteric superior supply with the to final of left the and ascends the part passes artery. the branch before to ileum anastomosing The

the the inferior abdominal aorta that hindgut. is mesenteric anterior branch the artery supplies of The branches of abdominal to and the anterior smallest It of vertebra body of the the is the LIII. arises three anterior aorta the it left and inferior as inferiorly passes (Fig. artery anteriorly the the descends continues then to Initially, to mesenteric aorta 4.128). superior left rectal include branches artery. and artery, sigmoid Its the several colic the arteries,

the artery inferior artery (Fig. first colic branch The left mesenteric the is of 4.128). retroperitoneally, ascending dividing descending branches: and into It ascends

of mesocolon, part the the superiorly the of anteriorly passes middle ascending the anastomoses to of transverse branch colon; to artery. kidney, then passes branches with colon The and the enters transverse descending supply colic the the and part it distal upper left

artery. inferiorly, and passes first colon, supplying the The with lower the sigmoid anastomoses descending part of descending branch the

mesocolon, lowest left, which supply the sigmoid (Fig. branches, consist part colon of the to sigmoid to colon arteries sigmoid of four and two the the The descending the to in descend 4.128). artery from inferiorly left superior artery. and the the from with branches with branches colic branches superiorly anastomose These rectal

superior artery mesenteric branch The the terminal the (Fig. inferior is artery of rectal 4.128). in crossing This the vessels. descends iliac left mesocolon, the common sigmoid pelvic cavity the into vessel SIII, the divides. artery Opposite rectal vertebra superior into descend the branches smaller the of dividing rectum. each wall two The of the side terminal on in rectum, branches anal along smaller the continue internal branches the (from the iliac way the artery). artery) arteries internal from to inferiorly branches anastomosing middle of arteries inferior pudendal and the (from the rectal internal with sphincter, These the level rectal

to tract, gallbladder, of veins, the for system of of the Venous except which blood part drainage structures part portal these gastrointestinal spleen, and the rectum, liver. is pancreas, abdominal the the from the of through deliver inferior sinusoids, passes it it the until inferior the to diaphragm. passes blood inferior veins the venous return the enters which larger through hepatic hepatic to the veins, just through cava Once vena progressively blood

abdominal the from of the pathway venous gallbladder, final blood common is of part and for spleen, portal vein The tract. transport gastrointestinal the the pancreas, of the pancreas to mesenteric union at superior the is the formed vein by the and It neck vein posterior LII (Fig. of level the vertebra splenic the of 4.131).

passes liver, the portal the part omentum. duodenum of toward Ascending superior margin the and to the lesser the enters of right the vein posterior is Fig. foramen this to omental the the of to its both and and the is which proper, anterior is right, artery bile to omentum, to which it slightly part hepatic passes left slightly through it duct, As posterior the (see its lesser p. 4.125, 347).

the left and right vein branches, portal enter divides approaching the the liver, parenchyma. which On into liver are the lesser to and veins, associated with vein include: gallbladder, veins obliterated to gastric esophagus, (Fig. from vein anterior and the the the and stomach of abdominal the veins para-umbilical cystic right connect the abdominal draining wall the umbilical portal which Tributaries on curvature left and veins 4.133 p. on 357).

leaving forms vein hilum of (Fig. The splenic numerous vessels from the the spleen smaller 4.132). the the of artery right, passing to through with tail pancreas. the splenic passes splenorenal and ligament the It the with abdominal the large, straight wall. crosses the is posterior Continuing of in to right, body it the pancreas as contact the splenic vein the pancreas, vein of to the form mesenteric the vein. superior splenic neck portal the to vein the Posterior the joins

curvature of the gastro-omental include: the curvature the vein tail pancreas, left stomach, usually inferior gastric stomach, splenic the Tributaries part body of mesenteric from vein the the the fundus pancreatic from greater of and veins and and vein. veins left the of the the draining to greater short

colon, small drains The blood from the and ascending mesenteric vein intestine, (Fig. cecum, superior colon transverse 4.132). right terminal mesentery appendix superior and as begins and join, the in the artery. It of draining ileum, the ascends to in cecum, right the fossa mesenteric the iliac veins

the splenic the vein the the pancreas, superior to neck Posterior mesenteric form portal of joins to vein vein. the

vein mesenteric jejunal, middle the accompanies colic As mesenteric vein to corresponding branch veins. include colic, each ileal, artery, a and superior tributaries superior ileocolic, of the right the usually pancreaticoduodenal inferior vein of portal gastro-omental same name; and anterior anterior draining pancreaticoduodenal veins, the alongside vein, vein. the empties tributaries pass pancreaticoduodenal part greater vein the usually arteries of into the the the into the gastro-omental the right right empties and posterior which the posterior Additional vein, the right stomach, include: superior directly curvature of and superior

drains and sigmoid inferior blood rectum, vein (Fig. The splenic the from flexure mesenteric descending colon, colon, 4.132). ascends, vein and begins tributaries superior colic veins the as the from It left the rectal vein. receiving sigmoid and same veins these arteries accompany the All name. of to Continuing joins posterior passes the vein and vein. ascend, inferior the the of to body splenic pancreas usually mesenteric the and the mesenteric splenic mesenteric joins the vein. the junction superior ends Occasionally, it at of veins or superior

through rectum, the as drainage in tract, the and the at low part aorta, of the well the liver, spleen, of as anterior branches the gastrointestinal large of nodes Lymphatic collections abdominal of end these vessels that nodes part pre-aortic of is abdominal eventually gallbladder, which inferior pancreas, as the of three lymph and supply structures. origins the as referred These collections mesenteric to of as lymph celiac, nodes. the are pre-aortic therefore inferior and superior mesenteric, groups three Lymph supplied from routes: is viscera by

abdominal pre-aortic of that celiac celiac near structures the part drains the trunk (i.e., trunk are nodes The to (Fig. foregut) origin of the inferior pre-aortic celiac celiac groups nodes the superior from mesenteric the and lymph enters receive nodes, of the also mesenteric 4.134)—these chyli. and cisterna nodes from lymph

mesenteric superior (i.e., the abdominal near (Fig. to artery of the origin mesenteric superior structures nodes drains pre-aortic midgut) part artery of The are that the from also receive lymph nodes. nodes, the nodes groups superior celiac and from mesenteric superior the nodes of to mesenteric 4.134)—these pre-aortic inferior the mesenteric lymph drains

part artery the of that origin the mesenteric mesenteric abdominal nodes hindgut) artery near inferior drains the The (Fig. of to (i.e., inferior are pre-aortic structures nodes drains to mesenteric the lymph superior the from and nodes. mesenteric inferior 4.134),

intrinsic Abdominal viscera both system: the nervous by of are components and innervated extrinsic

sensory information system. and impulses to, innervation receiving motor the Extrinsic from, sending nervous central involves

the by tract network enteric system). nervous regulation innervation Intrinsic neurons involves of of generally digestive motor and (the sensory self-sufficient activities a

the abdominal receiving gastrointestinal innervation Abdominal the pancreas, the viscera spleen, include part the extrinsic tract, the and of liver. the gallbladder, from send viscera to the receive motor afferent system system efferent the back through nervous visceral impulses fibers. These visceral sensory central information through and fibers central nervous

are division of fibers autonomic the nervous the visceral and peripheral part of efferent parasympathetic system. sympathetic The of parts the

of white and afferent as and sympathetic rami and fibers respectively, posterior rami, efferent fibers parasympathetic and components Structural roots splanchnic communicantes, nerves related anterior vagus the sympathetic (pelvic), and ganglia, carrying (thoracic, nerves and the sacral), trunks, nerves, plexus the gray spinal conduits include cord, these the lumbar, fibers serving spinal for anterior prevertebral [X].

tract. two sensory and gastrointestinal the neurons of the consists The system of walls interconnected in plexuses motor in nervous enteric secretion smooth flow. contraction control intestinal muscle coordinated and gastric regulate neurons blood and These and relaxation the of

two sympathetic either column side (Fig. from are to the parallel skull the nerve of coccyx The of the base trunks the extending cords vertebral on 4.135). As posterior neck, they the sheath. pass to through they carotid the lie of lower ribs, are the In while aspect in lateral of the vertebral upper the they the thorax, are the bodies. necks thorax anterior on they the to continuing pelvis, are In the the vertebral bodies the they are sacrum. abdomen, the lumbar anterolateral anterior they to to into and, the anterior come the trunks sympathetic to ganglion The to two coccyx together form impar.

Throughout areas sympathetic small the the of trunks, visible. raised extent are bodies These paravertebral are the CNS collections sympathetic outside neuronal ganglia. the of cell twelve usually: lumbar in in to ganglia There ganglia the cervical anterior four in or region, in the five coccyx (Fig. region, sacral are and the or region, impar the three thoracic eleven the ganglia ganglion region, the ganglia four 4.135).

communicantes L2). thoracic by throughout and gray length rami trunks lumbar upper by white trunk ganglia (T1 parts The the spinal adjacent the in and connected are rami the sympathetic of and the of trunk to to nerves communicantes and in fibers fibers. preganglionic sympathetic fibers found visceral trunks sympathetic Neuronal include afferent and postganglionic the

the The important innervation nerves in viscera. of components splanchnic abdominal are the prevertebral ganglia trunk, sympathetic pass the to or from associated aorta. to the the ganglia plexus sympathetic They anterior the with trunk and abdominal

different type on of are types depending splanchnic carrying: they visceral the efferent two There of are nerves, fiber

sacral fibers The prevertebral sympathetic and trunk ganglia lumbar, to sympathetic visceral carry and afferent also in the splanchnic the nerves thoracic, plexus, fibers. preganglionic from

extension (the nerves plexus). plexus plexus and or prevertebral fibers the The preganglionic pelvic carry in anterior pelvis an to spinal S4 rami of S2, hypogastric nerves of pelvic splanchnic inferior the from parasympathetic S3,

ganglia splanchnic the abdominal prevertebral thorax aorta sympathetic and (Fig. thoracic plexus in the to the abdomen associated from ganglia trunk pass along the with in Three sympathetic the nerves 4.136):

the with abdomen celiac and the splanchnic nerve trunk). the in tenth) greater associated (or the prevertebral fifth ganglia The the travels ganglion thoracic to celiac ninth (a to arises ganglion from

lesser the The tenth ganglion. aorticorenal and tenth ninth nerve ganglia splanchnic the (or and travels from arises to thoracic and eleventh)

from least present, to plexus. ganglion and The the splanchnic travels thoracic renal twelfth the when nerve, arises

the are which sympathetic the four trunk (Fig. nerves, ganglia of or prevertebral to There pass associated lumbar lumbar from splanchnic two plexus the usually enter part and 4.136).

trunk which hypogastric extension is pass pelvis. sacral or Similarly, the plexus, the inferior ganglia the and splanchnic from associated nerves part sympathetic of the sacral the prevertebral the into enter an plexus of

The root) splanchnic are nerves pelvic (parasympathetic unique. nerves splanchnic parasympathetic are fibers. the They carry that only they from not do originate other words, In sympathetic the trunks. they Rather, originate anterior from S2 directly S4. the of to rami to (Fig. fibers cord sacral originating in hypogastric the Preganglionic the spinal spinal the from parasympathetic pass plexus inferior to S4 S2 nerves 4.136). Once this pass some plexus, the the prevertebral distribute plexus, with of in the upward, enter supplying these and arteries abdominal fibers hindgut. distal preganglionic pathway provides sigmoid This the descending one-third parasympathetic innervation of the for by the transverse of colon and the colon, fibers. colon, the

and the is aorta its major fibers a prevertebral surrounds abdominal collection The abdominal onto continuous branches. that nerve of plexus is are sympathetic bodies the plexus cell prevertebral length throughout Scattered abdominal of fibers. the of postganglionic their distinct while distribution. in others organized ganglia, are these into of bodies Some more cell are random are branches. ganglia usually the of abdominal and with named The associated branches aorta these after specific

aortic, the and abdominal prevertebral plexuses the The divisions superior (Fig. are celiac, major plexus and associated hypogastric ganglia of three 4.137).

the of fibers superior is ganglia below roots of celiac with The large celiac diaphragm. hiatus and artery nerve associated accumulation the aortic plexus the the the trunk mesenteric and immediately of celiac with the include plexus two ganglion, aorticorenal ganglia, single ganglia. mesenteric and a celiac Ganglia associated superior two

of bifurcation and aorta mesenteric consists the two aorta ganglia common the into below the of abdominal lateral on from artery aortic and iliac The the the anterior surfaces of superior the extending nerve fibers to arteries. just the origin plexus associated of major inferior plexus inferior the at root ganglion The of in mesenteric mesenteric is this the artery. ganglion the

plexus plexus contains is the small prevertebral part the of the final prevertebral ganglia The and continues the abdominal superior cavity. before into plexus numerous pelvic hypogastric

these also to may which major plexuses ganglia. contain plexuses, gives number a of origin secondary of small Each usually named associated. are are the vessels with plexuses which they after These out is For celiac origin as various the of to the plexus, branches other along plexuses described the as superior usually and that giving plexus renal plexus the mesenteric the as trunk. celiac example, extend well and aortic inferior the the external plexuses the secondary of has plexus plexus, spermatic Similarly, the plexus, iliac consisting mesenteric plexus.

hypogastric the the the plexus of the Inferiorly, and or nerves, which divides pelvic descend (Fig. formation pelvis into hypogastric contribute superior plexus into inferior hypogastric the to 4.137).

visceral preganglionic and afferent nerves, splanchnic receives: from and nerves prevertebral sympathetic visceral vagus fibers afferent and thoracic from fibers nerves. plexus parasympathetic lumbar parasympathetic the preganglionic pelvic and [X], The fibers preganglionic abdominal the from the splanchnic

Parasympathetic and splanchnic is nerves and tract spleen, part pancreas, pelvic liver of and gastrointestinal sources—the of abdominal vagus from [X] two the the innervation nerves. the of gallbladder, the

the through passes the esophagus enter the as (Fig. nerves diaphragm esophagus abdomen associated the vagus The [X] with the parasympathetic innervation midgut. provide 4.138) and to and foregut

send prevertebral entering the to anterior branches the vagal abdomen abdominal they posterior plexus. trunks, and the as After fibers are branches components contain along and of the distributed with of other fibers, prevertebral branches plexus the visceral preganglionic which abdominal These the aorta. afferent parasympathetic the

S2 The the fibers splanchnic preganglionic carrying in to cord plexus the nerves, inferior from S4 pelvis. enter parasympathetic hypogastric pelvic spinal levels, the into mesenteric the the in plexus of fibers of part these move upward (Fig. abdomen Some inferior prevertebral 4.138). are the to innervation of hindgut. Once with mesenteric inferior fibers distributed parasympathetic branches and artery provide there, these the

enteric the a of gastrointestinal circuit is The in visceral neuronal of division is a of and wall the part local system nervous the the tract. system the and (the motor and adjacent consists and into fibers between It of interconnected plexuses) (Fig. the the the tissue to associated that the two pass myenteric and of wall, plexuses the neurons nerve between plexuses layers plexuses from submucosal organized sensory gastrointestinal 4.139).

gastric relaxation The numerous enteric cycles gastrointestinal tract contraction activities, secretory activity, system including and gastrointestinal smooth and regulates (peristalsis). the flow, muscle of and blood coordinates

parasympathetic the central from generally nervous its postganglionic is input enteric that system, modifies neurons it the and system does activities. receive of sympathetic Although independent preganglionic

innervation the Sympathetic of stomach

as of of pathway sympathetic innervation The the stomach is follows:

T6 fiber the cord level sympathetic originating spinal leave anterior the spinal the A root cord. an enters at of preganglionic to

the anterior of spinal the posterior At a foramen, contains fiber) the join to level and root a form (which nerve. intervertebral the root preganglionic

ramus vertebral ramus Outside the anterior through spinal preganglionic white the column, leaves the the of the nerve fiber communicans.

ramus trunk. connects to The the communicans, white preganglionic fiber, the sympathetic containing

not synapse trunk preganglionic through the the the sympathetic passes greater and trunk, but enters Entering fiber the splanchnic nerve. does

of and through ganglion. diaphragm crura enters the celiac The splanchnic the the greater nerve passes

synapses the ganglion, with In neuron. fiber celiac postganglionic the a preganglionic

The its branches. fibers of the along joins postganglionic fiber surrounding and plexus the nerve continues celiac trunk

The trunk through plexus of the of nerves supplying postganglionic the stomach the fiber eventually travels of and branches point reaches accompanying the distribution. celiac its

the from enteric by nervous the gastrointestinal the system. input of activities may the This tract controlled modify sympathetic system

part region posterior the the to of abdominal and pancreas (Fig. tract, spleen, the The abdominal gastrointestinal is posterior the 4.140). abdominal contents making posterior the regions. area, structures involved in this between a of wall, are not that This muscles only conduit contains the but bounded numerous the activities up area body bones also abdominal use and directly by as cava, and vena associated include inferior the Examples the aorta and its plexuses, sympathetic abdominal lymphatics. nerve trunks, the this during nerves), of and to organs the originating there and it body the area of associate suprarenal critical with that the that are in other this function structures of in regions the remain normal the are are (i.e., glands). area (i.e., kidneys lumbar adult development There also in plexus and

Lumbar sacrum and the vertebrae

the lumbar into (Fig. abdominal area the the posterior of of are bodies Projecting vertebrae midline the five 4.141). column. this vertebral region forward structures is the convexity) of the part to the of secondary of due lumbar prominence these in (a curvature The

be vertebrae from lumbar distinguished because and cervical can of thoracic their The size. vertebrae any vertebrae in They much than any region. are other larger other vertebra The bodies LI massive in increase progressively size from are LV. to vertebral and are the and slender, The short processes and are and and large long processes stocky, transverse are stubby. the spinous pedicles this the column. and articular large are laterally, in promotes part which vertebral oriented and flexion and extension medially The of processes

vertebra Between of is of lumbar the the an intervertebral wall. which this each midline abdominal completes posterior part disc, boundary

the abdominal sacrum (Fig. wall, margin of of of midline the consists vertebrae, inferior The boundary the posterior the to upper lumbar 4.141). the vertebrae by is that structure five fusion inferiorly. is the a sacral narrows wedge-shaped superiorly sacrum broad The and single, bony into formed of through. and posterior and surface foramina contain of posterior anterior concave posterior its for convex anterior and the rami anterior pass sacral nerves Its surface to spinal

of pelvic bone, ilia, (Fig. at the joints which components sacro-iliac sacrum each the are to attach The laterally 4.141). The area into ilium iliac expands upper part a (the thin wing-like outward each fossa). of The muscles, this of are wall. posterior and region the of related the medial of iliac side bone, abdominal components each

and Superiorly, the bony ribs framework XI wall (Fig. the XII complete of abdominal posterior 4.141). they a tubercles. that not or with necks their do they and have ribs unique sternum in on ribs, facet These heads, articulate single they articular have other or do are not the

superior posterior the of to kidneys. both superior of XI Rib part the rib is part the to kidney, XII is left posterior and for serves of ligaments. a muscles rib point attachment Also, numerous XII and as

abdominal the of the in wall region and bony of abdominal framework posterior lateral, posterior fill (Table medial, forming 4.2). boundaries superior Muscles inferior, the the inferiorly superiorly the lumborum muscle, is major diaphragm iliacus Medially the and minor quadratus is (Figs. muscle, is the the are and psoas laterally muscles, and 4.143). 4.142

and space lumbar vertebrae, of psoas between of the Medially, anterolateral the vertebral the bodies cover in the the transverse filling the (Fig. muscles surface the bodies major processes 4.142). discs of Each vertebrae. the and vertebra, vertebrae, TXII these intervertebral the bodies the lumbar from transverse vertebra the processes of five between all each muscles lumbar from of and from arises along brim, the to lesser each Passing muscle the ligament, attach the inguinal thigh, anterior into the inferiorly the femur. pelvic to trochanter under of continues

joint the stabilized the The the is hip the against trunk thigh is supine. gravity flexes when major muscle trunk body flexes psoas and the when at anterior to by innervated is nerves L3. rami L1 of It

sometimes minor major the psoas muscle absent. muscle, with psoas the which Associated is is major when into Lying brim pectineal the the the arises the intervertebral the and disc; surface the TXII long LI intervening present, its vertebrae inserts iliopubic tendon of pelvic and of muscle from eminence. and psoas line on slender this

a anterior ramus weak by the column flexor The of lumbar minor nerve vertebral the is is psoas and innervated L1. of

(Fig. between column the of iliac sides crest vertebral and lumborum space fill XII both the the quadratus Laterally, the rib on muscles 4.142). overlapped the abdominis muscles. by major muscles; borders psoas are are medially transversus the their lateral They along

Each transverse arises the of quadratus iliolumbar of lumborum from process and ligament, crest. vertebra adjoining muscle part the LV, the iliac the the of border the vertebrae superiorly and XII. attaches rib process four transverse muscle of inferior The lumbar to the first

the and quadratus to of bending contribute The lateral twelfth depress and stabilize trunk. lumborum muscles ribs the vertebral Acting the of lumbar muscles may column. part extend the together, the L4 T12 are They and of by nerves. L1 to rami innervated anterior spinal

fossa the each (Fig. muscle fills Inferiorly, iliac on an iliacus side 4.142). expansive the origin this psoas to major passes lesser with inferiorly, femur. attaches iliac the of and the trochanter joins muscle, fossa, From covering muscle the the muscles these are iliopsoas combined the the they into referred to As pass thigh, muscle. as

body flexes the against when at the psoas is the flexes joint iliacus stabilized when the is trunk hip the trunk the Like major gravity muscle, and thigh supine. the femoral innervated nerve. by the branches is of It

diaphragm boundary region. forms the abdominal of the the Superiorly, posterior also thoracic the separates from musculotendinous This cavity. sheet cavity the abdominal

Structurally, attach consists which the diaphragm arranged part a the of (Fig. into fibers circumferentially tendinous central muscle 4.143). by the musculotendinous The which vertebrae the blend is longitudinal column: the anterior to with vertebral diaphragm lumbar crura, of ligament anchored

LI the the intervertebral longest (Fig. to the and and and The right the of to broadest of LIII bodies vertebrae intervening crus discs is crura is attached 4.144).

intervertebral attached LII and associated and is disc. the Similarly, the to LI vertebrae left crus

median across by to (Fig. midline tendinous arcuate crura connected the ligament), aorta a are The which arch anterior passes (the the 4.144).

to a the Lateral psoas crura, arch the the major covering formed second muscle. is fascia of part the by upper tendinous to process (Fig. attached medial arcuate the the and and This is of vertebrae of LI ligament, LII vertebra which the medially LI transverse laterally sides is to 4.144).

fascia ligament, quadratus A lateral formed that arch, covers the in lumborum. thickening tendinous the a is arcuate by the third transverse rib the medially LI attached to (Fig. and laterally XII It process is to of vertebra 4.144).

diaphragm. arcuate of of as of the muscular The medial lateral and points origin ligaments serve some the for components

Structures the around passing diaphragm through or

diaphragm Numerous structures through pass (Fig. the around or 4.143):

of aorta anterior just ligament, posterior two at midline. to vertebra arcuate the vertebral diaphragm median the of is the the to the to left lower and and diaphragm to crura of it bodies posterior The TXII; the passes level the between

and, duct thoracic Accompanying aorta aortic the the the vein. sometimes, hiatus through is the azygos

the vertebra passes the aortic the of through of diaphragm the the of to hiatus. left at crus right the TX, musculature esophagus of just level The

and gastric vagal vein, posterior lymphatic a and artery the branches esophageal left anterior esophageal with Passing are of the the and the trunks, hiatus vessels. esophagus few the through

inferior cava caval the opening, in thoracic cavity through from the large which third opening passes vena the to abdominal the is The (Fig. the diaphragm cavity vertebra tendinous in diaphragm. approximately the TVIII the at of central part 4.143)

through inferior the the cava caval the is right nerve. Accompanying phrenic opening vena

side. of muscular diaphragm phrenic left tendon to the on left the nerve The the just passes through anterior central the part

cavity openings the cavity or the structures from Additional either to pass as abdominal outside pass just in they through the diaphragm small (Fig. thoracic 4.143):

splanchnic side. least and either lesser, the pass (when present) crura, nerves on through greater, The

the through hemi-azygos The passes crus. left vein

on the medial either the to ligament, sympathetic posterior are arcuate trunks. side, Passing

to to vessels. anterior just ribs, epigastric the superior Passing diaphragm, the deep the are

at musculophrenic also vessels vessels intercostal and and points. pass Other nerves) various diaphragm the the (i.e., nerves through

by The is the fibrous the domes lateral by is contents the appearance diaphragm area (Fig. in this a of centrally, which caused attached right of pushing left flattening pericardium, the causing and underlying classic of the these diaphragm areas upward, abdominal and 4.145).

on suprarenal liver The of are from contribution fundus the left kidney and gland. and the right, right domes some on right the with stomach the spleen gland, produced from the by: the left, kidney the suprarenal the and the and with contributions left

expiration rib the a the of height at places is intercostal domes estimate during in dome Although the right and reasonable breathing, these at varies dome remember the This V. percussing normal fifth to the important space left thorax. when

the inferiorly. muscular causing diaphragm inspiration, the contracts, tendon of During the diaphragm central be part to drawn of the results the in enlargement flattening of intrathoracic pressure. domes, cavity, and some in of thoracic This a the reduction The these lungs that is changes to effect the venous the enters enhanced. is return air heart physiological and of

There is the to diaphragm inferior blood its surfaces: superior supply on and

thoracic superior pericardiacophrenic artery, internal the thoracic both a branch Superiorly, the of musculophrenic the the diaphragm. arteries, phrenic supply the artery, and of aorta, branches and

the Inferiorly, (see abdominal arteries, the inferior the supply branches of aorta, Fig. diaphragm phrenic 4.143).

is drainage through Venous veins to these arteries. companion

the Innervation nerves. diaphragm phrenic by is primarily of the C5 levels, motor from to C3 the innervation central fibers spinal the diaphragm and to to These the cord sensory all part. provide nerves, thoracic pericardium, pleura the the the They pass cavity, the and surface through superior between mediastinal of to diaphragm. the phrenic the nerve cava the passes inferior the through nerve point, through vena by right (see the phrenic At accompanies itself diaphragm left diaphragm and the this

Fig. 4.143). of nerves. intercostal by the fibers to are peripheral sensory diaphragm Additional supplied areas the

kidneys retroperitoneal abdominal region in (Fig. The are posterior the bean-shaped 4.149). tissue in lateral column. immediately to connective the They extraperitoneal vertebral lie the extend kidney the inferiorly, with the its to right from In liver. the position, the left because approximately vertebra superiorly vertebra TXII kidneys than with relationship supine of somewhat LIII lower the the slender than and the size midline. and a longer organ nearer they in to kidney is kidney, right shape, the and similar Although left more are

structures other Relationships to

by structures, kidney some against of directly of which and which peritoneum numerous surface from the the of are the layer to (Fig. of related separated anterior are a The some kidney right kidney is 4.150):

right the by suprarenal part the covered A superior is of small gland. pole

the part part large of rest liver the the is of anterior inferiorly, peritoneum. layer and upper the is a separated against a it by of surface Moving of from

the contacts part and is the of duodenum Medially, descending retroperitoneal kidney. the

pole inferior colic with side, The its covered small intestine. associated kidney, a its the the flexure medial of of and, segment on right intraperitoneal on is by directly lateral is side, the

(Fig. left the related to kidney of directly The some intervening some is kidney anterior numerous surface peritoneum structures, layer also and of with the against an 4.150):

small the superior side, covered the A of part medial pole, on is its by suprarenal left gland.

rest the is by spleen. covered intraperitoneal The stomach the and of pole superior

the pancreas part middle the of retroperitoneal covers kidney. the Moving inferiorly,

of the parts its the side, kidney medial its and, and the the colic is by the covered left of flexure intraperitoneal lower the by side, the beginning jejunum. on descending of On lateral colon, half

structures (Fig. the related Posteriorly, to are similar right and left kidneys 4.151). is direction, this, lateral muscles. to abdominis inferior a psoas transversus and to and in quadratus are the moving major, medial Superiorly diaphragm lumborum, the

XII. ribs rib to while the pole kidney region the anterior superior of same anterior is kidney left the to and is right XII, XI The of sacs extend the to kidneys. recesses the The therefore and pleural posterior specifically costodiaphragmatic

Also and subcostal passing and the the to iliohypogastric nerves posterior kidneys are vessels nerves. ilio-inguinal and the

in The arrangement and a with unique kidneys enclosed are of and fascia fat. associated kidney extraperitoneal accumulation of the renal capsule, fat), perinephric Immediately which the is an surrounds (Fig. fat—the (perirenal completely outside fat there 4.152). the fascia). extraperitoneal (the renal is fat condensation fascia membranous perinephric a Enclosing the of the septum. a thin enclosed glands by separated are from fascial The compartment, also suprarenal this in kidneys usually surgical any incised approach renal organ. in must this The fascia to be

each posterior margins fascia At and (Fig. of lateral anterior the fuse renal kidney, layers the the of 4.152). fascia connect may This abdominal on the lateral transversalis fused wall. the layer with

blend and the covers fascia the posterior gland, anterior that the diaphragm. of the layers fuse Above renal fascia with suprarenal and each

cava and the inferior the and over (Fig. Medially, layer in the vessels aorta associated the of the abdominal tissue continues renal connective fascia fuses with vena hilum the with the anterior 4.152). midline side blend opposite to with cross cases, may some its the the companion and layer the layer. anterior In

the fuse the The between covering of layer lumborum renal the muscle. fascia with and muscle to passes fascia psoas the posterior major the kidney fascia medially quadratus the covering

the ureters. fascia and anterior layers posterior Inferiorly, renal the enclose of the

(Fig. and In fat kidney of paranephric fascia, with a fat (pararenal to final and fat) completes the layer perinephric associated the addition fascias the fat renal 4.152). This accumulates fat posterior kidney. each and to posterolateral

smooth has and a by Each surface which covered posterior easily except fibrous disease. capsule, removable during kidney is a anterior

the enter margin lymphatics, of a On medial (Fig. leave kidney through of and nerves each vessels, kidney, the which renal is the is and of kidney slit the vertical deep substance which hilum the 4.153). continuous the renal sinus. with hilum the Internally, is fat into and structures. all sinus surrounds hilum continues Perinephric and the

of Each and medulla. an an outer consists inner kidney renal renal cortex renal completely of continuous cortex The surrounds is the tissue a band medulla. pale renal that triangular-shaped (the of dividing renal medulla the renal into into the pyramids). columns) aggregations inner discontinuous the cortex of renal (the the Extensions aspect project of renal tissue kidney,

toward renal the directed pyramid toward projects the The of bases are renal sinus. renal each outward, the while renal the inward, pyramids cortex, apex of

minor papilla) of calyx. and is draining apical the surrounded papillary tubules contains openings a renal the by the (renal projection ducts The

the represent minor ureter of receive the from form and ducts papillary that tube will (Fig. urine parts calices the proximal the The eventually 4.153). of to renal calices the is calyx, pelvis, funnel-shaped the renal to unite two and form the major the calices form superior ureters. or which In sinus, end major minor a unite several three

a single lateral the abdominal branch of A artery, renal kidney. supplies aorta, each large These vertebrae of vessels just the usually to mesenteric and LI (Fig. arise artery superior between the LII inferior origin 4.154). the little cava. renal artery longer higher and right than left a the to posterior the right, arises usually and passes is The vena renal inferior artery

anterior branches, the and into divides approaches renal renal As which each hilum, parenchyma. it renal the posterior artery supply arteries are common. Accessory renal below level, originate the directly aorta, or the and other the the commonly from at called pass extrahilar arteries, primary arteries. the of hilum some lateral with the enter aspect primary are or They above kidney arteries either abdominal into renal

arteries right both Multiple the left which anterior veins (Fig. veins, the to to renal contribute renal of renal formation are the of and 4.154A). posterior vessels aorta the either the compressed and and artery of be to in Importantly, crosses left by two longer vein (Fig. aneurysm to the anterior these midline an renal can abdominal superior the mesenteric 4.154B).

lateral The kidney renal (lumbar) nodes the origin the around lymphatic of the artery. aortic is of each to drainage

urine that ureters to the tubes the muscular are bladder. from kidneys The transport are sinus. continuous which the renal the They funnel-shaped in superiorly pelvis, a with renal structure is several minor formed pelvis Fig. in two or a by formed renal three the The from of major (see of calices, turn which are condensation condensation calices is 4.153). renal papilla. calices a minor The surround

kidney renal The inferiorly at narrows becomes of the it pelvis with ureteropelvic ureter the and the through hilum (Fig. as the continuous passes junction 4.155). major retroperitoneally junction, medial on the of muscle. ureters descend Inferior the this to psoas aspect the the ureters external the to artery, the of or At either pelvic the cross enter the artery bladder. the their beginning the iliac continue iliac the brim, end pelvic common journey of and cavity,

ureters points are three constricted course along the (Fig. their At 4.155):

ureteropelvic point first at The junction. the is

common iliac point vessels is the at ureters second brim. pelvic the The the where cross

The is third the ureters point of wall bladder. the where the enter

constrictions. at Kidney stones become lodged can these

adjacent they toward the as from branches (Fig. receive bladder pass The vessels arterial ureters 4.155):

supply arteries The end. upper the renal

branches part iliac the testicular abdominal aorta, common middle the ovarian the or and The from arteries. may receive arteries,

ureters iliac from the the of one arteries. are supplied In cavity, internal by or branches arteries pelvic more the

arteries cases, and branches, into anastomoses. all form longitudinal descending divide which In the ureters ascending reaching

follows drainage to arterial Lymphatic supply. ureters similar a of the the that of pattern aortic the middle and with each and nodes iliac nodes, drains to of associated Lymph external the part to ureter drains vessels, each with each common ureter lymph vessels. internal lymph to of upper part iliac from: ureter inferior (lumbar) lateral the the associated part nodes the drains of the

nerves aortic, hypogastric, follow vessels. the blood the superior Ureteric innervation hypogastric from plexuses renal, inferior that and through is

come Visceral both T11 afferent fibers to L2 sources, and levels. visceral parasympathetic to sympathetic efferent spinal return fibers from whereas cord the areas distention referred cord to therefore supplied usually cutaneous related is pain, T11 Ureteric ureter, spinal levels. to of to which is L2 by the the pubic lateral in crest, thigh. and and areas the majora likely females, would These and region, in abdominal ribs anterior most the proximal the scrotum below the aspect include wall posterior the iliac labia males, above of the

the of kidney associated (Fig. pole The with superior each glands are suprarenal 4.163). medulla. consist of They an cortex an and outer inner gland a gland whereas right The semilunar shaped in the shape larger the is the left and two. like pyramid, of is

inferior the cava, whereas Anterior and, and suprarenal right spleen. to occasion, the of of of vena gland gland anterior part the on liver the lobe is part is to right the left suprarenal the pancreas, the stomach, glands. to of diaphragm Parts the both are posterior

thin septum renal are in its associated The by though fascia, kidney. each the and from perinephric fat glands the a gland surrounded enclosed separates suprarenal

is The arises and primary (Fig. the extensive suprarenal sources from supply to glands arterial three 4.163):

the inferior branches upward As suprarenal the arteries) multiple to diaphragm, abdominal (superior from bilateral they phrenic arteries pass the give suprarenal glands. off the to aorta

glands directly abdominal usually aorta. arises from (middle middle the to branch A the suprarenal artery) suprarenal

arteries) renal upward branches Inferior suprarenal to from (inferior arteries the suprarenal pass glands. the

is consists the supply leaving of usually drainage, of this the multiple vein venous which a gland. single hilum In to each arterial contrast the while vein the cava, is left on side, and On renal the enter vein left left suprarenal suprarenal the right almost passes the enters inferiorly vein. short right inferior the to vena side, immediately

by synapsing. plexus without trunk innervated the levels from gland mainly is and sympathetic pass both through suprarenal that sympathetic fibers The preganglionic the spinal prevertebral T8-L1 the medulla. fibers directly preganglionic innervate adrenal cells of These

lower at aorta aortic midline abdominal diaphragm the hiatus approximately at as a structure the level of the vertebra (Fig. The TXII of begins 4.164). of of passes the to anterior It ending surface of at LIV, the LIV. level vertebrae on bodies just of LI left lower the vertebra the downward midline to At iliac this it divides the point, right left arteries. and common into a the umbilicus 2.5 crest. between highest iliac approximately or anterior cm even bifurcation below be wall the This the abdominal extending on of visualized with line as a point the points can

the ganglia posterior the passes prevertebral abdominal As surface. and the of through aorta covers nerves anterior plexus region, its abdominal numerous structures: also other related is It to

descends, the aorta, as are renal to splenic part pancreas Anterior and vein, the of it the abdominal and the the vein, inferior left duodenum.

as inferior they to left posteriorly the veins pass Several it lumbar cava. cross vena

On right vein, are cisterna diaphragm, its the side inferior the azygos thoracic and right chyli, cava. duct, vena crus of the

On the crus is left the its diaphragm. left of side

aorta body classified visceral as: branches (Table supplying or abdominal the the be diaphragm supplying can posterior Branches wall, of branches. terminal or branches organs, 4.3)

paired visceral either branches vessels. or are The unpaired

surface (Fig. the that from aorta anterior visceral unpaired the The branches three abdominal arise of inferior abdominal mesenteric which the which the the celiac artery, mesenteric artery, 4.164) supplies which hindgut. the trunk, supplies and superior the abdominal the supplies abdominal foregut, are: midgut,

The of abdominal aorta (Fig. branches paired visceral the branches of that the renal aorta origin aorta laterally arise inferior superior abdominal abdominal the vertebrae anterior of suprarenal surface the mesenteric of pass branches include: multiple on psoas middle aorta major renal the and the the the downward testicular arteries, the arteries—lateral just the arteries—anterior and the the muscle. between origin ovarian of supply arising artery that of the the above and vascular are of gland; LI arise the LII, renal and just part lateral or and arteries 4.164) suprarenal kidneys; abdominal the below of the arteries—small, to branches supply to that

vessels the diaphragm abdominal the are branches posterior or supplying of wall. The body aorta They lumbar median arteries, inferior phrenic the arteries, consist and the sacral of (Fig. the artery 4.164).

aortic arise directly from aorta, or The abdominal base to the the abdominal (Fig. phrenic as inferior the immediately diaphragm the common arteries of hiatus inferior of either aorta, trunk the a trunk from from the celiac 4.164). supply the provide pass origin, onto and to inferior the they some suprarenal continue the Whatever their of upward, diaphragm. arterial surface gland,

usually of of the lumbar the arteries (Fig. pairs There are four surface arising posterior abdominal from aorta 4.164). the continue abdominal the posterior laterally, and of vertebrae, the transverse over lumbar the lumbar the processes passing bodies to trunks laterally between and posteriorly adjacent They and vertebrae, of sympathetic reach wall. run which point artery, that intercostal similar onward, to demonstrate segmental this branching posterior branches the a a providing they pattern cord. supply From includes spinal

posterior median (Fig. artery branch is the sacral The final 4.164). surface over coccyx. and over direction, passes the then vessel of superior posterior an aorta the the surface and the to abdominal the surface lower inferior bifurcation first the anterior in sacrum vertebrae lumbar of from anterior This the and arises just of

diaphragm vena heart. structures the all returns cava atrium from inferior to the the The below blood right of of midline. just of the It to together vertebra the two veins when right is at come formed iliac level the LV, common aorta column the abdominal immediately posterior It to ascends the the region anterior of through to abdominal (Fig. right vertebral the and a in by of tendon level the 4.166), piercing the central at leaves the diaphragm TVIII. direction, vertebra abdomen continues the of superior

and the common root the part is of During anterior bile head cava duct, crossed the of part inferior superior portal surface the the cava ovarian completely the artery, (Fig. of pancreas, surrounds on mesentery, or the its which the the iliac duodenum, the course, occasion vein, liver, the duodenum, artery, the the vena of right testicular by overlaps vena of inferior the and right the the 4.166).

veins, vein, cava veins, renal inferior veins, veins. right or common iliac phrenic hepatic Tributaries to right veins, inferior include suprarenal vein, testicular the: ovarian and vena lumbar the

veins the are which are gallbladder, of gastrointestinal no because portal tributaries from liver. from the these of the venous or passes structures spleen, the through the the part system, tract, first the components abdominal pancreas, There

attention. special their Of unique mentioned veins tributaries and the the venous in lumbar above, are connections deserve the of lumbar veins directly drain (Fig. the cava into all vena Not inferior 4.167):

the drains vein. The into of iliolumbar common a lumbar vein generally the iliac tributary vein, fifth

and the vena lumbar fourth veins third usually cava. drain inferior into The

the may The and into empty veins. ascending lumbar lumbar second first veins

veins with the lumbar anastomosing The the veins iliac, ascending common are and (Fig. the of long, azygos and thorax veins lumbar that iliolumbar, channels connect venous hemi-azygos 4.167).

the of upper ascending body. channels the inferior the blocked, veins collateral the parts If become lumbar cava between and becomes vena important lower

deep abdominal the vessels body most drainage of region associated the posterior diaphragm with Lymphatic from the vessels of structures nodes the blood of converges below lymph regions mainly and major and collections (Fig. on 4.168). drains predominantly the then duct. The thoracic lymph into are different that regions in summarized drain Major channels body whole lymphatic the a as of

1, see Chapter pp. Table 4.4 (also lymphatics general). 27–28, of discussion for in

Approaching associated and the merge, superiorly. inferior associated with the vena nodes the groups and lymphatic pass the two common arteries vessels bifurcation, aortic abdominal cava and of multiple with aorta and veins lymphatics of collections iliac or are abdominal collections right These to (para-aortic the (Fig. anterior lateral of abdominal subdivided positioned the which nodes be aortic either left side nodes), pre-aortic lumbar and are which and into nodes, on aorta aorta, may 4.168).

a of As lymph collect these pass posterior to structures. abdominal region, collections variety the from lymphatics of continue they through or and from the lumbar (para-aortic the nodes lateral or wall, aortic receive kidneys, the lymph lymphatics suprarenal nodes) body the glands, ovaries. The testes

the around the as nodes part anterior well and pancreas, abdominal the that aorta liver. spleen, as three tract, The organized of the the gallbladder, abdominal supply of branches pre-aortic gastrointestinal are mesenteric inferior lymph into divided and the and the named arteries. similarly by are celiac, superior nodes, from organs They mesenteric, receive supplied

lateral left Finally, nodes form lumbar intestinal pre-aortic and the the form trunk nodes right lumbar (Fig. the whereas or trunks, aortic the 4.168). dilation appears together chyli). These (the at that, a a form as and times, trunks come confluence saccular cisterna and abdominal confluence the of anterior is trunks aorta side to This to posterior lymph right vertebrae bodies the of and LII. of the LI thoracic duct. the the marks of It beginning

posterior in system Nervous the

posterior region. nervous system in Several the important components of the abdominal are nerves plexus abdominal and associated These nerves. of trunks and lumbar of the plexus aorta, splanchnic the with and nerves, include the the associated ganglia sympathetic

pass anterolateral pelvic the trunks continuing abdominal sacral the the (Fig. vertebral the region promontory posterior The lumbar and through cavity into to bodies, sympathetic across before 4.169). small areas their are course, Along raised visible. bodies—which cell bodies—primarily cell nervous outside neuronal system. located collections postganglionic are of These neuronal central the represent are sympathetic paravertebral They ganglia. sympathetic usually trunks region. abdominal along in posterior four are There the ganglia the

sympathetic associated posterior the lumbar splanchnic nerves trunks with abdominal region (Fig. the are in Also the 4.169). system sympathetic and the nervous ganglia to the components the of pass associated trunks plexus from of the with aorta. nerves abdominal These splanchnic four nerves afferent to and fibers fibers. carry sympathetic two visceral Usually preganglionic lumbar

is abdominal surrounding the plexus network of fibers a nerve prevertebral abdominal aorta. The from right extends of diaphragm iliac to aorta the the hiatus arteries. of aortic common the into the left bifurcation It the and Along it is subdivided into plexuses smaller, its (Fig. named route, 4.170):

moving at referred the trunk nerve artery. mesenteric fibers the of celiac as the accumulation the plexus—this superior is with the diaphragm roots subdivision inferiorly, includes Beginning celiac fibers initial and of and associated nerve to

aortic is the Continuing abdominal just nerve aortic extending of below (Fig. fibers mesenteric the from superior plexus plexus inferiorly, artery the the to bifurcation 4.170).

continues abdominal the the bifurcation At hypogastric plexus. inferiorly abdominal prevertebral plexus the the superior as aorta, of

nerves from and vagus visceral parasympathetic preganglionic the splanchnic Throughout for: from afferent afferent thoracic is its preganglionic abdominal preganglionic and sympathetic the lumbar a fibers splanchnic nerves from fibers (Fig. plexus fibers and pelvic the parasympathetic the conduit prevertebral [X], and visceral nerves, length, 4.171).

of plexus; (the nervous ganglia), of Associated in neuronal bodies the abdominal are prevertebral prevertebral along usually aorta. abdominal postganglionic of after with cell aggregations branch the they prevertebral the recognizable plexus clumps named are collections abdominal the tissue which sympathetic are nearest superior are (Fig. as referred ganglia and therefore celiac, inferior They mesenteric, aorticorenal, mesenteric to 4.172). with critical plexus, These the in abdominal viscera. a play abdominal the prevertebral innervation along the role of structures,

and heart pain in given from 4.5. for the sites are Common referred viscera from abdominal Table the

of L4 formed anterior of (Fig. the anterior by L1 to L3 rami and plexus is the lumbar of most The ramus nerves Table 4.6). and 4.173 from T12 contribution (subcostal) It a also receives nerve. the

of nerves, lumbar and include (lateral the iliohypogastric, and the of cutaneous and femoral ilio-inguinal, nerve obturator Branches nerves. cutaneous), genitofemoral the femoral thigh the lateral plexus the lumbar of attachment (Fig. the psoas of to transverse The the the lumbar anterior forms processes muscle substance plexus its to in vertebrae major 4.174). relative or the cutaneous the nerve, thigh. the ilio-inguinal, nerves medial—obturator lateral—iliohypogastric, nerve emerge to nerve, either: lateral psoas muscle, branches various Therefore, and anterior—genitofemoral femoral and of major the

L1 from and ilio-inguinal ramus trunk nerve iliohypogastric The arise as a of nerves the (Fig. anterior single 4.173). and trunk or the psoas from into Either lateral nerves. border after muscle, emerging iliohypogastric the this before the major divides of single soon the ilio-inguinal

the lumborum the The anterior surface passes across the nerve quadratus iliohypogastric posterior kidney. of muscle, to transversus pierces anteriorly the the the internal around continues and It oblique between transversus muscle abdominis and muscles. body abdominis and crest, supply oblique the external internal Above (Fig. the skin branch to the gluteal pierces a iliac lateral posterolateral cutaneous muscles 4.175).

just direction. an anterior the iliohypogastric (the to nerve in anterior the continues an remaining in superior medial oblique it piercing obliquely and medial of internal The iliac spine part the as downward continues anterior direction, branch) cutaneous distributes to Becoming of just skin region above external inguinal piercing the after (Fig. pubic the the aponeurosis in it oblique, the superficial ring, cutaneous, the 4.175). abdominal supplies branches musculature. to course, Throughout the it also its

to, lumborum and inferior The nerve the muscle. quadratus it smaller the nerve is than, as iliohypogastric crosses ilio-inguinal part the that more muscle usually iliacus nerve, crest. the of way course iliac and its is crosses than oblique to the of on iliohypogastric Its it transversus then end crest, and abdominis pierces canal. it oblique the the iliac Near of anterior the the inguinal muscle pierces and internal muscle, the enters

medial in inguinal anterior ilio-inguinal pubis of of surface spermatic women along mons scrotum the majus with provides (Fig. emerges penis, upper and through thigh, the the the men, nerve or and cord, to the and labium superficial innervation the The the cutaneous in the ring, root 4.175). to abdominal supplies the its musculature. it Throughout course, also branches

nerve genitofemoral arises the nerves rami from (Fig. The L2 of L1 and anterior 4.173). passes major the anterior major. until downward on surface it psoas It substance of psoas the the muscle the of in emerges descends the It muscle, the in position, posterior passing on of retroperitoneal surface a then the ureter. to divides and eventually femoral genital into branches. It

enters inguinal branch inguinal genital and through deep canal the continues ring. downward the The cremasteric in men, muscle innervates on skin part women, upper terminates the continues ligament It of in skin majus. and: and the the the accompanies pubis round the mons the terminates on anterior canal the in uterus labium and scrotum, and and the the through of of

lateral the of femoral external side passes lateral entering ligament, artery. femoral descends femoral artery to branch sheath the posterior and The the inguinal the iliac to on the to and thigh supply of the It anterior lata femoral the layer of anterior sheath the the (Fig. skin upper fascia pierces the 4.175).

L3) and cutaneous of nerve Lateral thigh (L2

L3 the from The and of thigh anterior L2 the nerve lateral (Fig. of arises rami cutaneous nerves 4.173). the psoas of (Fig. muscle from iliacus the lateral obliquely the the superior passing toward muscle, iliac major downward spine It across anterior border emerges 4.175). the enters passes and the inguinal ligament to thigh. It posterior

anterior cutaneous of the skin (Fig. of and the The supplies the lateral knee nerve lateral level on thigh the the thigh to 4.175).

to L4) Obturator (L2 nerve

arises L4 of nerves obturator (Fig. nerve rami the anterior The to from L2 4.173). descends (Fig. pelvic psoas major from medial muscle, its side the brim in near It the emerging 4.174).

the continues the enters obturator the iliac thigh. of nerve The canal, the obturator cavity, compartment of passes to the medial common the pelvic gains across wall lateral the access to which posterior through vessels, nerve obturator and

into of and the the obturator area obturator branches. divides nerve canal, posterior anterior the In by compartment separated two externus and obturator the entering thigh, brevis adductor On are the muscles. medial of the branches the the to medial cutaneous medial the compartment, two hip magnus and to the pectineus, saphenous branches obturator to of their to adductor course joint aspect the cutaneous adductor articular articular joint, and part the the branches the the muscles, of aspect with to branches in the leg adductor Throughout gracilis, upper knee these externus, longus, nerve, association through muscular (Fig. branches medial brevis, the and branches thigh, of supply: branches 4.175).

to (L2 nerve Femoral L4)

L2 arises the nerves rami The (Fig. to nerve from of L4 femoral anterior 4.173). lateral the of the major the of psoas through major substance lower It border descends muscle, psoas (Fig. emerging the from 4.174). the lies psoas the descent, of border surface anterior iliacus muscle. of major the nerve Continuing femoral the between and the its lateral lateral of it deep the the femoral to is anterior thigh. fascia passes enters and the as the It inguinal and iliacus artery to posterior the ligament to compartment the into thigh, multiple divides Upon it immediately entering branches.

Cutaneous on nerve of medial the anterior thigh, saphenous branches of nerves cutaneous the surface and of and the supplying (Fig. the medial the nerve on supplying skin surface skin the leg include: the intermediate femoral the 4.175).

pectineus, vastus medialis, and branches sartorius, vastus Muscular innervate rectus the intermedius, lateralis vastus femoris, iliacus, muscles. supply the knee joints. and branches hip Articular

physical is examination. the position of abdominal Visualization fundamental to of viscera a wall. viscera Some these by abdominal palpating through can of parts felt be the their or positions of the be can deep to features structures. establish used Surface

Defining surface the the projection of abdomen

extent body. the delineate surface of to the the be of on Palpable used landmarks abdomen can the spine, anterior These (Fig. below the iliac costal are: crest and margin above and landmarks superior tubercle, iliac the pubic 4.176).

wall margin readily The thoracic wall. abdominal the the from costal palpable and is separates

inguinal pubic the anterior ligament, of the line marks spine position limb anterior from of tubercle which superior abdominal the separates between iliac thigh above the lower the the A and the below. wall

separates of the limb. abdominal gluteal the iliac wall from lower region The crest the posterolateral

in to thoracic therefore abdomen of abdominal this the part viscera the abdominal are protected above wall. costal of upper margin projects the the the diaphragm, cavity and by region The

the cycle. the during breathing diaphragm The level varies of high can forced cartilage dome expiration. as diaphragm as costal the during fourth the The the of right on reach

to find the ring inguinal How superficial

external the inguinal the superficial is in triangular aponeurosis (Fig. of defect an ring elongate The oblique 4.177). abdominal is anterior in It opening aspect external lower canal. inguinal lies the of the of wall the and the medial The canal than ring inguinal in women: are superficial larger men in and

the the pass ring. In between structures testis canal inguinal and abdomen through that and pass superficial men, the inguinal

the passes round the tissue In inguinal the uterus connective ligament superficial canal ring to the through of majus. women, and inguinal merge of with labium

and of ligament: ring inguinal inguinal to the superficial crest tubercle The superior pubic medial the is end and the to

inguinal cord spermatic the the located the ring. is cord the ring easily can spermatic external wall—the superiorly of In the to lower fascia by superficial continuous spermatic be inguinal men, the of abdominal following superficial with margins

is can palpated it. be pubic In lateral and the ring to and tubercle the superior women,

and iliac canal, spine the the ligament, superior superior to inguinal the midway deep pubic to ring, inguinal which inguinal the internal symphysis. opening lies anterior is The between the ligament. same below felt the the but of in pulse inguinal can position The femoral be artery

is often appear, the men, site the examination. of the and in Because during ring evaluated superficial inguinal the ring inguinal are parts related where inguinal canal physical hernias particularly

to How determine lumbar levels vertebral

and vertebral of levels viscera for vessels. the Lumbar useful major positions visualizing blood are can lumbar approximate or be landmarks palpable The of positions established using visible (Fig. vertebrae the 4.178):

medial symphysis. cartilages costal of horizontal vertebra—this the and A ends the body body plane suprasternal midway between LI through the passes cuts (jugular) of plane the notch the the the ninth through and transpyloric pubic

edge disc through passes A the on a is the the that margin LIII plane the the between body horizontal plane cartilage) vertebra—the of of horizontal vertebrae. and passes through and lower LIV (tenth the LIII costal umbilicus costal normally

A highest on spine passes (supracristal LIV vertebra; plane the the point and horizontal iliac of through crest body plane) the the through

vertebra. the the of of body the plane A through ilium through the crest tubercles passes of LV the

Visualizing at structures LI the

the LI vertebral pubic The between and cartilages (Fig. the symphysis, marked jugular cuts ends midway costal is the transversely the level notch the plane, which through ninth body by of and through transpyloric 4.179). the the and from At are: of this the of hila superior kidneys, level neck pancreas, end the upper and of mesenteric limit beginning the origin the the the the aorta. of duodenum, of the artery

colic close are and The right to level. left flexures also this

of position Visualizing the major

vertebral of vessels levels of major (Fig. the abdomen origin in the related is the Each to blood 4.180):

border originates The aorta at the vertebra. of celiac the from the LI trunk upper

lower the mesenteric border artery superior originates of at LI vertebra. The the

approximately at originate renal vertebra. the LII arteries The

at inferior The vertebra. mesenteric originates the artery LIII

common bifurcates The at and level LIV arteries vertebra. right iliac the the left aorta into of the

vena cava the join the level. iliac and veins left common right LV vertebral to at form inferior The

to quadrants abdominal locate Using

horizontal abdomen transumbilical by can through a The passes plane, plane vertical the quadrants umbilicus median (Fig. into a be divided and which 4.181):

gallbladder and are the quadrant. upper in The right liver

left quadrant. upper the The spleen are and in stomach

and appendix cecum quadrant. in The lower are the right

of quadrant. left are lower and descending the sigmoid colon colon in the The end

liver wall. dome of under the diaphragm the is is deep lower the right of thoracic the and to Most to palpated of the when inhale descending inferior is margin below deeply. the a The can liver costal margin be asked right patient of under placed under felt can the the costal liver the “slipping” margin. deep inspiration, fingers On be the palpating edge

surface A is the of projection common appendix

spine iliac the is line McBurney’s to right up anterior point, the which of from along a umbilicus. one-third superior way the

is to from gut the which referred regions pain surface Defining

pass midclavicular transversely through be sagittal by regions a and (Fig. side which abdomen subcostal can body planes, intertubercular on plane The the nine each into by divided the and 4.182). three (hypochondrium, umbilical, regions These each three flank, abdomen groin). side the (epigastric, central planes separate on and pubic), into: regions

umbilical region, the the hindgut the the pain foregut is pubic abdominal from region, the region. to referred the is midgut is part the referred to from referred of Pain pain from and epigastric to

the Where find kidneys to

kidneys either side to related are back project ribs The the of the (Fig. midline and lower onto on the 4.183):

little right reaches a The as and as the XI. rib higher left kidney high than is

only XII. superior The pole kidney reaches rib right the as as high of

poles of the the vertebrae. and of the LIV between The level kidneys lower occur disc the LIII around approximately at the and the vertebra. the of kidneys are the of The LI ureters hila beginnings

descend ureters pelvis. the vertically of the tips the anterior The the processes enter lower and lumbar vertebrae transverse to of

to Where spleen the find

back The the to in and ribs left spleen of IX onto XI the projects (Fig. side area 4.184). midaxillary line. superior to contour the of just kidney posterior the pole of from extends left spleen to The follows and X the the rib

Fig. Abdomen. 4.1 A. Boundaries.

B. abdominal of contents. Arrangement Inferior view.

Fig. the viscera. abdomen The abdominal protects contains 4.2 and

Fig. in abdomen 4.3 breathing. assists The

ofabdominalmuscles abdominal musclesRelaxation diaphragmContraction of of InspirationExpirationDiaphragmRelaxation ofdiaphragmContraction

Fig. childbirth. defecation, to intraabdominal assist 4.4 and pressure Increasing in micturition,

retained in closedAir wallIncrease cavity of inintraabdominalpressureMicturitionChild diaphragmContraction thoraxFixed Laryngeal abdominal birthDefecation

Fig. Abdominal wall. 4.5 Skeletal A. elements. Muscles. B.

Fig. The 4.6 tube by suspended mesenteries. is gut

mesenteryKidney—posterior peritoneumParietal Branch of toperitoneumVisceral peritoneum aortaGastrointestinal mesenteryVentral tractAortaDorsal

Fig. series A progression organ from an (A a to C) intraperitoneal showing secondarily the organ. 4.7 retroperitoneal to

structuresMesentery tractGastrointestinal before wallIntraperitoneal part to MesenteryVisceral tractRetroperitoneal gastrointestinal peritoneumArtery tractParietal gastrointestinal fusion tract with tractGastrointestinal peritoneumGastrointestinal of ABC tractSecondary of gastrointestinal retroperitoneal part

Fig. thoracic 4.8 the aperture Inferior diaphragm. and

Fig. 4.9 inlet. Pelvic

IL ligamentPelvic inletInguinal bone VPelvic sacrumS of Ala

Fig. cavities. 4.10 and abdominal pelvic Orientation of

wallAxis abdominal of inletAxis pelvic cavityAbdominal cavityPelvic Thoracic cavity of cavityPelvic

Fig. the cavity abdominal 4.11 is with continuous cavity. pelvic The

inletBladderUterusShadow of internal of vessels RectumPeritoneumPelvic ureterShadow iliac

Fig. passing and abdomen the Structures thigh. 4.12 between

Fig. of A development the gut (A and series the to 4.13 H) mesenteries. showing

Fig. Innervation wall. 4.14 the of anterior abdominal

Fig. Inguinal 4.15 region. A. Development.

B. men. In In C. women.

inletUterine brimLeft renal ligament deferensDuctus canalSuperficial Inferior vaginalisTesticularartery veinLeft ductus arteryLeft inguinal ovarian ringDeep ringC veinPelvic veinBInferior renal (remnantsof ovarian ofgubernaculumEpididymisTestisTunica veinAortaPelvic and inguinal vena testicular of tubeRound uterus arteryLeft testicular arteryLeft cavaRight vena testicular cordRemnant veinLeft cavaAortaLeft arteryRight gubernaculum)UterusSuperficialinguinal testicular deferensInguinal ringSpermatic

Fig. 4.16 Vertebral level LI.

of and umbilicus duodenumPosition notchRightkidneyLI marginPyloric symphysisCostal orifice (transpyloric)planePubic Jugular betweenstomach

Fig. the gut. Blood supply of 4.17 A. the gut of to mesenteries. Relationship vessels and B. view. Anterior

Fig. shunts. 4.18 venous Left-to-right

Fig. 4.19 system. Hepatic portal

Fig. Prevertebral 4.20 plexus.

L2)Pelvic Sympathetic plexusLumbar to splanchnicnerves T12) least (cranial)Greater, inputPrevertebral nerves to lesser, nerves(T5 trunks inputParasympathetic vagus (L1, posterior splanchnic and S4)Anterior splanchnic (S2 and

Fig. 4.21 abdominal of the cavity. Boundaries

Fig. topographical pattern. 4.22 Four-quadrant

Fig. Nine-region organizational pattern. 4.23

Fig. 4.24 of abdominal Layers the wall.

Fig. Superficial fascia. 4.25

ligamentAponeurosis thigh fascia)Membranous of fasciaFatty Superficial layer(Scarpa's lata fasciaScrotumInguinal of layer(Camper's obliqueFascia fascia)SkinPubic symphysisPenisDartos external

Fig. membranous superficial into of other layer 4.26 Continuity fascia of areas.

fasciaExternal toischiopubic to withdartos fascia (Scarpa's (Colles' fasciaContinuity muscleand fascia)Attachment Continuity fascia)Attachment rami lataSuperficial ofsuperficial fascia with layer aponeurosisMembranous superficialpenile oblique perinealfascia

Fig. External its aponeurosis. and 4.27 muscle oblique

muscleAbdominal iliac obliqueInguinal albaLatissimus external muscleAponeurosis superior Linea ofpectoralis oblique part spine ligamentAnterior muscleExternal of major dorsi

Fig. the Ligaments external oblique formed from 4.28 aponeurosis.

Fig. 4.29 region. inguinal of Ligaments the

Fig. 4.30 its Internal muscle oblique and aponeurosis.

muscleRib iliac spine muscleand superior muscleAponeurosis albaExternal oblique oblique of External XInternal oblique external obliqueAnterior aponeurosisLinea

Fig. its muscle and aponeurosis. abdominis 4.31 Transversus

External of superior spine XTransversus and muscleRib internal abdominismuscle of albaExternal oblique aponeurosisLinea obliqueAponeurosis oblique external iliac muscleAponeurosis obliqueAnterior

Fig. abdominis and 4.32 pyramidalis muscles. Rectus

rectus oblique lineTransversalis abdominis sheathRectus of muscle oblique External intersectionInternal musclePosterior albaPyramidalis muscleTendinous fasciaLinea Arcuate wall muscle

Fig. sheath. the rectus of 4.33 Organization of A. three-quarters through the rectus Transverse upper section sheath. the rectus the the lower sheath. section one-quarter of Transverse through B.

Fig. 4.34 wall. abdominal of showing the layers the Transverse section

Fig. 4.35 fascia. Subdivisions of extraperitoneal the

Fig. of abdominal wall. Innervation the 4.36 anterolateral

processIlio-inguinal aponeurosisIliohypogastric T7 to External crestAnterior (L1)Xiphoid nerve to muscleand T12 T7 (L1)Iliac cutaneousbranches T12Lateral cutaneousbranches nerve oblique

Fig. innervating abdominal the the by Path taken anterolateral nerves 4.37 wall.

Fig. Dermatomes of wall. abdominal 4.38 anterolateral the

Fig. 4.39 anterolateral to Arterial supply the wall. abdominal

Fig. arteries. epigastric and 4.40 Superior inferior

Fig. of 7 from Descent 4.41 to the birth. week testis (postfertilization)

Fig. 4.42 canal. Inguinal

ringExternal spine of inguinal external muscleAponeurosis ringDeep obliqueInguinal albaSuperficialinguinal ligamentSpermatic Linea oblique cordAnterior superioriliac

Fig. ring and Deep fascia. 4.43 transversalis inguinal the

Fig. and 4.44 Superficial oblique. of the aponeurosis the inguinal ring external

superior of external ringAnterior inguinal Inguinal iliac ligamentFemoral veinExternal Spermatic oblique muscleAponeurosis spine cordSuperficial and oblique artery

Fig. the muscle and Internal oblique 4.45 canal. inguinal

Inguinal and superior tendonAnterior muscleAponeurosis iliac internal oblique ligamentFemoral artery spine veinInternal oblique of cordConjoint Spermatic

Fig. canal. the Transversus and 4.46 abdominis inguinal muscle

Fig. cord A. 4.47 Spermatic (men).

B. of ligament (women). Round uterus

nerveExtraperitoneal tunica muscleConjoint layer fascia genitofemoral of tunica branch of obliqueaponeurosisTransversalisfasciaIlioinguinalnerveIlioinguinal artery peritoneumArtery nerveInferior of fasciaParietal ringInternaloblique Internal vaginalisExternal tunica the tendonExternal veinsParietal fasciaDeep spermatic vesselsGenital vaginalisCavity the muscleSuperficial obliqueaponeurosisTransversusabdominis inguinal to inguinal andpampiniform layer deferensCremasteric ductus plexus deferensExternal ringTesticular vaginalisAVisceral of spermatic the of vesselsDuctus fasciaCremasteric epigastric

ofgenitofemoral nerveGenital of nerveExtraperitoneal superficial vesselsRound ligament fascia(fatty mons obliqueaponeurosisTransversusabdominis nerveInferior tendonExternal branch ofgenitofemoral pubisIlioinguinalnerveIlioinguinal uterusExternal peritoneumGenital obliqueaponeurosisSkin strandsBConjoint muscleParietal of fascia muscleMembranous layerof fasciaSuperficial epigastric connectivetissue layers) branch Internaloblique Fine

Fig. inguinal Indirect 4.48 hernia.

Fig. Direct 4.49 hernia. inguinal

Fig. 4.50 inguinal Right triangle. A. view. Internal

peritoneum covering the still view parietal B. the Laparoscopic area. showing

iliac Inferior of vesselsDuctus deepinguinal deferens vesselsPosition epigastricvesselsDirect ringBLateralMedialExternal herniaTesticular

Fig. inguinal and side (arrow) Coronal large a CT shows male of the a hernia bowel large small containing loops of 4.51 patient. left on

Fig. Right hernia. 4.52 inguinal indirect the T2, of plane weighted magnetic a image male resonance groin. fat saturated, in coronal

Fig. 4.53 A. Intraperitoneal. B. Retroperitoneal.

Fig. sacs and of peritoneal 4.54 the lesser cavity. Greater

Fig. greater Transverse omental the the continuity (epiploic) 4.55 the foramen. lesser between illustrating through sacs section and

Fig. 4.56 cavity. CT abdominal in Coronal fluid ascites shows

Fig. the metastasis on surface of the Peritoneal 4.57 liver. upper axial abdomen. tomogram the in of Computed plane the

surface Peritoneal vena kidney of metastasison liverAortaInferior cavaLiverSpleenLeft

Fig. of 4.58 Radiograph gas. subdiaphragmatic

Fig. Greater 4.59 omentum.

Fig. omentum. Lesser 4.60

omentumDuodenumDescending ligament of colonOmental foramenLesser stomachHepatogastric )GallbladderStomachLesser (retracted curvature Liver the colonAscending ligamentHepatoduodenal

Fig. abdominal forming the mesenteries, on posterior Peritoneal wall. reflections, 4.61 outlined

transverse sigmoid mesocolonRoot of mesocolonRoot the the of of mesentery Root the

Fig. Abdominal esophagus. 4.62

of vagus nerve esophagusRight aortaAortaThoracicesophagusAbdominal RightvagusnerveTracheaArch crus ofdiaphragmLeft

Fig. abdominal supply stomach. to and esophagus 4.63 the Arterial

Fig. Stomach. 4.64

Fig. the duodenum. barium, showing 4.65 Radiograph, stomach using and the A. stomach. Double-contrast radiograph of showing cap. duodenal the radiograph Double-contrast B.

duodenumABPyloric duodenumPyloric flexureBody canalPyloric stomachDescending of of stomachInferior jejunal part duodenumDuodenal of part orificeSuperior antrum sphincter of stomachPyloric capPyloric of antrumEsophagusNormal duodenal Fundus

Fig. Duodenum. 4.66

of kidneySuperior minorduodenal arteryPortal vein veinInferior partDuodenum—inferior partDuodenum—descending colonSpleenAbdominal glandRight aortaEsophagusL1L2L3Bile partDuodenum papillaPosition vena partDescending of suprarenal colonAscending majorduodenal —ascending papillaLeft PancreasDuodenum—superior mesenteric ductRight and cava kidneyGallbladderPosition

Fig. the supply Arterial duodenum. to 4.67

Fig. the Radiograph, 4.68 jejunum barium, ileum. and showing using

Fig. the arterial supply in 4.69 the small to intestine. Differences Jejunum. A. B. Ileum.

Fig. 4.70 Ileocecal junction. A. Radiograph showing junction. ileocecal B. showing junction ileocecal the fold. ileocecal Illustration and image the of ileocecal C. fold. Endoscopic

Fig. supply Arterial to the ileum. 4.71

Fig. The that tube from plastic is proximal can a end. be controlled 4.72 endoscope the flexible (e.g., Through excision can used which surgical a run endoscope minor side be endoluminal to portal through polyps). biopsies of to procedures devices perform be the and can inserted, various obtain and

Fig. images Endoscopic junction. the of gastroesophageal 4.73 A. Normal. esophageal cancer Esophageal junction. B. at

Fig. image stomach of toward the 4.74 Endoscopic the antrum pylorus. the of pyloric looking

Fig. Endoscopic second image showing 4.75 normal of part of the appearance duodenum. the

Fig. plane. coronal MRI Small 4.76 bowel visualization using in

Fig. 4.77 colon CT tumor. sigmoid by Axial thickening shows caused wall

Fig. with Meckel’s 4.78 a Vasculature diverticulum. associated Surgical Meckel’s of A. diverticulum. image B. angiography. Digital subtraction

Fig. 4.79 intestine. Large

colonSigmoid flexureAppendixCecumHaustra colonOmental colonAscending colic colic flexureAnal canalRectumIleumTaeniae coli Transverse appendicesLeft colonRight of

Fig. the Radiograph, showing barium, using large 4.80 intestine.

Fig. large in 4.81 intestine nine-region organizational the Position of the pattern.

Fig. 4.82 appendix. Cecum and

Fig. appendicular vessels. and 4.83 Mesoappendix

Fig. the Positions 4.84 appendix. of

Fig. and the 4.85 appendix. to Arterial supply cecum

Fig. Inflamed appendix. 4.86 scan. Ultrasound

Fig. inflamed 4.87 appendix. CT Axial shows

Fig. Colon. 4.88

Fig. Right colic left and flexures. 4.89

Fig. 4.90 Arterial colon. the supply to

Fig. and canal. Rectum 4.91 anal

Fig. supply the to anal canal. and 4.92 Arterial rectum Posterior view.

Fig. and malrotation 4.93 Small volvulus. bowel duodenum, jejunum barium. upper of stomach, Radiograph using and

Fig. malrotation. bowel 4.94 Small stomach, barium. duodenum, jejunum of using and Radiograph

Fig. the bowel. This loops anteroposterior view, of a 4.95 dilated radiograph abdomen, small of number demonstrates of circulares Small to by plicae that can be indicated. the wall from wall identified as pass bowel large bowel dilated. is not The the bowel an is adhesion after dilatation The cause of pelvic surgery. small

of small circulares Dilation bowelPlicae

Fig. patient in Coronal dilated CT fluid-filled obstruction. with of small demonstrates small and 4.96 bowel bowel loops

small Dilated fluid-filledloops of bowel and

Fig. abdomen CT in and shows bowel obstruction. transverse patient with dilated 4.97 ascending and fluid-filled Coronal colon of large

Fig. 4.98 radiograph to obstruction colonic demonstrates placed contrast to passing bowel relieve surgery. that through prior This oblique a has been stent

Fig. descending the within double-contrast 4.99 colon enema and demonstrates outpouchings colon. distal the throughout predominantly This sigmoid the small numerous barium large bowel remain and instances These diverticula most quiescent. are outpouchings small in

Fig. with Axial in colon 4.100 sigmoid of CT inflamed diverticulitis. patient

Fig. the of abdomen. the Position in liver 4.101

Fig. Surfaces recesses liver and with of associated liver. the the 4.102

Fig. the surface liver. of Diaphragmatic 4.103

Fig. liver. surface the 4.104 of Visceral A. Illustration. B. contrast, with Abdominal tomogram, computed plane. the in axial

liverCaudate Left teresFissure lobeRight lobe lobe liverRight hepatisPortal for lobe cavaStomachNeck crus liverLeft ductPorta veinInferior ductsBile for vena of ligamentumvenosumHepatic of veinFissure of pancreasSpleenLeft of kidneyAortaRight liverQuadrate lobeGallbladderAnteriorPosteriorFundusBodyNeckCystic lobeof crusLeft properHepatic lobeQuadrate artery ductABGallbladderPortal ligamentum

Fig. of the ligaments. view area associated Posterior and the liver 4.105 of bare

hepatisAnterior impressionQuadrate impressionEsophageal lobe coronary impressionColic lobe ligamentRight coronary triangular ligamentBare vena liver impressionCaudate liverRight triangularligamentLeft impressionLeft of of ligamentGallbladderPorta areaFundusBodyNeck lobeGastric ligamentPosterior cavaSuprarenal lobeFalciform Inferior Renal

Fig. liver Arterial gallbladder. the supply and 4.106 to A. Schematic. cystic B. surgical duct and artery. Laparoscopic view of cystic

Fig. 4.107 Pancreas.

Fig. 4.108 Abdominal images. with computed tomogram, axial plane. in A. Abdominal contrast, the B. ultrasound Abdominal scan.

veinSplenic colonic lobe of vena GallbladderPancreasPortal cavaRight veinStomachLeft kidneyAortaInferior crusALeft crus liverRight flexureSpleenLeft

arterySuperior arteryPancreasLeft renal veinAortaInferior vena of mesenteric cavaVertebra lobe Left liverBSplenic

Fig. system. Pancreatic 4.109 duct

Fig. the 4.110 supply to pancreas. Arterial view. Posterior

Fig. 4.111 Bile drainage. bile. passage for Duct A. system of system. Percutaneous transhepatic bile demonstrating cholangiogram B. the duct

duodenumDescending ductDescending ductBile hepatic part duodenumAB ductMain ductLeft hepatic GallbladderCystic ductRight of ductCystic ductCommon of ductNeedleCommonhepatic hepatic ductBile pancreatic part

Fig. 4.112 Spleen.

Fig. ligaments 4.113 related vasculature. and Splenic

Fig. hilum of and spleen. Surfaces 4.114 the

Fig. 4.115 Arterial spleen. the to supply

Fig. bile vessels 4.116 hepatic into of the Division liver segments upon the of the distributions based segments). and ducts (Couinaud’s

Fig. multiple Gallbladder containing 4.117 stones. scan. Ultrasound

Fig. (MRCP) resonance the in coronal plane. Magnetic cholangiopancreatography 4.118

Fig. biliary cholangiopancreatography Endoscopic 4.119 system. of retrograde (ERCP)

Endoscope duct common mechanismStent with bile in optic side-viewing

Fig. the enlarged 4.120 CT containing abdomen spleen massively (splenomegaly). a of Coronal

Fig. branches of the Anterior 4.121 abdominal aorta.

Fig. 4.122 summarizing to of each tract segment. midgut, and hindgut, supply the foregut, the primary into gastrointestinal arterial Divisions

Fig. 4.123 Celiac trunk. A. celiac Distribution of trunk. the B. branches. of trunk Digital subtraction its and the celiac angiography

Fig. to supply the Arterial 4.124 pancreas.

Fig. common hepatic artery. the Distribution 4.125 of

Fig. Initial relationships artery. of branching superior mesenteric and 4.126 the

Fig. artery. Superior 4.127 mesenteric A. superior Distribution artery. mesenteric of the B. subtraction of angiography the superior and Digital artery branches. mesenteric its

Fig. 4.128 mesenteric artery. Inferior A. artery. inferior the of Distribution mesenteric B. subtraction the inferior branches. angiography mesenteric artery of Digital its and

Fig. gastrointestinal of and system the Arterial the to the parts to abdominal 4.129 supply spleen.

Fig. and mesenteric marginal superior inferior 4.130 connecting artery Enlarged the arteries. subtraction angiogram. Digital

Fig. vein. 4.131 Portal

Fig. Venous the portion tract. abdominal of drainage 4.132 gastrointestinal of the

Fig. Portosystemic 4.133 anastomoses.

rectal abdominal veinSuperior veinsInferior veinsthat veinSuperior iliac iliac wallExternal accompany LiverSpleenSplenic mesenteric veinLeft azygos rectal veinInferior theligamentum teres cavaInferior gastric veinRectumStomachTributaries veinInternal iliac to vena veinPara-umbilical veinPortal veinCommon veinson veinSuperficial mesenteric

Fig. abdominal the of 4.134 of drainage tract. Lymphatic gastrointestinal portion the

Fig. Sympathetic 4.135 trunks.

Fig. 4.136 Splanchnic nerves.

Fig. prevertebral plexus ganglia. 4.137 Abdominal and

Fig. 4.138 the of of abdominal innervation the Parasympathetic tract. portion gastrointestinal

Fig. 4.139 enteric system. The

Fig. abdominal Posterior region. 4.140

Fig. abdominal Osteology of wall. posterior 4.141 the

Fig. posterior 4.142 the of wall. Muscles abdominal

Fig. Diaphragm. 4.143

anteriorand arteryCentral with nerveRight crusSympathetic veinGreater tendonInferior nerveInferior phrenicarteryAortaThoracic crus nerveLesser cavaHemi-azygos Left vagal phrenic epigastric posterior vena ductEsophagus splanchnic splanchnic nerveLeft trunkRight splanchnic phrenic nerveLeast trunksLIVLIIILIILISuperior

Fig. diaphragm. Crura of the 4.144

Fig. Right and of domes left diaphragm. the 4.145 radiograph. Chest

Fig. 4.146 Fetal hernia diaphragmatic utero. in T2-weighted image. MR plane. in in Fetus mother plane, coronal sagittal

lumbarvertebra abdominalcontents thoracic Fetal (fluid-filledloops on vertebralcolumnFetal headNormal cavityFetal fetal intestine)in lung cavityFetal development rightside of of ofthoracic sideMaternal side diaphragmdeveloped left onright

Fig. showing and upper hernia. stomach esophagus a Lower 4.147 hiatal using Radiograph barium.

Fig. of CT 4.148 hiatal hernia. Coronal

Fig. of the 4.149 Retroperitoneal the position abdominal kidneys posterior region. in

of peritoneumAbdominal kidneyLeft edges glandRight suprarenal glandLeft suprarenal cavaDiaphragmRight kidneyCut vena Inferior aortaEsophagus

Fig. kidney. the 4.150 to each Structures surface related anterior of

flexureLeft colic suprarenal StomachLiverPancreasDescending part colonSmall flexureDescending intestineSpleenJejunumRight colic of suprarenal glandLeft duodenumRight gland

Fig. the surface posterior Structures of kidney. each to related 4.151

Fig. surrounding 4.152 fat and kidney. Organization the fascia of

Fig. of Internal the kidney. 4.153 structure

veinPyramid calyxUreterHilum sinusMinor of in pelvisMajor papillaRenal calyxRenal kidney columnRenal arteryRenal cortexRenal Renal renal medullaRenal

Fig. Renal vasculature. 4.154 A. showing long CT the left vein B. crossing renal image midline.

Fig. 4.155 Ureters.

renal renal Internal inletFirst iliac constriction—ureteropelvic iliac iliac kidneyLeft arteryRight bladderSecond constriction—entrance kidneyAbdominal constriction—pelvic junctionUreter arteryGonadal to arteryCommon arteryRight aortaBladderUreterThird arteryExternal arteriesLeft

Fig. pelvis. urinary renal tract Low-dose displays (CT 4.156 of CT left stone in KUB) axial

Fig. and 4.157 invading, the kidney the in growing duodenum. possibly right toward, Tumor in the plane. Computed tomogram axial

Fig. the kidney right 4.158 renal Tumor right in vein. into the spreading axial in Computed the tomogram plane.

Fig. 4.159 carcinoma right of kidney. cell pelvis Transitional the in the Coronal reconstruction. computed tomogram

Fig. 4.160 double-J (anteroposterior radiograph view). stent demonstrates This a is The superior stent renal double-J situated within pelvis. aspect the of the describing slightly dense over tip the area bladder, as of projected the double-J ureter, radiograph. path the is which stent passes the the of through the The and a stent on appears ureter, the

Fig. Kidney 4.161 transplant. A. This of aorta. image the of bifurcation an the MR demonstrates angiogram for the the been external into has fossa. a donor iliac left artery to that is Attaching iliac the artery kidney transplanted left Abdominal showing in left the iliac plane, transplanted B. tomogram, fossa. the the computed kidney in axial

been donor kidneyTransplant aortaCommon iliacarteryThe external the arteryExternal to left used iliacarteryInternal kidneyin left iliac iliac the iliacfossa AAbdominal arteryhas connectto

Fig. computed using urogram Coronal 3-D of view tomography. 4.162 multidetector

Fig. supply suprarenal to glands. the 4.163 Arterial

Fig. Abdominal 4.164 aorta.

Fig. repair. Volume-rendered aneurysm an infrarenal 4.165 reconstruction using abdominal with aneurysm after (B) aortic patient and tomography (A) of before endovascular computed multidetector the intraluminal Note entire not demonstrates the only the image and contrast vessel. White in calcium. the aorta patches intramural represent

Fig. 4.166 Inferior vena cava.

Fig. 4.167 Lumbar veins.

Fig. 4.168 lymphatics. Abdominal

nodes aortic lumbar mesenteric nodesCommon nodesCisterna iliac Inferior withlateral lumbar trunkRight chyliPre-aortic with vena nodesExternal nodesInternal (lumbar) nodesInferior nodesSuperior iliac trunk nodesLeft cavaIntestinal mesenteric iliac trunk nodesExternal lateral iliac nodesCeliac (lumbar) aortic

Fig. Sympathetic region. posterior the trunks through 4.169 abdominal passing

Fig. abdominal in ganglia and 4.170 posterior the plexus region. Prevertebral

Fig. passing through abdominal and the 4.171 Nerve ganglia. prevertebral fibers plexus

Fig. plexus. prevertebral with Prevertebral ganglia associated the 4.172

Fig. Lumbar 4.173 plexus.

of nerveIliohypogastricnerve nerveFemoralnerveTo iliacusmuscleLateral cutaneousnerve trunkObturator lumbosacral thighGenitofemoralnerveIlio-inguinal T12L1L2L3L4To

Fig. the posterior Lumbar region. 4.174 abdominal in plexus

nerveSubcostal nerve of trunks(L4,L5) (L2 nerveLateral nerve nerveObturator L4)Lumbosacral (L2,L3)Femoral (L1,L2)Iliacus nerveGenitofemoral to (L2 nerve nerve thigh cutaneous (T12)Iliohypogastric nerve nerve muscleIlio-inguinal nerveIlio-inguinal of cutaneous L4)Genitofemoral muscleObturator Subcostal major (L1)Psoas thighFemoral nerve to nerveIliohypogastric nerve (L1)Lateral

Fig. lumbar 4.175 plexus. Cutaneous the nerves the distribution from of

(L1,L2)Lateral genitofemoral nerve (L1)Femoral nerve nerve (L2 cutaneous (L2 cutaneous branchof of cutaneous nerve nerve branch obturator cutaneous nerveMedial L4)Cutaneous (L1)Ilio-inguinal nerve of of nerve (L1,L2)Lateral cutaneous fromfemoral to nerve nerve femoral (L2 thigh L4)Femoral nerveSaphenous thigh femoral iliohypogastric nerve nerve nerve cutaneous nerve of iliohypogastric to from L1T12T12T12T11T11T10T10Ilio-inguinal branch (L1)Genitofemoral (L2,L3)Obturator branchof to L4)Lateral (L2,L3)Intermediate from (L1)Anterior

Fig. of Interior abdominal 4.176 man. a the region view of and ligament, the position diaphragm are indicated. of the Palpable landmarks, inguinal bony the

Fig. Groin. 4.177 A. man. In a B. In a woman. regions Examination ring superficial related of inguinal man. the C. and canal a inguinal the of in

of ligamentFemoral cordInguinal pubic uterusInguinal obliqueSuperficial of arteryDeep external superior obliqueAponeurosis of of spineSpermatic inguinal symphysisABCAnterior iliac ringSuperficial symphysisAnterior ligamentFemoral ringPosition Deep of artery inguinal superior ringPosition inguinal external inguinal ringAponeurosis pubic iliac spineRound ligament

Fig. positions indicated. vertebrae of used Landmarks 4.178 for lumbar are establishing the abdominal the view region a Anterior of man. of

iliac planeIntertubercular crestLILIILIIILIVLVPubic tenthcostal on of cartilageLower iliumJugular planeUmbilicus910 notchTranspyloric symphysisTubercle cartilageHighest crest of edge End planeSupracristal point of costal ninth planeSubcostal of

Fig. and the level. associated level this viscera 4.179 with LI important vertebral man. the a region of of abdominal Anterior view

artery KidneyEnd mesenteric costal notchDuodenumTranspyloric planeNeck ninth cartilageLI9Pubic of symphysisJugular of pancreasSuperior

Fig. body’s vessels the 4.180 Major onto projected surface. abdominal region view a the Anterior man. of of

iliacveins symphysisJugular planeUmbilicusInferior originof Bifurcation cavaLII of mesenteric vena mesenteric arteryLITXIILIILIIILIVLVPubic renal planeSupracristal Approximate Inferior border inferiorvena trunkAortaLower notchTranspyloric LISuperior planeSubcostal planeIntertubercular Joining LICeliac border aortaLV the of Upper form arteryLIV arteryLIII common of of cava910 to

Fig. major quadrants of Abdominal positions the and viscera. 4.181 view man. a of Anterior

Fig. abdomen. nine 4.182 the of regions The Anterior of woman. view a

Fig. 4.183 ureters. the and kidneys of Surface projection woman. abdominal of view of a Posterior region the

Fig. of the spleen. 4.184 projection Surface a Posterior view of man.

eFig. biopsy 4.187 right the vein. hepatic in Transjugular liver needle Radiograph.

eFig. collection gas. Subphrenic 4.188 and of pus Computed plane. tomogram in the axial

eFig. of gas Subphrenic collection pus and of transjugular intrahepatic Position portosystemic shunt 4.189 a stent. Radiograph.

eFig. shunt. 4.190 Functioning portosystemic intrahepatic transjugular Venogram.

Fig. the 4.185 head the of pancreas. Tumor in in tomogram axial the plane. Computed

eFig. computed a 4.191 loop and the cavity. diverticula pelvis the axial the demonstrates a of plane, colon in with numerous pelvic abscess sigmoid A large of in tomogram,

Fig. demonstrates situated the postcontrast right tomogram, in metastases lobe 4.186 plane, This axial of liver. the two the computed within the lobe of left clear. is liver The larger hepatic is vein, of of right plane the left and the principal the middle to lies the dividing the liver the in two metastases situated The the sides liver. right of of which

Table Abdominal muscles 4.1 wall

muscles Table abdominal wall 4.2 Posterior

aorta the Table 4.3 of Branches abdominal

4.4 Table drainage Lymphatic

pathways 4.5 pain (visceral Referred afferents) Table

of 4.6 Table plexus lumbar the Branches

In the clinic

its incisions the to is anterior obtained through and usually Access the abdominal wall. in contents abdomen and incisions interest. region placed Traditionally, around the of been have at surgical allow incisions these visualization good of to and The of was the size usually access cavity. large optimal abdominal widely has smaller. abdominal the drugs developed become and muscle-relaxing become As anesthesia incisions have used, have

the pubis, to used exploratory is whole (laparotomy). performed the most large the abdominal and a process incision xiphoid Currently, craniocaudad allows procedure symphysis to wide be central to contents the abdominal incision provides commonly of an the access from which

In the clinic

invasive operating minimally of Laparoscopic small also or no by to through a 2 as more series than keyhole in 1 is performed length. incisions surgery, surgery, known cm traditional shorter less patients incisions As than abdominal surgery, and pain experience used in have times. are recovery the those much smaller postoperative with a scars. also is outcome smaller cosmetic There favorable repair, performed now gynecological appendectomy, and and hernia as well as commonly urological, such Several procedures procedures, cholecystectomy, surgical laparoscopically. are orthopaedic, as numerous

as a known operation, a used live, images surgical surgeon. magnified to by a transmit viewed the During camera laparoscope field to monitor the is the of port-site, cavity incision, small inserted usually a a camera into the at called the abdominal through The umbilicus. is inflating is the abdominal dioxide. gas, with to space to carbon by create elevated operate, wall enough order typically cavity In the Other used additional introduced the instruments surgical long, are port-sites, to thin operate. can through which by surgeon be then access the surgical is planned of allow placement to optimal The port-sites to field. these carefully

use the of been Laparoscopic robots. with further surgical surgery has enhanced the operating arms, small moves incisions. systems Using surgical indirectly the robotic into these instruments by inserted surgeon controlling are the field through which laparoscopy used surgery dexterity. and the overcome by worldwide Robot-assisted some helped of the limitations now is enhancing of surgeon’s has routinely instruments. of view allows 3D the manipulation is provides field, precise, robotic the and surgeon surgical The surgical system and degree a of improved rotation with of the method. procedures can as prostatectomy now and performed with cholecystectomy be this such Several

most laparoscopic surgery. the in surgery, as single-site is advance recent also laparoscopy, known single-port Laparoendoscopic This single be assistance. a operating port usually introduce with can incision, umbilical, and channels robotic method performed several without with a or uses to postoperative than even an time, recovery a laparoscopic pain, traditional Benefits cosmetic and include result faster less better surgery.

In clinic the

covering cremaster middle muscle cord. In the men, the second the of form and or cremasteric spermatic fascia supplied (L1/L2). nerve the the are and its This genitofemoral of muscle branch by fascia associated genital the of arc. by stimulated Contraction a testis and reflex can this resulting be elevation the muscle of aspect the sensory the touching the of stimulates anterior thigh part Gently of the and nerve. the in around superior fibers ilio-inguinal at the skin L1. spinal enter at These cord level the sensory fibers fibers this the elevation and results the of genitofemoral of of the nerve, which in in At the stimulate carried testis. motor sensory contraction muscle level, branch cremaster the the fibers genital

cremasteric in diminish with age. to children, The more is active reflex tending be neurological it certain disorders. may As reflexes, in with absent many testing limited. it men, Although used its cord spinal be in level for L1 is can clinical function at use

the In clinic

groin around the Masses

the confluence is structures. anatomical complex a of Around there groin and correct from therefore the which mass and structure the the good knowledge arises examination allow Careful of anatomical diagnosis. anatomical determination groin masses hernias. most in The common the are

position The is ligament. to groin the examination of inguinal the key determining superior medially. the anterior laterally spine ligament tubercle between the inguinal and pubic iliac The passes are Inguinal above and ligament inguinal on usually more are apparent the hernias standing. of A mind bearing is in visual the inguinal anatomical landmarks of the necessary, the lump ligament. assessment

wise examine is In for check scrotum to to a the men, lump. it suggests and If that originate its to an canal present, inability might is hernia. an feel inguinal edge abnormal be may a it upper the from mass and bulges cough, the asking the hand By patient to outward. the lump lump placing over the

reduce over made pressure lump. attempt applying swelling the gentle, the should An firm to by be lump is will the of careful the should be reveal recurrence withdrawn observation and mass. If hand the reducible,

strangulation represent the is an which are or infection. tubercle pubic increased in important, very groin and of early relative as to position the may presence of pain, of signs mass The abnormal the temperature

a As rule: general

An appears and pubic tubercle inguinal crest. the above superficial through inguinal ring the hernia

below canal appears below) to tubercle. the lateral hernia (see femoral through femoral pubic the A and

in hernia of or in A protrusion or a part viscus, is through whole, opening. a the abnormal normal hernial carries usually of of lining forms a The peritoneum, which the sac. viscus the covering parietal

variety occur regions. in Hernias of a the anterior groin abdominal lower of site is commonest wall. The the the the are the caused inguinal passage birth the viscera of and inguinal present persistence some hernias and patients, (congenital) are of canal. vaginalis by from processus through In pressure and Acquired patients weakening from of abdominal incisions), older causes of nerves the intraabdominal inguinal repeated walls surgical of wall abdominal associated damage canal. (e.g., raised and coughing occur in to disease), lung from hernias with the anterior include the (e.g.,

One bowel the potential that the hernial of is sac. within with stuck fat and may problems hernias become obstruction, pain can appreciable bowel cause necessitating This surgery. urgent and neck perforation potential to ischemic hernia, blood hernial bowel and Another cut at which off in (Fig. the the the sac, to supply the of bowel the is the of is rendering risk susceptible strangulation 4.51).

an indirect the deep passes and enters hernia inguinal hernial The inguinal the sac through ring inguinal of canal. hernia hernial sac ring. the If through large may emerge enough, the is inguinal the superficial extend men, In into (Fig. such may a hernia the scrotum 4.52).

the ring. inguinal to through of immediately of The canal a hernial inguinal the superficial pushes sac hernia posterior wall inguinal posterior the forward direct to hernia ring. inferior epigastric and inguinal through the protrudes the vessels directly forward superficial medial The

direct when identified are ring: during is between an vessels the of hernia a internal the epigastric differentiation deep inferior made indirect inguinal at and medial The the surgery edge

sac lateral vessels. hernial the indirect to inferior passes An epigastric

direct A inferior the is medial vessels. epigastric to hernia

commonly inguinal than in a women. have canal women occur men than hernias because much more Inguinal larger possibly men in

the of the medial femoral A hernia the and anterior into thigh. canal passes femoral aspect through the lymphatics. the canal femoral lies sheath, edge the of femoral at femoral The which medial and artery, femoral vein, contains of sac, is bowel type bowel is this prone narrow of and canal so trapping within hernia neck strangulation. femoral making the The to and the susceptible irreducible extremely to populations. usually are are congenital, middle-aged not and and commonly in elderly acquired, hernias occur most Femoral in pelvises because occur wider men, In tend have they more to addition, women. commonly than women generally

midline. area meets trunk leg loosely as where groin can the the be near the defined The the together, the end bones the thigh, Here of the pubic attaches abdominal tubercle, inguinal trunk in superficial the ring the the the of pubic the and symphysis (external) two the adductor muscles of to blend pubic the attaches muscles ligament with medial occurs. inguinal and of force activities. athletic around It considerable there is where and sporting also in during this translation is region most groin longus, pubic the inflammatory changes include to or can pubic abdominis/adductor of the which insertional be region in due hernias. Pain problems causes, and numerous at symphysis, the rectus

hernias are Umbilical rare. return congenital they and cord to Occasionally, the umbilical from cavity of to the development. during small abdominal are from bowel the failure result the hernias of umbilical incomplete After birth, closure from umbilicus (navel). may result of and these not later. surgical attempted most hernias generally first close in Overall, is until repair life, the year of

occur Para-umbilical the and necks, treatment. and hernias umbilicus requiring often surgical so adults at in have small around may

Incisional operation. in defect a abdominal of a scar previous through occur hernias a do not the they are and strangulate of these necks viscera contain. wide Usually, the hernias therefore

line sheath. posterior lateral at part through of A border into the rectus upward arcuate the lower spigelian the hernia the passes of as lower may side appear tender anterior the on a one abdominal mass wall. It

and canal, the in also sites obturator the above foramen develop below association cavity the hernias Abdominopelvic and include with piriformis can walls, the muscle. sciatic pelvic greater and

clinic In the

cavity A the movement cavity. fluid of abdominal of volume small suspended peritoneal within the viscera lubricates the in peritoneal It imaging detectable such not tomography. or computed is ultrasound on any as available (e.g., failure) in ascites. pancreatitis, conditions heart of this peritoneal volume can liver as or In increase; known is the various acute cirrhosis, pathological fluid distention (Fig. of of free marked high cases intraperitoneal abdominal volume In observed can fluid, be 4.56).

disease and the and The spread the which peritoneal peritoneal the over through of surfaces. has space bowel area, visceral facilitates surface cavity large a large procedures. administering certain of number can of types be surface Conversely, area for a this and treatment used

the fluid. of obstructive Patients excessive cerebral fluid this within hydrocephalus of (an accumulation continuous ventricular cerebrospinal drainage with system) require fine-bore through then peritoneal placing of neck and beneath placing the the catheter wall through abdominal the This achieved the cavity. cerebral the into and skin is and the wall, skull by tube a of the and ventricles part extracranial the chest scalp into cavity, fluid it through into is absorbed. drains where the peritoneal Cerebrospinal the tube

who renal failure dialysis require develop People live. to methods. There two are

dialyzed blood through the from the membrane, (hemodialysis), the returned method a artificial and to taken circulation, first is In complex body. blood and remove metabolites. of excess flow remove is to rate electrolytes, A noxious fluid, required exchange high body the returns atrium, blood “mature”) placed fistula and established returned. approximately is weeks vein, to a (by right for be and requiring is time cannula to through the and To patient an upper usually cannulated an either each dialysis, can or is artery accomplish arteriovenous six this, into the which a limb, large-bore surgically in aspirated connecting

dialysis), is membrane. as (peritoneal the dialysis the peritoneum In second method used the of an for and The fluid surface is large dialysis the ideal membrane peritoneal electrolyte exchange. area cavity a tube is fluid and wall dialysis, dialysis abdominal the is through To cavity. the inserted small peritoneal into accomplish injected and fluid the the between peritoneum molecules and are Electrolytes across exchanged blood. is completed, dialysis fluid is drained. the Once

Peritoneal of spread disease

of disease and The (Fig. throughout abdomen area the allows the cavity surface to malignant infection peritoneal easily spread large 4.57). direct colon from rapid. the or ovarian malignant spread by be cavity enter cancer), may (e.g., peritoneal cells If invasion Similarly, malignant a an releasing appreciable into peritoneal and surgeon malignant of cause the cavity patient’s worsening may a cells excising prognosis. tumor the large the also surface across area. Infection can spread

act to, barrier and disease. container The a can of, cavity peritoneal also as body to spread tends therefore than rather into Intraabdominal the below other diaphragm infection cavities. remain

bowel perforated A cavity. release gas perforated peritoneal often caused the a into the by leads duodenal ulcer) to (e.g., of radiograph—gas diaphragm. extremely visualized beneath be peritoneal can gas in the small on an chest easily be demonstrated This amounts erect can laparotomy gas A abdominal with patient and subdiaphragmatic (Fig. severe pain a needs 4.58).

the clinic In

greater omentum The

the is greater When performed structure usually opened, the omentum. a is cavity is laparotomy encountered and peritoneal the first hangs fatty drapes suspended colon, membrane apron abdominal transverse the an stomach, the This cavity. of within the curvature like over the and greater freely lies from vascular double-layered It of to abdomen” the area organ and inflammation. around “policeman inflamed wall of off referred its to as the to apparent the itself is migrate often any wrap ability because to

of a When part peristalsis. becomes ceases bowel it inflamed, This a paralytic area aperistaltic to referred ileus. local is as The region no there peristalsis. to move is the bowel the to the greater where “massages” omentum part noninflamed remaining and of continues spreads the to diseased adheres omentum, inflammatory which bowel. then The greater localized the reaction to area of

tumor spread. for important an site is metastatic also omentum The greater a for spread Direct omental route of common is the by transcoelomic ovary. carcinoma significantly becomes it metastases omentum, develop within the thickened. greater the As

cake.” the tomography computed omentum is to “omental thickened imaging during an referred In as and laparotomy,

the In clinic

esophagus transition the between Epithelial and stomach abdominal

epithelium). gastroesophageal to stratified another type epithelium) one (columnar (nonkeratinized is transition epithelial demarcated from junction by squamous a epithelial type The proximally the lie more esophagus. In the does gastroesophageal of not junction occurs junction people, but at third lower histological some in the the anatomical to with associated This risk and also of ulceration people predispose esophageal increased these adenocarcinoma. may an is In reflux, epithelium, gastroesophageal in can conditions, the epithelium columnar in the like esophagus esophagus called a condition stratified and certain the metaplasia is undergo esophagus. the epithelium replaced lower by squamous Barrett’s presence malignancy people the of these predisposes (adenocarcinoma). to development esophageal The Barrett’s of esophagus

the clinic In

the part Duodenal they superior less much in the than ago. were years occur are common of and usually 50 duodenum ulcers first, patients died was and hemorrhage there At peritonitis. from or no treatment some gastrointestinal prevent dangerous. duodenal to patients were treatment the for ulcer extensive surgical As and was patients with techniques surgery recurrence to upper developed, ulcers subjected in this antagonists) stimulation the disease. developed stomach (histamine drugs indirectly of acid the significantly of reduced rates H2-receptor were these knowledge and increased, secretion secretion and understanding have mortality the mechanisms for to and and block As morbidity acid the of can cells now that inhibitors. proton stomach example, produce pump the with, therapy acid Pharmacological directly for inhibit the when treatment) screened formation. bacteria (by Patients reduces which ulcer pylori, for also duodenal antibiotic are significantly eradicated Helicobacter

tend Anatomically, duodenal to posteriorly. ulcers anteriorly occur or either

directly can the onto the posterior gastroduodenal ulcers fatal hemorrhage, some in duodenal which pancreaticoduodenal artery artery, commonly, which torrential onto more may erode produce superior either Posterior patients. or, be femoral catheter Treatment may whereby from place very surgery abdominal into radiologist fine the artery of the artery. the endovascular a celiac may ligation extensive the or with by vessels involve means upper retrogradely stem which coils, artery using blood. hepatic blocked and may the the common gastroduodenal artery the small of are and flow The area be bleeding cannulated

the Anterior ulcers erode cavity, causing peritoneal duodenal into peritonitis. local reaction intense which off the and ileus the omentum, of perforation. promote seal to This attempts greater adhesion the inflammatory cavity of erect as a enters and on usually considerable observed amounts the gas. subdiaphragmatic chest an and duodenum can peritoneal stomach contain of radiograph The be gas, which patient perforation In surgical. instances, for most treatment is the ulcer

In the clinic

the Examination upper of lower and

the examine proximal esophagus, to is It necessary for stomach, and jejunum, often disease. duodenum, colon simple After an series and for the look appropriate tests bleeding, a blood to physicians arrange most inflammation, and tumors. examining patient, taking of history steps three compress namely, lumen, it. the of bowel, may next any to the bowel, or into assess the extrinsic and the of masses the components in loop erode wall, which The investigation

of lumen Examination bowel the

visualized solutions can be fluoroscopy and using Barium patient may swallowed by unit. sulfate be X-ray an the tumors) peristaltic be The waves masses can assessed. and be and (e.g., can lumen for examined polyps coats displaying Patients fine the the also the dioxide–releasing that may fill thinly be granules detail. stomach so to carbon mucosal given resulting images barium mucosa, in duodenum, the relatively can bowel. simple be used esophagus, image are stomach, and and small to These tests the a sulfate used enema can be barium large barium into to imaging For introduce the colon. bowel, Colonoscopy colonography used. CT and are also

bowel extrinsic and Examination the wall of masses

invasive that can is the medical the tube surfaces diagnostic be body. to by a Endoscopy of an a assess procedure inserting minimally used organ into interior material are source at attached light eyepiece is a plastic typically a one which and of made end. through flexible The instrument monitor. a to images projected are then The bore passage endoscope Some of small polyps). instruments of also the the obtain small the main of through and removal to procedures to systems undertake biopsies (e.g., allow

to and the assess and abdominal an small endoscope (Figs. duodenum, used medicine In proximal is stomach, bowel gastrointestinal esophagus, to 4.75). 4.72 and is well swallowed The the sedation extremely patient tolerated. light under tube by is

the long into colon and through passage Assessment tube (colonoscopy) is of flexible the anus of the by rectum. performed the and the advanced The the endoscope terminal into cecum colon is ileum. then to sometimes to the bowel undergoes The visualization good to the bowel. entire before allow patient preparation examination the of large clear of solutions designed fecal help taken the bowel orally material. to Specially are to may visualization. be used and improve the Air, examination during suction water, Biopsies, of the using stent openings can colonoscope. can passed bleeding, removal, that also through additional be polyp performed and special in instruments placement cauterization be

bowel and is or computed another using tomography to assess the way imaging lumen resonance Cross magnetic sectional wall. mural can good and mesentery and provides allows bowel of the is of thickening useful wall distention of Magnetic segmental motility the increased or bowel bowel it or mucosal and assessment continuous small demonstrate ulcerations assessment particularly vascularity visualization bowel also small resonance of dynamic and because (Fig. in 4.76). such patients Crohn’s usually in disease. as inflammatory is bowel performed It with diseases,

to produce for (also of with colon the CT lesions abnormal bowel. or views virtual such large colonoscopy strictures alternative way an high-resolution assess CT visualize use 3D pneumocolon) colonography or to called polyps and CT spiral as the is the to bowel needs insufflated less colon take to images to It the ensure preparations patient colonoscopy, good-quality achieve traditional to bowel than cleansing, be CO2. the and is with invasive needs but tumor If is a present (Fig. disease 4.77), and lymph used metastases nodes both distant abnormal CT), are MRI CT assess (MRI, to (MRI), (CT). and regional

clinic In the

diverticulum (Fig. A Meckel’s and that of part the extends embryo the (vitelline remnant cord the antimesenteric into is umbilical of the stalk in on yolk the the duct) lies of 4.78) border proximal ileum. the outgrowth tubular It of as a bowel. blind-ended appears is (occurring small population), patients. Although the of number important produce it it uncommon 2% symptoms diagnosis finding of approximately does a an because to it diverticulum consider in of is always in Meckel’s the and may and mucosa It gastric lead contain ulceration hemorrhage. to therefore obstruction. and Other intussusception, diverticulitis, include typical complications

In the clinic

imaging of wall the or information endoscopic studies. from obtained provide important bowel be that barium not techniques These about the can may with or of the change inflammatory may indicate wall suspicion. regarded is tumor always and Thickening If can spread metastatic locoregional a the spread. along demonstrated, be with lymphadenopathy assessed, and tumor is

placed on end Endoscopic uses device tract. to the ultrasound gastrointestinal ultrasound small (EUS) upper endoscope of assess a the the whether resectable. submucosa extremely and is show high-powered views mucosa and therefore produce of It a the can tumor the to It biopsy. guidance provides a taking clinician when also

the clinic In

Carcinoma stomach of the

of Carcinoma malignancy. common stomach a gastrointestinal the is the anemia, this to until late the cancer, inflammation not polyps predispose of gastric Chronic diagnosed which is of in disease. aggressive development pernicious usually the (gastritis), course and include leading obstruction. and anemia, fullness vague epigastric with Symptoms early eating, chronic bleeding to pain,

The be same be barium a using endoscopy, to obtained at which conventional allows time. the made diagnosis radiology or biopsy and may check metastatic computed if the to liver and, tomography out spread, assess Ultrasound for to surgical negative, resectability. scanning is used for carried is is is diagnosed carcinoma stomach a resection surgical the possible. early, curative If of disease, mean the not 8 late is because and 5 seek patients treatment months. survival between rate overall 5-year and between survival in the 5% a 20%, most until However, time do of with

In the clinic

is emergency. an abdominal Acute appendicitis obstructed occurs when either the fecalith the nodules. by lymphoid of or appendix a It is usually enlargement necrosis. wall, pressure proliferate Within invade the becomes appendix the damaged and appendix, bacteria obstructed which by inflammatory resolve other instances, this in change (Figs. some In cases, spontaneously; may continues or 4.86 generalized ensues, to and peritonitis. perforation lead localized which and may 4.87)

in have appendicitis the localized acute groin. right with patients Most tenderness and pain go. tends type come Initially, pain, central, the a which colicky of begins to periumbilical, as After the constant. to 6 pain hours, tends right 10 becomes in to the fossa localize and iliac fever, vomiting. may and a develop nausea, Patients 48. The appendicitis for of p. of on is described pain Case 1 etiology 1 the in Chapter

The treatment for is appendicitis appendectomy.

clinic In the

Congenital tract the disorders gastrointestinal of

growth the result the undergoes abdominal normal of cavity of positions series of rotations size in viscera a the changes accommodate complex organs the from (see from that The abdominal the pp. and developing tube gut to the of 265-268). number neonate during of can developmental appear are of emergencies. many A gut or the of some occur anomalies and infant, in development, which surgical which diagnosed disorders Occasionally, such adults. only are in

Malrotation after midgut to the coelom and and umbilical has from passed fixation the incomplete it rotation of sac the returned is abdominal (Figs. 4.94). 4.93 and of The muscle the bowel the small duodenum junction. determines of of mesentery at the which (ligament Treitz), suspensory duodenojejunal of attachment position the begins proximal quadrant. the the the the in level of at bowel mesentery lower ileocecal junction The small of right ends fixation of the mesentery the gut. long twists line prevents of of This accidental

not the in artery. If axis permits around bowel does mesenteric twisting cecum flexure site, bowel which or of the end the of origin the shortens, of up mesentery the duodenojejunal small usual superior the its small the Twisting general, volvulus. bowel, the of termed in is of to may lead of a and bowel the flow reduction infarction. Volvulus small blood

midabdomen. in the the patients, In some cecum up ends series to the colon bands) cecum right undersurface of (Ladd’s compress develop the the extend of the and a duodenum. the that right the From peritoneal side folds and of liver obstruction. A small then as as well bowel may volvulus duodenal occur bands. necessary the be divide Emergency surgery to may

In the clinic

obstruction. A either can be or due obstruction functional a bowel true to extrinsic wall, extrinsic mass be compression an or to Mechanical caused obstructing (Fig. secondary tumor which body, intraluminal, in an foreign from a embryological or obstruction by the is adhesion, mural, band or can 4.95).

excessive number usually functional A which a state bowel obstruction a an has due again the due to frequently of postsurgical intraoperative is to causes, inability to is and most peristalse, of bowel handling. Other well may sodium causes has include occurred. correction abnormality until electrolytes rendering and (e.g., paralyzed bowel potassium) the of

has obstruction The depend obstruction signs symptoms on at the which occurred. and of level the intermittent, overcome the try symptom as pain primary waves abdominal, The central peristaltic colicky to the is obstruction. proximal of distention if Abdominal is obstruction fluid. will to it occur bowel (distal), a fill loops allowing more with low high produce bowel) distention. not proximal (in the A may abdominal obstruction small

ensue. inability and to absolute will the including constipation, pass Vomiting flatus,

lumen is electrolytes and produces important dehydration because the enter to diagnosis be considerable and fluid reabsorbed, abnormalities. which fail electrolyte and Early bowel the perforation. may compromising continues Furthermore, wall, to bowel which lead bowel and distend, within to blood ischemia the the supply and symptoms and the of are depend level obstruction. The variable signs on

appendectomy). any caused be typically bowel previous following interventions and for or operations (e.g., sought always Small abdominal surgery, adhesions by should obstruction previous is history mesentery causes Other bowel into (volvulus). include (e.g., passing own inguinal) twisting and its on bowel hernias bowel is Examination patients with orifices hernial in (Fig. mandatory obstruction of 4.96).

tumor. is caused obstruction a bowel commonly Large by potential Other (Fig. include hernias disease the sigmoid of diverticular causes and colon inflammatory 4.97).

electrolytes, The treatment fluid obstruction. of analgesia, and relief replacement and intravenous of is passage allows from The stomach. the nasogastric tube aspiration of of a fluid instances, settle small to adhesions, nonoperative with obstruction, In bowel secondary many management. typically will may (e.g., defunctioning operation lesion, procedure colostomy) bypass Large obstructing an temporary urgent require to or obstruction a remove (Fig. bowel the 4.98).

clinic the In

the sigmoid colonic the throughout diverticula, is affected disease (Fig. predominantly may colon though multiple colon, whole development be Diverticular the of 4.99). therefore the colon site potentially diameter and is pressure any where is has of sigmoid smallest portion of highest. colon the the The intraluminal the dietary and Poor also fiber linked intake diverticular to are obesity disease.

requires of treatment. patient presence does necessarily The not any multiple mean diverticula the or have patients other symptoms Moreover, signs. no many

becomes signs diverticulum when obstructed to the of the and feces tend becomes infected. by develop symptoms Patients and neck wall, along Inflammation pain. may spread causing the abdominal becomes inflamed When fever abdominal the (Fig. pain colon (diverticulitis), sigmoid ensue and 4.100).

occur. anatomical are there number the Because of sigmoid position that a complications the of may colon of diverticula pelvis. can form perforate in the to an The abscess The may an left produce inflammation mass, inflammatory ureter. the obstructing sigmoid producing may spread to bladder, bladder. fistula colon a the the between also the and Inflammation infection and may tract rarely fecal circumstances have these urethra. gas develop per material patients a and urinary In passing

scanning. The clinical CT and often examination diagnosis upon based is will resection be therapy; may treated surgical symptoms persist. instance, necessary be however, antibiotic with In the patients a first if

clinic the In

the externalize to occasionally to It is necessary wall. surgically bowel anterior abdominal Externalization important bowel plays in patient of management. an role are in bypass knowledge instances many anatomical life procedures our saving. These use extraanatomical and

the to skin stomach. placed is abdominal anterior Gastrostomy the and tube is through is attached into when stomach wall the a the performed and to feed and Typically the to is impossible food head patient complex fluid orally performed cancer). this take when neck it is (e.g., either or puncture The in wall. anterior can a performed through be procedure the under sedation abdominal needlestick surgically direct

the jejunum and to is abdominal brought the anterior wall fixed. Similarly a the small efferent placed as used jejunostomy site through feeding bowel. wall is tube proximal abdominal into is where the a The anterior

bowel contents diverted be from to performed need distal small ileostomy is An when bowel. the often healing ileostomy the colon as after in such allow surgery. is to An performed anastomosis, surgical to a protect distal

are when may of instances number There colostomy be a necessary. a performed to bowel after protect circumstances large the surgery. In is distal many it perforation decompression contents. wherein with its further indication allows bowel colostomy a the A imminent large bowel obstruction would and of include procedure for the is safe too performed unwell when and This a surgery. patient bowel temporizing extensive is reduced and is straightforward mortality. and It carries risk, morbidity preventing relatively significant

undergone end the surgical for and (typically anus when An patient is cancer). colostomy necessary the a has rectum of resection

procedure and An is bladder tumor. is after an extraanatomical conduit performed the resection for of ileal bowel this segment short In small of situation a is identified. divided its on 20-cm own twice The a is to of mesentery. segment bowel produce small bowel is segment of a This bowel used conduit. as isolated together. The is bowel joined remaining anastomosed to anterior end is abdominal the is proximal wall. distal the The ureters, the end anastomosed and to segment of the kidneys urine bowel the and small the anterior ureters passes short Hence, wall. into the from abdominal through to

ileostomy, wall. an conduit patients have either them ileal abdominal is collecting necessary a it or fix the colostomy, When onto to bag for anterior bags tolerated live well allow by are initial most healthy and patients life. thoughts to these normal to a nearly one’s Contrary and extremely patients

In the clinic

pancreas foregut. dorsal The buds the develops ventral from from and bud pancreas. The body neck, forms most dorsal and of of head, the the The bile part uncinate ventral the head the to the duct and process. bud rotates around of form the bud encircle two (becomes the ventral bifid), If splits may duodenum. the segments because developmental atresia, and therefore absent birth The undergo even duodenum and be may problems. constricted at is of After may poor to thrive and vomit emptying. fail may gastric child birth, due to the

by annular scanning. diagnosed in Sometimes is an ultrasound pancreas utero sac in increase prevent enough surrounding the of may volume amniotic fetus obstruction amniotic may duodenum the swallowing the overall The amniotic the the (polyhydramnios). fluid from fluid, which of fetus

clinic In the

referred frequent the tumors Malignant occur within and significant most deaths but neck. is the the of cancer killer.” for pancreas anywhere of the to head Pancreatic may pancreas often the as within are and a accounts “silent number loss. with nonspecific loss of a upper patients appetite, in are weight of and cancer, abdominal number findings pain, There pancreatic including obstruction jaundice. the on the which bile exact Depending site occur, of the cancer, duct produce can may of obstructive mesenteric in the patients is indicated portal most hepatis. have cancers is spread and into extend a vessels, vein possibility locally, of detected invading may there porta superior surgery cure, and Although where the typically these factors would common spread also surgery. node is and preclude Lymph curative

pancreas, involving procedure complex bypass the of a a resection duodenum, with Given of pancreatic position the necessitating is of tumor complex surgical region procedure. of resection the part a usually the

In clinic the

the of liver Segmental anatomy

For the many importance. little years segmental the of liver anatomy was of have segmental anatomy the and disease. important, liver liver liver development metastatic surgery, size, shape, resection since the to especially However, with for regard of the become clinically resection of

metastases. be knowledge in patients of with detailed curative segments, Indeed, performed tumor with the can surgery

organ into the plane, liver which equal by divides divided approximately is principal size. The the of halves inferior the a is vena fossa by imaginary line parasagittal passes defined cava. This gallbladder the to line through that that this is vein plane in is found. middle the hepatic It Importantly, left the from right the half. the half of liver principal divides the plane operative the lobes size are anatomy. little of The and unequal only relevance to liver bear in

The these segments drainage anatomy of to of traditional eight-segment arterial, biliary and the portal, liver relates the (Fig. hepatic 4.116).

segments remaining The are numbered as a fashion and to in up VIII. I, caudate segment segment the is defined lobe clockwise features consistent The between individuals. extremely are

From a VI, leaving principal division a III, V, involve in the and IV. plane perspective, II, segments surgical VII, hepatectomy liver which be segments I, removed, would right in and of would the VIII

clinic the In

in age in women. approximately are are of the Gallstones and present common 10% over more of people 40 bile mixture cholesterol a are a variety They and of pigment. consist of of components predominantly but undergo demonstrated can which radiographs. plain on may They be calcification, be a as of incidentally routine may Gallstones scan part abdominal visualized (Fig. ultrasound 4.117) a on or plain radiograph.

performing to way easiest of ultrasound gallstones confirm fasting is gallbladder. by of The examination the the presence a gas. overlying bowel ensure 6 hours and is well for eating the from is The to from refrains there distended shadowing patient little gallbladder of may the The presence examination and cholecystitis. dilation duct identify also bile Magnetic biliary image cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) to is way resonance tree. another gallbladder and the bile show the well defects pancreatic MRCP fluid as and contrast as in in the agent bile intrahepatic within and ducts to duct ducts. or gallbladder present uses the extrahepatic filling as a stones can visualize biliary used It be can and strictures tree in and to also the liver anatomy (Fig. demonstrate pancreatic 4.118).

the impact Hartmann’s bulbous the of which to a time gallbladder. neck in of time, of From region the gallstones region is pouch, gallbladder normally gallbladder the cannot empty gallstone area, the When contractions this of produce wall and in severe pain. the lodges may persists, this necessary. cholecystectomy If gallbladder) the (removal be a of

inflamed Sometimes (cholecystitis). may the become gallbladder the the of of may involves diaphragm, upper the referred pain not inflammation quadrant If the parietal related also occur but right only in to may the side. peritoneum the shoulder be abdomen on right the innervate the to that innervation This of visceral pain (C3 peritoneum due diaphragm the the is referred skin cord the shoulder. C5) spinal to also by over of levels output output sensory sensory referred region low (diaphragm) (dermatomes). case, this another of region high is one In of to somatic somatic sensory sensory

the small the which region pass of in the are time, obstructs the into the trapped of From bile ampulla, gallstones the time of and into flow duct bile sphincter to duodenum. This, jaundice. turn, in produces

Endoscopic the cholangiopancreatography can obstructing remove to gallstones within (ERCP) undertaken biliary retrograde tree. be problems biliary This diagnose pancreatic endoluminal fluoroscopy combines the and in procedure ducts. to endoscopy treat with and duodenum second Vater) stomach of part side-viewing and endoscope the of (the placed esophagus optical and is papilla is a the the identified. in through with the system ampulla advanced major where An pancreatic is common with converges the the where bile duct. This duct (stuck for taken or growth) The if is a examined abnormalities malignant may initially possible be papilla necessary. and stone biopsy bile Then amount to or contrast is of the small a (Fig. or visualize medium pancreatic duct duct pancreatic duct is either (cholangiogram) bile cannulated either radiopaque the and (pancreatogram) injected duct 4.119). stone extraction be with a basket is or present, removed it can a If stone an balloon. Usually, before a is sphincterotomy passage distal stone through removal to ease duct. its bile the performed

segment. malignant tree biliary duct be main a of placed or into opening by allow benign narrowed hepatic or of the common one bile caused cases strictures, to of into In the obstruction stent ducts the can more contrast inserted The confirmed of instillation flow of demonstrate patency the medium contrast stent stent. to by newly of is free the through

the In clinic

plasma. yellow (bilirubin) caused skin the pigment is Jaundice discoloration bile by excess a of the within is yellow. color which best eyes, by at the normally The looking yellow the turn sclerae white appreciated of

for the the been duration and of severity which elevation The extent jaundice. of bile pigments they account for of elevated have the the

of their jaundice Simplified the anatomical causes explanation types and to understanding

the porphyrin the the (globin) is to reticuloendothelial broken whereas destroyed hemoglobin red are cells compounds down When are molecule form bilirubin. iron recycled, by from system, the blood fat-soluble ring the On via bilirubin bloodstream, the is a water-soluble bilirubin. converted to form reaching the of fat-soluble liver biliary water-soluble it turn secreted where the stool. in is This into the bowel, forms color and then bilirubin dark of the tree into the

red incompatible of transfusion anemia). breakdown excessive and conditions there (e.g., is is hemolytic usually of by type This where blood cells produced in blood an jaundice

affected cirrhosis) liver bilirubin overdose). into converting disease, water-soluble poisons complex change liver biochemical or chronic the fat-soluble as from may (e.g., The liver within be such hepatitis and for (e.g., reactions by inflammatory paracetamol

tree Any jaundice, most biliary and duct at tumor produce the bile obstruction obstructing but gallstones an common the head the two within can the pancreas. the of are causes of

clinic In the

categories disorders: point two and rupture a there of view, spleen clinical are From main of enlargement.

there quadrant. is when to tends left the occur to localized trauma This upper It fractures. lower with associated left rib be may Because highly to peritoneal no there profusely and extremely is vascular, because susceptible when is bleeds an capsule, spleen into is to spleen injury it has such when the damage it structures, the thin surrounding even cavity. the ruptured, should rupture with abdominal suspected blunt be always injury. Splenic of spleen the preserve splenectomy. much but require as some as patients possible, treatments Current

an organ is surveillance. involved hematopoiesis of The the reticuloendothelial immunological spleen and in system lymphoma) Diseases the the spleen affect leukemia that (e.g., enlargement may generalized lymphadenopathy produce reticuloendothelial system and (splenomegaly) of (Fig. or 4.120). increased when course the normal The removing in performing microorganisms often (e.g., when spherocytosis). such thalassemia of as or its destroyed circulation, deficient the from physiological clearing erythrocytes enlarges or in sepsis, and antibodies and functions, particulates producing spleen pressure vein failure, portal by congestive increased also be Splenomegaly a result of thrombosis, caused or hypertension. venous may splenic heart enlarged An rupture. is to spleen prone

the clinic In

Vascular system to gastrointestinal the supply

of superior by abdominal inferior trunk the supplied are celiac mesenteric parts system and mesenteric arteries the the mainly (Fig. The and gastrointestinal 4.129):

The of and esophagus, celiac duodenum. the superior half of part the trunk duodenum, the part proximal descending the lower supplies stomach, of

supplies transverse the the the two-thirds and the of colon. of ascending The jejunum, the colon, ileum, proximal artery duodenum, the superior mesenteric the rest

inferior artery the The mesenteric the of and transverse most the colon, supplies rest the colon, rectum. the sigmoid of colon, descending

descending part mesenteric blood there the and the blood is arterial trunk celiac superior supply. a watershed Along of area between duodenum the supply potential the to ischemic, ischemia. vulnerable and this is the flexure, to splenic at area mesenteric superior become the area watershed is the the whereas artery between artery, mesenteric unusual extremely It inferior for

ischemic. states, the In region of flexure of the certain colon the splenic disease become can susceptible off, When urgent the to requires the patient surgical which rendering and mucosa perforation this large infection occurs, attention. of bowel, the then sloughs

inferior at Arteriosclerosis the trunk arteries. mesenteric superior and the the may throughout mesenteric abdominal openings the occur and of and aorta celiac artery the becomes occluded. mesenteric infrequently, Not inferior enlarge, middle, Interestingly, many and of artery. forming right, these between not continuous marginal because any gradually anastomoses suffer a complications, patients colic left arteries do the artery the Drummond), replaces The of supplied the artery artery distal (marginal (Fig. large blood this enlarged marginal which supply by therefore becomes inferior bowel mesenteric of 4.130).

openings trunk artery mesenteric and become to the narrowed, the the of celiac superior diminished. the blood If is supply gut pain the meal, therefore outstrips blood vessels, the (mesenteric of the the discomfort After limited angina). in through a supply heavy severe oxygen resulting stenosed of demand bowel and with rapidly and not condition this of lose Patients to weight. tend eat pain because the are of the trunk angiography, best lateral aortic is by and in diagnosis superior determined and appreciated celiac the The artery mesenteric the view. stenoses

clinic In the

which is histologically. the is liver, the disorder of confirmed a Cirrhosis complex of diagnosis a a is is necessary. diagnosis When biopsy suspected, liver

hepatic preexisting lobular regeneration reconstruction and nodular by interspersed architecture. of characterized Cirrhosis with of is widespread fibrosis areas abnormal liver presence implies previous The continuing cirrhosis of or cell damage.

obstruction, metabolic biliary inherited inflammation, The and disorders. of etiology obstruction, outlet includes nutritional and is and cirrhosis (alcohol), complex causes, (malnutrition) toxins vascular viral anatomical

and hypertension). tributaries progresses, to the leads vein cirrhosis in As increased the distorted, draining in intrahepatic its portal is vasculature turn the pressure (portal which splenic leading Portal to enlargement. produces pressure the in venules, splenic hypertension increased the below), (varices) portosystemic anastomosis dilated (see At of sites veins develop. large can in bleeding blood marked are and susceptible fatal. produce instances which These loss, may be to some veins

liver for production clotting is the responsible proteins, of those the of The including numerous cascade. clotting. liver cirrhosis) the blood prevent the decrease (including of adequate so these of proteins and may infection disorder production and Any risk of cuts; severe exsanguination. from a a Patients the significant cirrhosis of bleeding, addition, serious rupture, with when is even there varices liver danger of rapid have small in

produces which retention, As subcutaneous the edema. skin fails, and patient and water salt develops progressively the liver hold which (ascites) many retained in is also peritoneal can liters. the cavity, Fluid

in The blood increase bilirubin an poorly the leading to down serum functioning level, jaundice. blood which break (hepatocytes) are manifests unable cells and liver products, to as

not of metabolites. to do metabolic the by-products normal nontoxic liver convert With failure toxic metabolism, which buildup the made liver. shunts, This metabolites by numerous the is to allow portosystemic worse of noxious toxic the bypass compounds or Patients manifest develop acute that can neurological may features, state. confusion, hepatic psychotic severe fits, as encephalopathy, epileptic called

is encephalopathy neurological damage reversed, Hepatic condition liver of transplantation; if leads is the the irreversible urgent not death. and one it to criteria for

hepatic the liver. of to blood the drains the system from portal The visceral organs abdomen be with venous in flow elevated veins, to hepatic from individuals, from recovered liver. of less significantly pressure portal there patients flow vein the the portal 100% is cirrhosis), blood In (e.g., normal blood the whereas can which specific rest enters drain points circulation channels, into at (Fig. The the the of blood systemic collateral 4.133). portosystemic the largest of middle system; these abdominal the gastroesophageal of inferior tributaries gastric with tributaries venous veins veins the left on and rectal system collaterals of umbilicus—the the portal wall the anastomoses the systemic and anterior the vein with of and junction cardia to occur the anastomose with form stomach—where the The the around at: wall. its around veins of superior system; veins a the para-umbilical vein abdominal the system caval anastomosis of the anus—the azygos anterior rectal

and When are the varices at portosystemic umbilicus. vein (varices) portal varices anorectal junction, esophageal tend venous the these called: medusae at at enlarged of veins elevated, in junction, the caput around the enlargement pressure to the occur at anastomoses gastroesophageal and is the and sites

once bleed may intervention. requiring damaged, varices surgical trauma profusely, are to susceptible urgent and, Esophageal

the clinic In

is obesity as surgery bariatric surgery. for weight known and also Surgery loss for and few programs. through last to type diet over appropriate loss popular surgery unable has increasingly who significant achieve exercise become are weight years patients modification This of the a regarded often is It as resort. last the Importantly, that overweight impact have recognize we increasing medical patients to pose. from increased With patient is general to obesity diabetes cardiovascular likely may problems disorders. more the health and suffer and develop the have significant of budgeting nation.” care these serious a conditions on health “health a and regarded All impact are as for of

options a of number There are surgical to obesity. treat groups: two malabsorptive who can Surgery be into categorized are procedures. procedures obese patients main morbidly for and restrictive

producing malabsorption state, There that are also of a loss. produce preventing variety weight and bypass a further weight procedures gain jejunoileal There (e.g., bypass). include complications, osteoporosis, which diarrhea and are may anemia,

band the the placing to in stomach the or Restrictive around stapling of size decrease organ. procedures involve a or satiety and of an feeling patient earlier prevents This overeating. the from reduction produces

procedure currently popular surgery. is in bypass the States the United Probably gastric most the to proximal bowel This joining small a remnant. procedure of stapling loop the gastric involves small stomach and is Roux-en-Y procedure by The usually fashioning with performed loop and pancreaticobiliary a alimentary limbs.

gastric the used type patients be gastrectomy, at for risk procedure, high The be deemed to popularity because it of in surgery. is other increasing sleeve in bypass can portion along the of gastric the curvature. reduction by lumen large removing of greater a the involves It stomach

5%. to from faces 1% Any rates with undergoing increased risk and patient overweight surgery morbidity, mortality significant

the In clinic

muscle greater sheath. of is psoas importance At first muscle sheath any other than difficult appreciate why glance, is the it to vertebra. and each muscle arise lumbar but sheath also psoas from the The between discs intervertebral only the not its vertebrae from of disc is importance. This origin critical salmonella discitis). types preferentially In and certain tuberculosis is of (e.g., the disc intervertebral infection, affected anterolaterally. of the the spreads As and infection anteriorly disc infection develops, the sheath, sheath, within below muscle passes a and appear inguinal infection the as ligament position, into mass. spreads the the and In and muscle the anterolateral the may psoas

the clinic In

the embryology understand of is to occurs diaphragm. it consider diaphragm, the why hernia the through To a necessary

from the mesentery, rim—which the the formed four eventually septum separating structures— is cavity. transversum, the peripheral membrane, abdominal and esophageal cavity posterior the together, thoracic the diaphragm from The fuse pleuroperitoneal to the the tendon, a head cephalic embryo’s which more septum transversum then develops of The to the superior portion from the forms embryo. folding central of mesodermal its origin adult and position during moves

the occur various components may fail, failed Fusion points the of and (Fig. may hernias fusion of of diaphragm the through 4.146). (Morgagni’s costal hernia). opening margins membrane the when and canal left sites (Bochdalek’s the pleuroperitoneal on to pericardioperitoneal the the The hernia), process fails close the commonest and xiphoid through the right are: between an on

Hernias a also may large through tendon the esophageal and congenitally central occur hiatus. through

time to tend hernias Morgagni’s the at early in or appear birth Bochdalek’s or and infancy. around of allow the function. may enter to lungs reduce respiratory They cavity, bowel and compress which thoracic abdominal the hernias require the of surgical of diaphragmatic closure defect. Most these degree outcome itself. lead on the However, on hernias large can the and hypoplasia than hypoplasia to pulmonary the more repair of surgical depends long-term the rather

through, permit but do to free bowel Occasionally, of movement allow fluid. defects fail diaphragm the small within defects ascites may effusions, with develop present. Patients these pleural effusions may while develop are patients ascites pleural with when

In clinic the

be hiatus, mediastinum into posterior diaphragm the the the fundus allowing lax, of herniate the the stomach may esophageal (Figs. At the of to level 4.148). and 4.147 This acid of reflux. symptoms causes typically may and Ulceration and occur anemia. bleeding produce may diagnosis is endoscopy. usually or made by barium studies The found asymptomatic and on imaging CT frequently unrelated is Hiatal complaints. performed hernia incidentally is for often instance by medical the Treatment necessary. is surgery be first although may in management,

the In clinic

tract in with men sedentary and and stones in associated aged years, frequently lifestyles. Urinary are (calculi) common occur are than in women, between most people 60 usually 20 more polycrystalline stones salts urate, soluble calcium, and matrix. oxalate, phosphate, are aggregates of within other The an organic variations to the in The pH salts, small precipitate. the with cause salts these and urine saturated becomes

into that labia the the pain the majora. patient groin, scrotum region into infrascapular Typically and or the radiates even has (loin) from noticed. Blood urine the (hematuria) be in may also

species be bacteria Infection because tract certain with stones. excluded of associated commonly must are urinary

and urinary obstruction, of urinary include renal stones failure. infection, The complications tract discomfort. irritation, and bladder pain develop may within and the marked produce also Stones causing

based and diagnosis is of urinary stones upon examination. history tract The abdominal often visible are on Stones radiographs. which renal calices investigations Special may demonstrate the the is when dilated system and ultrasound scanning, obstructed. include: pelvis urinary clinical or way when the is suspicion preferred pregnant low. is women This in of imaging

nephrolithotomy, and the tract allows versus urinary these shows if ureteroscopy, stone, a percutaneous CT the and, smaller which the the detection rare on shock stone (extracorporeal or, exact extremely to even open location based surgery) of (Fig. of plan obstruction procedure the size, days, density, of wave the (CT the stones, KUB), level help low-dose of lithotripsy necessary can remove urologist 4.156).

currently pinpoint urogram, increased. will often obstruction, to used an which stone the exact demonstrate access intravenous has less CT of because the is level the KUB low-dose

clinic In the

Most in cell the arise that carcinomas. renal kidney tumors are proximal from epithelium. These tubular develop the tumors are renal Approximately the the cell tumors which the of of tumors, arise from urothelium within transitional kidney pelvis. 5% Most urine a in the patients typically blood region (hematuria), pain mass. infrascapular have and in the (loin),

Renal cell tumors (Figs. not but the invading spread grow unusual they they vein. kidney, and renal are into 4.158) the also from only because fascia, and 4.157 the outward fat do cell suspected. any is carcinoma of rare This so, be renal other extension for should seen, venous type when tumor, artery. into inferior renal into right and cava, the In and addition, spread into the tumor the atrium along the pulmonary the the grow may and valve rare in cases can tricuspid vena across vein

Treatment renal spread removal, is metastases. even metastatic show most cancers regression of because surgical some patients is present, for when

carcinoma urothelium. the cell from arises Transitional carcinomas present The the from within urinary urethra Therefore, present may and to within the when tract. develop transitional a bladder, be patients as parts behaves urothelium upper calices is unit.” “single similar the the tumors also of urinary the tumors other investigated In must the bladder exclude to of patients be possibility tract with of always cancer, whole (Fig. the 4.159). collecting system by of that performing currently same visualization achieved This is CT time. renal dual-phase the at parenchyma the a and urogram the allows

the clinic In

abdominal lie into renal the the lateral a procedure is pelvis. wall placed or renal posterior cortex through the within nephrostomy where A tube a is to urine of the to from tube of the renal (Fig. function is pelvis through this allow drainage tube externally The 4.160).

on situated may posterior be to to wall, thin up 2 the skin. the cm and 3 are in only from The subjects healthy abdominal kidneys relatively is easily straightforward, to the the because kidney Access kidney visualized under guidance. be ultrasound can cortex skin anesthetic, the into under local and needle a ultrasound renal renal be the can Using direction, the pelvis. into placed, through drainage wires A and to series the catheter. of can the be needle passed tubes through position

The for such procedure many. a are indications of ureteric the kidney. significantly function within pressure kidney of the impairs patients the ureters with the obstruction and urine the In distal back ultimately will This failure death. produce renal and obstructed a to system dilated susceptible also Furthermore, is infection. producing also In many urine there not is cases, failure the obstruction but infected only within renal system.

the In clinic

patients common failure. renal a Renal procedure now transplantation undertaken in end-stage with is

Transplant obtained either deceased donors. or are kidneys living from healthy with donors because modern-day normal assessed, a individual, from carries living risk. harvesting The a carefully small medicine, even are kidney a

have death. kidney or suffered dead donors are brain Deceased cardiac a tissue. harvested donor and of is venous aortic with small The cuff kidney harvested. is The also ureter

(Fig. right iliac ideal to is the or fossa kidney An place left in the the transplant situate 4.161). symphysis. curvilinear made incision A pubic and the is paralleling iliac crest fascia are external and muscle, muscle, The oblique transversalis muscle, transversus oblique divided. internal abdominis the peritoneal parietal peritoneum surgeon but The not identifies cavity. the does enter medially vein, external peritoneum to The and external iliac is artery, reveal retracted the bladder. parietal iliac some the end-to-end artery directly as In is internal of the renal mobilized procedure an donor artery kidney. the iliac and recipient instances the of anastomosed onto is the donor iliac to vein the vein. Similarly internal anastomosed artery artery a external anastomosis. the recipient the presence aortic anastomosed venous similarly small for of donor is the In to cuff iliac the and of tissue tunneled a anastomosis. is through bladder ureter the The obliquely easily with straightforward wall

transplant left space The for because created locations right new structures. kidney ideal other iliac to fossae and the compromise be can a without are Doppler is this assessment. kidney abdominal the wall, proximity The to anterior ultrasound the which advantage vascular permits easy procedure great the and visualization of of Furthermore, easily are position biopsies this in obtained. The to make enables patients extraperitoneal a approach swift recovery.

In clinic the

Investigation urinary of tract the

After rectal examination assess the examination including an appropriate are prostate to patient, special history digital in men, a the required. of and investigations

to technique using system visualization the or urethra tube attached rigid a of that an bladder is and a (cystoscope). allows optical flexible Cystoscopy urinary a other Images studies. monitor, done as in displayed are endoscopic on of foreign cauterization and removal Biopsies, the removal, from bladder can bodies during stone performed cystoscopy. be bladder, bleeding with to and tool patients serving of and macroscopic investigate microscopic as assessing as as helpful hematuria, establishing urethral the fistulas, causes well Cystoscopy and in diverticula bladder voiding problems. is a

most one carried the IVU investigations radiological (Fig. out of and commonly important is An 4.162). with iodinated The injected patient medium. contrast is media around iodine contain benzene ring. atoms spaced Most three a contrast high the atomic of iodine The number of and atomic beam. to attenuates hydrogen, the relatively number carbon, oxygen compared radiation renal excreted tubules. some contrast the are are filtration, although secreted media by intravenous predominantly glomerular After injection, by This the collecting visualization system of the allows ureters as bladder. and well as

may assess to and Ultrasound be obstructed. size be of the dilated the when can kidney which used size calices, easily be bladder when ureters using poorly seen ultrasound, the can full. are visualized the Although of measurements before and micturition. bladder after Ultrasound can be obtained volume

tool used estimate renal an to the parenchyma because be can extremely compounds medicine urinary for investigating and assess the radioisotope renal is cell Nuclear mass scarring. for tract useful and function useful in renal scarring suspected. children when often very is and are disease reflux tests These

clinic In the

or is of An below generally dilation and a the aortic occur renal region to aneurysm tends aorta the (the at arteries). region in abdominal the infrarenal aneurysm risk the rupture benefit operation patient. reaches 5.5 accepted or an will As the expands, greater of the aorta increases, that significantly is it an when now cm and generally

aging of abdominal increasing. aneurysms aortic number is With the the population, patients. abdominal asymptomatic aneurysms of identified of increasing imaging aortic number with are a the techniques, in use Moreover,

for open xiphoid pubis process of which symphysis incision the an the involved operative aneurysm. of treatment technique, sternum was the many large standard dissection and years For from to the repair the a and woven excised tubular was graft aneurysm a was sewn place. The into would the number unit even most patients care be Recovery intensive may the and operation. a of weeks, take in after placed days,

to techniques aneurysms—the new (Fig. developments graft a performed of endovascular type aortic Further abdominal and being to treat have led procedure 4.165).

involves the dissecting inguinal surgically artery ligament. femoral The technique below the preloaded large struts the aorta graft passed incision a into through with femoral is femoral is small support artery. the catheter the artery metal compressed A the and abdominal made in on for the is opened, Using aorta. of guidance inside the the graft lining X-ray attachments the Limb iliac that made are vessels. to the into extend graft common tube aneurysm. aortic abdominal device bifurcated effectively the This excludes

is device not of type patients. This all suitable for

to Patients unit. receive care to who not need do intensive device the this go leave Many patients the hospital 48 within 24 to hours. this patients for repair. can be surgical open were who deemed used for Importantly, device unfit

the In clinic

clot vein (thrombus) system a a the is Deep condition veins the in pelvis. venous deep formed legs thrombosis potentially the of the is fatal and of where abnormality for of Virchow decreased abnormalities flow, wall. constituents the reasons as the described the vessel of blood of formation blood, and thrombus smoking, factors contraceptive and the Common include oral hospitalization and predisposing travel. pill, air surgery, (e.g., and clotting protein deficiency). include C S abnormalities factors Other protein

discomfort diagnosis calf. with including The be leg and swelling in and pain difficult establish, deep of vein may thrombosis to symptoms the finding. an may also incidental be It

suspected which a thrombosis undergo blood In fibrin deep practice, test, of a measures D-dimer vein levels patients degradation product. with high deep vein If with thrombosis. is positive association a is there this

deep of vein thrombosis twofold. are The consequences pass the the and into arteries. main and through clot right side system venous dislodge the into of heart Occasionally the the pulmonary may to they size are clots of the significant lung and obstruct produce If death. blood instantaneous may the flow may complications system to valvular include the legs, lead chronic the swelling and of ulceration. in Secondary normal which venous leg incompetency destruction with

for thrombosis The vein prevention. deep is treatment by prevent are optimized patients factors. potential to thrombosis, all In deep removing vein risk order the stasis to may venous Subcutaneous the wears injected prevent patient be in compression stockings and while hospital. heparin

it patient it filter to be traps certain may vena is a to necessary the situations possible insert clots. treatment, and In prophylactic large not inferior optimize with cava that the any into It risk ended. removed may be after period has the

In the clinic

groups. retroperitoneal arranged From are in two lymph a perspective, clinical nodes and structures, The midline lymph bowel, lymph pre-aortic such pancreas. the from group liver, embryological as the node drains aortic kidneys lateral group as adrenal the The (the glands. aorta, nodes), and such drain lymph lymph side bilateral from para-aortic lumbar of either node on the or structures, the nodes. wall also embryologically Organs these posterior abdominal derived lymph drain from to the the These to lymph not regions). organs (importantly, testes inguinal testes drain ovaries include the and do the

alternate general, presence predictable drainage disease, routes; occur. drainage however, of In in will lymphatic of routes lymphatic the standard follows

a for number enlarged There are causes of retroperitoneal nodes. lymph lymph observed cancer). is of feature enlargement colon adult, in In a lymphoma, disease metastatic malignant smaller (e.g., the and enlarged presence the infection node of massively spread are and nodes of lymph

type. disease and tumor the based upon the is The a for cell number including bowel) treatment lymph malignant of primary site its histological factors, of node (e.g., the metastatic primary tumor treated the and lymph and the node lungs) removed organ to with the often spread Normally, surgically radiotherapy. and (e.g., chemotherapy liver spread is are and

considered lymph to resect appropriate for (e.g., testicular in instances In retroperitoneum certain nodes cancer). the may the it be

retroperitoneal lateral resection incision paramedian lymph in line. midclavicular to The approach a surgical involves the node oblique, transversus transversalis three anterolateral opened divided. abdominis) layers and are the is oblique, the abdominal fascia of and (external The internal wall sees structure the is peritoneum. the The surgeon parietal next parietal procedure peritoneum, contents the structures. the of moves intraabdominal entering a intraabdominal standard the of midline, parietal toward operations, which for peritoneum the allows most view surgeon gently which and pushes Instead the is clear the retroperitoneal the with node aorta left, lymph group easily and of kidney. para-aortic abdominal the On the a clear view demonstrated, is inferior access cava lymph right the On para-aortic retracted the vena and the to to has node right demonstrated is chain. be

the entering and well of lymph lacks is procedure the retroperitoneal (e.g., tolerated extremely paralytic peritoneal The ileus). cavity problems of dissection node segmental nerve midclavicular the line of abdominis vertical of muscle. the a to in incision Unfortunately, supply complication a rectus the is division of proportions the atrophy wall. anterior produces muscle and This asymmetrical abdominal

man diagnosis epigastric 45-year-old was of A mild reflux a and pain, made. esophageal had well. He given medication, which was worked appropriate the prominent which the rib of hump a requested the time radiograph, chest demonstrated the the side on initial family fractures. practitioner However, a and old of left diaphragm at consultation,

further questioning. The for was patient recalled

his but pleased was for further reflux, recalled He for given had history concerned and he treatment with being gastroesophageal the examination. about was been extremely great not and “rupture.” the operation had that the interview, what a he patient success. undergone but had performed, previously a the was did was he for recall involved operation accident at that motorcycle time was in During a assured laparotomy The been revealed a

undergone a splenectomy. The patient have is to likely

that of patient In caused important blunt left-sided by lower severe motorcycle trauma (such fractures as an rib a are has sign appreciable any who trauma. accident), extremely had abdominal

small review time was dome the removed it hemidiaphragm. revealed of but notes at of old surgically, patient’s A a was there was not that the rupture the the spleen left the of injury appreciated that the of a hernia seen on The enter, which diaphragm the on radiograph. the gradually the “hump” could developed producing bowel patient chest through

it was injury the patient unlikely has and asymptomatic, discharged. harm to the patient occurred that come years been many will is this ago and Because any

to two patients. inspect was asked medical of A abdomen the student On veins first the irregular radiating patient umbilicus. he from noted the the to over groin caudal a the direction, he cranial in patient the coursing second chest. from veins, the On abdominal irregular anterior noted wall to was He of his features. asked and the determine explain to findings these significance

first were region. draining In from radially away patient veins the the periumbilical the from do enlarged umbilicus. veins not the individuals, normal In radiate pressure of increased hypertension with a patients disease. venous is portal as portal the hepatic In result vein. at collateral Small around obliterated the veins umbilical and develop portosystemic through anastomosis. pass veins drain a wall, and the anterior abdominal forming umbilicus the These onto this liver. diagnosis the patient eventual The for was cirrhosis of

veins a finding wall. second anterior on in in The abdominal direction abdominal caudocranial is typical of on draining for the patient veins anterior the not the wall and is veins drainage been of normal obstruction prominent, that it route are taken. has an so route usually to there alternative venous implies the an When of here blood Typically, right to lower and the from cava the inferior into from retroperitoneal organs limbs the and the the vena drains heart. atrium cava, the of the returning by patient to route. This thrombosis inferior preventing heart chronic “usual” the a vena from had blood

from a and vessels, of the the include Blood the some of series may via run drain epigastric fascia. the superficial inferior collateral superficial pelvis which veins, limbs which lower in veins drain and the internal veins, systems cava. turn anastomose deep superior with venous and superficial, the the thoracic to into These into drain which in the superior, vena epigastric brachiocephalic

collateral thrombosis, inferior veins other blood flow. to hypertrophy the the anterior of accommodate wall After in and increase initial abdominal the cava vena pathways the

family woman physician 52-year-old visited lethargy A her increasing complaints of vomiting. and with compared significant to weight. had and visits physician examined previous The her she lost that noted below quadrant and the also upper of well-defined on in examination rounded liver mass 10-cm was was a (Fig. palpable right jaundiced, edge abdomen the She the 4.185).

of pancreas. the The head of clinical the carcinoma was diagnosis

be precise to can signs is made such three It difficult a been diagnosis have appreciate how when described. only clinical clinically

patient’s the bile was obstruction duct. distal in The

causes the breakdown obstruction jaundice, failure When are and (prehepatic), posthepatic the blood biliary along red has length excessive tree. patient of of the a include (hepatic jaundice), which hepatic causes, cells

in this her quadrant palpable the upper below right liver; had mass patient the a was The that was gallbladder.

healthy is not individuals, gallbladder the In palpable. duct expanded cystic of gallbladder An or either insertion duct the duct). indicates the cystic the below within bile obstruction level (i.e., the

patient’s the The the position was of to related vomiting tumor.

not It weight vomiting occur and uncommon malignant in loss with disease. is a patients to for (cachexia) within the the the descending of the the pancreas duodenum. primarily part head to adjacent duodenum, lies The of curve of region of head likely invade Any and of encase the is the tumor may duodenum. pancreas the expand to the and mass in obstruction. happened, case, this almost patient’s in complete this Unfortunately, producing each revealed soon that discussion vomiting relatively Further she undigested with food after was meal. the patient

scan CT A complications. demonstrated further

region anatomical malignant be pancreas head are may complex the which of a process. of In and the neck the with involved structures, of The mass confirmed head scan part of the region descending of the the pancreas, invaded in the which duodenum. the CT a the duct. pancreas distal pancreatic blocked had mass bile the of the the into duct neck and the part extended of and The the the had splenic, invaded gastric, and confluence venous series portal Posteriorly small producing of and splenic a the mass superior veins, bowel mesenteric varices. of directly

chemotherapy, underwent but later. months 7 died This patient palliative

the been investigations. underwent on 44-year-old A with melanoma recently a toe series of diagnosed had woman and

multiple that to an aggressive can throughout spreads (properly nodes form cancer be and other melanoma) body. organs the skin lymph of malignant called Melanoma cellular its upon and penetration dependent The potential its depth skin. configuration through the of is the also malignant

patient malignant melanoma The lymph which spread in foot, the the developed nodes the of to groin. had liver. two the on it metastatic within patient right the were was resected; imaging the inguinal noted nodes lymph lobe follow-up developed The however, that lesions of

these lesions. considered physicians possibility of removing the and Surgeons

the A segments within (Fig. CT and that VI was scan the of performed liver lesions demonstrated V 4.186).

because resection. The segmental liver is it for anatomy planning important the the of surgical enables

undertaken surgery The and right identifying confluence portal hepatic of was involved left the ducts. the vein and and the imaginary vein. the The in hepatic was principal divided the liver middle plane of were successfully duct The biliary right and was the hepatic main and ligated radicals liver resected.

the liver. remaining the left segments of included The lobe

a VIII. surgical of and VI, resection segments underwent V, The patient VII, The remaining and segments IVa, IVb, included II, III. I, not the It that the of hepatic is to lobes remember do liver the correlate volume. with important contains left III. and liver The II only of the segments lobe V, contains lobe and VI, liver of segments the VII, right IV, The VIII. planning surgical cross-sectional when resection. imaging segmental is Hence, important

abdomen. developed man and A a jaundice 55-year-old distended massively severe (free A of of the fluid liver and the peritoneal had patient ascites the significant demonstrated further was that made, diagnosis confirmatory cavity). within cirrhosis tests but debate should be was confirm biopsy some how this A liver was necessary there the cirrhosis, to about biopsy obtained (eFig. 4.187).

to the the with determine In extent it of cirrhosis patients the and cirrhosis etiology. important is

are tests History, examination, useful investigations. complex by are and radiological blood and supported be the of obtained. must liver sample begin and prognosis, treatment determine tissue a To consider taking there liver are to biopsy suspected important with a when issues patient a cirrhosis. However, from

function. issue is One liver

to liver patients The of poor, the inability by patient’s is suspected conjugate with bilirubin. jaundice—an liver function demonstrated as disease clotting blood-clotting involved cascade, significantly some severe the patients with liver Importantly, liver in because the of impaired. blood-clotting is factors ability disease products are bleeding. a therefore high risk have patients of These

Another ascites. presence is the issue of

liver Normally walls. rests lateral the the abdominal and anterior against liver This for can biopsy be has a been obtained. contact useful care after direct over obtained where the weight the biopsy and After region of been procedure, the the has stems bleeding. localized patient the lies the any liver pour abdomen ascites, be cannot the fluid. significant and the the compressed blood patients freely ascitic of against may into the have walls When liver

biopsy so for considered. must has be liver patient a The another approach ascites,

patient The to the department radiology liver biopsy. transjugular was a for referred

neck the the The vein anesthetized. was in skin jugular around a guidewire. insertion and a obtained of was Access needle through and into the was right the jugular vein vein. right through brachiocephalic The guidewire advanced internal entered posterior the was the wall aspect and entered passed inferior of cava, It vena atrium, cava. the of the superior superior the along vena directed right inserted the wire hepatic the A catheter over into was vein. and series into the vein. hepatic a was of and needle enlarged hole placed wire the right and dilators, was the a biopsy over Using biopsied through the right and biopsy vein liver the removed. was was hepatic The sample suture the neck, used flow. was compression jugular vein stemmed any simple A in to the and close internal minor blood

immediately how liver the not Assuming the liver, the that because bleeding this patient much does circulation. the and will penetrate capsule, needle biopsy the enter from the it not is vein hepatic bleeds returned to is important

and A poorly 30-year-old mass. diffuse defined a man epigastric had asymmetrical scrotal examination Further enlargement. revealed

man or aortic, lateral abdominal lumbar, part of the that regional differential testicular diagnosis, nodal cancer possibility with had resident the As her involvement para-aortic the (the nodes). considered

in men. ages men between A testicular accounts common and is between the 34 all most 25 1% for of primary of and 2% neoplasm malignancies the in tumor and are predisposing of testicular of and cancer A maldescent strong history factors. family testis the

tumor to chains Spread the lymph is the typically the drain testes. of node that

from the fascia develop transversalis in peritoneum. structures to the testes the abdomen, vessels The and the between upper adjacent renal migrate They scrotum before inguinal birth. just the the canals through into normally their take and their arterial with testes them supply, drainage, their venous supply, their nerve The lymphatics.

revealed lymph the lymph in the tomography upper mass scan iliac internal nodes a lymph para-aortic enlarged common chains. node computed and throughout and abdomen A node

carcinoma testes, mass upper iliac lymphadenopathy abdomen, in would of aortic unusual which (lumbar) be a into nodes drain the very lateral would present. to Assuming was the the the be normally scrotal for it

of Further required. the was mass examination scrotal

affected test transillumination on side the scrotum A of positive. was the ultrasound testes An around scan and large revealed testis. normal and right right fluid the collection a left diagnosis hydrocele right-sided of was a A made.

Scrotal common mass young is masses utmost anatomical in exact clinical the site of determining scrotal males, the of and importance. are be Any cancer. testis mass testicular investigated to should arises the that from exclude but the fluid that clinically malignant. scrotal hernias, and from or (hydrocele) important also as arise lesions, not such are are Masses epididymis

The scan revealed ultrasound testis, is a which the hydrocele. fluid of surrounding diagnostic and from around (epididymal cysts) cysts Simple can epididymis defined. arising be the easily

lymphoma diagnosis suspected. was A of

malignant nodes. is Lymphoma lymph of a disease Hodgkin’s lymphoma into types, divided are namely and lymphomas two specific Most lymphoma. non-Hodgkin’s prognosis following excellent. caught early the If radical is chemotherapy

the posterior performed approach. from underwent a biopsy, The which patient was computed was the position tomography in He the scanner. in (CT) placed prone a special with needle sample. obtain was a cutting A device node used to lymph fine difficult). biopsy cava were para-aortic regions approach inferior right the the and have the in the vena between left-sided vena to the used the on from is which a needle (i.e., is A aorta was the cava and approach, because nodes pass side would posterior inferior anesthetic using the the local lateral quadratus skin anesthetized of border muscle. at The lumborum was and muscle was entered needle nodes. para-aortic angled the lumborum retroperitoneum left-sided approximately lie the The at 45° to the within quadratus beside lymph “hit” CT not needle to using other procedure guidance, slowly, structures. advance the Because taking care can this is performed the retroperitoneal operator

A biopsy diagnosis obtained was lymphoma. Hodgkin’s good and was the active is life. leads in remission and 2 years chemotherapy underwent and an The full later patient

in approximately right man cm the 3 soft in had A scrotum. mass a diameter 35-year-old inguinal a hernia. was diagnosis The right indirect

the were examination What findings?

was the a placed tender testes separate behind felt from and sac was the transillumination not the it.” to mass which above The light a negative. were physician the and was test The able (in scrotum and from scrotal viewed front) bright not the is is mass, “get occurs test when light positive the through the (A penetrates scrotum.)

positive patient felt cough the a “impulse” was mass. within the When stood up,

maneuvering, and scrotum. the the emptying After so from mass be delicate massaged into inguinal careful could canal, the hand the When removed, recurred in the massaging mass scrotum. was the

hernia deep canal An ring. through inguinal the indirect enters the inguinal inguinal muscle. through the passes inguinal canal external the aponeurosis superficial oblique the exit to inguinal through It ring in the of scrotum the pubic superior medial and the within the cord. to tubercle The into sac hernia lies enters and spermatic

A posterior passes canal. hernia wall inguinal the through inguinal directly direct the of down the inguinal canal. not does It pass into large and If through enough, superficial pass scrotum. ring the inguinal the may it

his in pain A man the severe developed 25-year-old left abdomen. of lower quadrant diffuse short The was did constant relatively for pain periods time. ease but and of and his pain in that region indicated the On questioning posteriorly the region (loin). left inguinal radiated into the patient was direct infrascapular (hematuria). was urine A blood positive dipstick for

A made. diagnosis stone (calculus) of ureteric a was

the pain, radiated passage patient’s of initial groin, ureter. the stone to The relates left along later which to ureteric the infrascapular

distention. The of relates the pain origin to ureteral

series the the of peristaltic kidney along transport ureter along of the bladder. the the ureter to length waves A from urine ureteric in an pain. the becomes exacerbation obstructs the distended, the resulting stone the of As kidney, ureter periods of in the relief. periods The and distention, resulting are waves peristaltic of superimposed upon exacerbation

is pain The referred.

fibers the spinal spinal visceral into afferent second cord, cord. pass the nerve first of entering ureter lumbar and from the (sensory) The segments the Pain spinal sensory to referred innervated somatic from cutaneous cord thus the is same nerves levels. by regions

CT a patient The investigated scan. was by

stone determine to a radiopaque) location proceeded radiograph intravenous urography used radiopaque are the Traditionally, to this of renal look stones. for (90% plain to was and often renal stones precise of to system low-dose is collecting using dose contrast. used no visualize renal the Currently, of and stones and radiation level of obstruction, CT the the intravenous low pinpoint

useful or be stones scan ultrasound junction pelvicaliceal vesicoureteric the and An assess at for to may dilation junction. reveal may the also pelviureteral Ultrasound is in the at is use ureteric assessing orifices radiation obstruction (e.g., pregnant particularly with is and the other also causes in a concern. of and when tumors the useful valuable around imaging of women bladder) for

and the Usually precise an of assessment carried the tracts urogram to upper of be would intravenous location stone. urinary enable out

abdomen scans obtained. Not are also of infrequently, the CT position the the and pathology. stone give about information and other show the These also ureters, scans not of associated kidneys, but only bladder

this lower right abdomen, If predominantly have pain also appendicitis right infrascapular within the and to patient’s on was the would excluded. be colic. A CT appendicitis of and urinary differentiation enable scan would

was with the to A 27-year-old woman surgical admitted ward appendicitis. an underwent She appendectomy. was had within at that there was pus It the abdominal noted cavity. perforated the and operation appendix appendix the was The and stump tied. removed solution. saline was washed with abdomen out The warm recovery, had and patient she become temperatures. right unwell, The with pain spiking day but her shoulder over by uneventful an initially 7 made

intraabdominal This had patient abscess. developed an

peritoneal involve bowel fecal the contamination may operation on fecal and contents Any flora. with the appreciated at of time be This the operation. not may

period an abscess developed, reaction pus. an cavity Over and ensued filling inflammatory the with postoperative chart pyrexia observation “swinging” revealed Typically, the (fever). a

recess. and sites the abscess the are for to pelvis hepatorenal common most The develop

hepatorenal women, in the cavities abdominal of the recto-uterine and, When the (pouch pelvic peritoneal in superior cavity position, is posterior points pouch patient the the (the lowest a recess) supine of aspect Douglas). in are and the

hepatorenal referred the in was pain the pain suggested shoulder that from abscess that the and diaphragm. the was recess The

innervation of from is motor to C3 nerves diaphragm the The C5. and sensory and the spinal shoulder—a from C5) the as diaphragm diaphragm. the the by of levels pain parietal the (C3 carried is covering brain region other from skin by as by peritoneum entering those coming is into nerves interpreted the same over supplied the undersurface spinal the the nerve sensory of to from phrenic somatic sensation The cord the cord somatic

demonstrated radiograph hemidiaphragm. elevation of A right the chest

to around on the the the right was elevation top anterior subphrenic of tracking the hemidiaphragm a the due pus from of lateral position. space liver liver the in sit and This hepatorenal to aspect of this collection of fluid. An demonstrated scan ultrasound be seen abscess the between probe cavity XII. The could clearly ribs and ultrasound placing by XI The rib at lobe the border of the lies in right midaxillary inferior X lower line. and the through XI the lies laterally parietal chest cavity is the and pleura parietal intercostal pleura the on wall, which diaphragm. the overlying the pass of diaphragm placed ultrasound muscles abscess, ribs probe the between waves and When into XII between below the the the continue

intercostal not was by done route. an Drainage subcostal using local drain 1 removed of guidance and established was was and a CT (eFig. anesthesia, Instead, pus liter 4.188). cavity in an may effectively It placing (pus into to pass the and the mind this to cavity intraabdominal that that space). produce is important cavity, pus a pleural the bear into drain allows empyema through in thoracic pleural the abdominal

patient The recovery. and uneventful made slow a

margin. A man rectal the developed just above low-grade 45-year-old anorectal carcinoma a and (see the was left with an colostomy He left below). underwent of lower abdominoperineal abdominal a tumor resection sexual Unfortunately, the reasons, of of including number for lack wife man’s him desire. left a He drink” to over cirrhosis. and years “turned developed the ensuing enlarged emergency his around from veins with colostomy. into brought He the bleeding room severe was (eFigs. was An created, emergency bleeding stopped intrahepatic which portosystemic all transjugular shunt 4.189 and 4.190). rehabilitation now in well a He is doing program.

necessary because the site colostomy of was of the tumor. low A

and colon rectum patients, early but some older tumors the Carcinoma of life. do people in develops get in usually from change. undergo Most benign which malignant develop polyps, tumors metastasizes local develops it lymphatics. through the invades malignancy wall As bowel then the to the of and the origin. below tumor The within a and centimeters wall for extends its few above and lymph pre-aortic spread lymph Lymphatic nodes to to and is chain. local then node regional the the into These eventually duct. thoracic drain

for was tumor close tumor certain margin When resection so the anal was sphincters the that clear. surgery, assessed margins of was to the were man to this the that necessary be fecally patient to bowel cannot incontinent. the because be would be anus sphincters The joined without the surgery lymph node the locoregional the the chains was peritumoral and including excised, the around fat At tumor rectum.

free brought through The a end sigmoid the the wall. was anterior hole in abdominal colon of anterior a bag bowel was of feces. carefully placement then to to collect to allow the wall The abdominal the sutured a This is colostomy.

to most to been they especially their anterior cured well, reaction having cope wall, bag immediate the usual a cancer. of Contrary patients negative extremely have abdominal on if

This patient’s damaged. pelvic were nerves The the for nerve erection penis. parasympathetic dissection supply of pelvic the radical pelvic damaged necessary surgical his some explained to which part relationship. to Unfortunately, patient, the well led in failure this not of was the radical the penis supply the surgery be damaged, pelvis, in interfering clitoris with any nerves so With sexual function. the may or that

stomal This bleeding varices. patient was from

liver liver As this normal drinking developed architecture. he serious a and problem, the damaged became his cirrhotic (portal hypertension). portal in This turn blood pressure in the vein increased the

portal patients with veins anastomoses the develop the veins system of small In hypertension systemic between of portal and the the circulation. are position and consequence; are they trauma. the little a anastomoses of and These however, subject in at mucosal lie usually to junction, submucosal gastroesophageal portosystemic ensue and from following Torrential even death trauma, hemorrhage may minor blood occur may loss. surgical ligation. includes require and sclerosant banding, varices injecting substances, urgent treatment, even These which

portosystemic anastomoses relatively most consequence. little Fortunately, other are the of of abdominal anterior and wall patients develop the colostomies, (systemic drainage) veins with large of (portal veins cutaneous bowel veins veins). the on In small the system between may portal to they are because of passed the through subject become colostomy. feces these enlarged as hypertension, veins trauma If are Torrential damaged. they hemorrhage may are if ensue

the was pressure. portal carried A procedure lower to out

this surgical pressure the vein considered. portal patient, in were To several procedures reduce the in included renal and sewing shunt). sewing the vein portal side cava the vena vein onto shunt) These inferior (a onto vein (portacaval of splenic the splenorenal the the extremely a large These and complex. require however, incision abdominal are procedures, it a create alternative, an decided intrahepatic As shunt. was transjugular portosystemic to

carried be intrahepatic relatively out is that under local Creating portosystemic transjugular a a shunt technique new anesthesia. may inferior approach, placed long atrium, the needle internal the and the superior right vein, a vena a cava. jugular through internal right vena into is the jugular cava, Using special directly hepatic vein the the portal The steering into with needle passed is a through right branch hepatic wires, and, is of right cannulated substance the vein. balloon passed is inflated. is over the through hepatic A substance the small and and wire After balloon it open. removed, in (a this tract metallic been placed the has wire a across flexible to keep the is tube) stent liver now shunt. right from vein portosystemic vein, the flows hepatic into a Blood portal freely creating the

this a the and venous pressure the to lower is result so system portosystemic portal the in potential system, of procedure, the at similar bleeding the systemic reducing As this patient’s (i.e., of colostomy). that anastomoses for

man engorged around left both plexus within emergency swelling came pampiniform large the A with (enlarged and veins left varicocele 62-year-old veins). varicose left department testis legs the of to and a the of and

known following was The to this carcinoma renal due was on and the week. have have to patient left a cell operated

the findings renal of biology of Anatomically all the link tumor. possible with the carcinoma the to is cell knowing it by

cell and Renal tends steadily to predictably. grow carcinoma is 3 than tumor to kidney. confined less when Typically, 4 it the cm, remains the to inferior grow right the propensity tumors the the the into heart artery. through pulmonary vein, to atrium Large into and have cava the vena the and renal

vein. into grew tumor renal The the

into the largest left renal grew of vein. all off testicular vein blocked into is As the tributaries the tumor it the the which draining vein, of testis testicular the (a left This dilation a caused vein the blockage of around the occurred). varicocele left veins

were for legs obstruction. by The accounted swollen caval

into heart. the toward vein the the tumor renal cava along The and grew inferior vena into grow case inferior in tumors this tumor rapidly can occluding Renal it. vena cava, grew rapidly; the the veins, leg of and the swelling This the the increased resulting ankles. pitting in pressure in edema

unfortunately patient on The died operating table. the

the this In into vena inferior “tongue” patient’s of case, a grew cava. tumor kidney became detached vascular on time its in vena the surgery, cava. pedicle; of dissection portion inferior a initial the the large however, tumor the At of mobilized and The through occluded right artery. tumor atrium passed and the pulmonary right embolus the ventricle the not be surgery, of time cleared and at succumbed. patient the could This

to with central was came emergency lower pain A 65-year-old department sided. businessman that predominantly left abdominal and the severe the loin, fecal urinated. passing radiating also He he left noticed was gas he had he pain and as into and debris

(eFig. his abdomen and A CT performed pelvis was scan of 4.191).

(likely left fluid abscess) CT demonstrated collection the of pelvic in The scan a fossa. a iliac thickening of this arising the sigmoid small colon. multiple bowel significant collection fluid with sigmoid diverticula colon Associated was wall and of the throughout was the Gas in present bladder. the An left system. the left ureter obstruction was noted pelvicalyceal in and

patient urgent operation. underwent an The

As the entered midline into the left were tissues incision, inflamed. iliac surgeons cavity a in fossa through significantly the abdominal the his cavity mobilize used as a colon from hand sigmoid to of scan. was CT there The “whoosh” the which surgeon on indicated a entered pus the and The out pus and drained. washed was sigmoid the dome inflamed the and The and of thickened colon to stuck bladder. was remarkably into passage dissection and of bladder, in allowing revealed the and patient’s a small symptoms the the gas of bladder fecal producing fecaluria. dome perforation finger the and the of Careful pneumaturia material colon sigmoid resected. was The a anterior the passed oversewn colon form through abdominal the stump descending to The rectal wall was and colostomy. was of small in was the The catheterized dome the hole was the oversewn. and bladder bladder

period a where patient postoperative remained pyrexial difficult septic. and The in care the intensive he had unit to The colostomy began well. function

the and in ultrasound dilation patient a the underwent left performed and demonstrated kidney, was An the nephrostomy. continued

a on drainage the the into guidance Under ultrasound the placed renal pelvis cortex through left. renal catheter was drained amount urine passed 24 after however, from significant initially; tract pus of hours the renal freely. was A

for left. inflammation distal likely The on the the the obstruction cause the ureter around was bacteria small also the allowing possible to perforation It occurred, is ureteric tract. enter that a urinary

further normal renal left function patient recovery made hospital. of The with a uneventful and the resumption

to and some return later, to weeks On clinic in colostomy not continue the patient with did the outpatient his bag. surgeon the wish the was Further planned to patient. “rejoin” to discussion, surgery

the was identified. “taken stump down” and operation the was rectal At colostomy There between ends. a however, significant gap bowel was, the sutured, from the colon enable to wall. the the abdominal bowel be To posterior mobilized was descending and performed and week 1 hospital well. was anastomosis An remains left later the currently the patient

aortic 72-year-old department aorta). man aneurysm emergency expansion (an was an brought abdominal the A the to abdominal infrarenal with of for scheduled measured was and after the with cm, The patient it 10 discussion repair. aneurysm

endovascular and were surgical treatment patient. The explained the to options

Treatment position. an aorta sewn the dilation the and a many operative years, aneurysms is (ballooning) abdominal is has where of graft procedure into been, resected for aortic of line from option modern graft A repair). artery the to (endovascular to aneurysm aneurysm place the is a within surgeon artery the this and small technique it. in makes the dissects In hole femoral a the is catheter through and the the the arterial graft passed aorta. femoral distal is compressed and abdominal artery within a into The catheter system iliac it aorta, to relining inside of The graft aneurysm. then released can expansion be further effectively the prevent the

Occasionally been enlarge the has after relined graft needs placed be to to endovascular a identified. continue and aneurysm may cause the

and revealed and Doppler the there the lining ultrasound abdomen between the the of flow wall aneurysm. CT a investigation of scan endovascular A was

were likely for sources assessed. this bleeding The

divides the arteries. and limbs level of the begins two the iliac in arteries usually end that renal graft below into The common aneurysm wall. the the graft vessels fed be continue from aneurysm to between The may and any artery. mesenteric vessels can inferior These the include and the arteries lumbar dynamics branches, Interestingly, flows the to thereby graft aneurysm. leading through flow lumbar with in the enlargement into blood of the artery the however, aorta usually arteries; from these place, inferior blood the in and may changes abdominal in opposite direction flow with mesenteric the the

flow was the into sac. mesenteric aneurysm superior the Blood artery from

superior artery the level normally. Above the graft arises of mesenteric the marginal as artery around the artery from middle region From a branches with in of flexure, (this become colic the and the marginal a marginal branch right mesenteric of colon anastomoses, splenic the hypertrophied can inferior the known branches colic vessel the Drummond). and the it and this pressurized blood aneurysm filling allowing situation, mesenteric passed to In into remain retrogradely artery, expand. the inferior

inferior to further. mesenteric was aneurysm the laparoscopically expand artery failed ligated and The Over 6 ensuing contracted. months aneurysm the the in fit the two groin. small remains scars with healthy, and patient The

412.e1 412.e2

Fig. 4.1, cont’d

Conceptual to Other Regions Relationship Overview •

Fig. 4.13, cont’d

Fig. cont’d 4.15,

Fig. cont’d. 4.47,

Fig. cont’d 4.50,

clinic—cont’d the In

In the clinic—cont’d

the In clinic—cont’d

clinic—cont’d the In

the clinic—cont’d In

clinic—cont’d the In

the In clinic—cont’d

clinic—cont’d In the

clinic—cont’d the In

the In clinic—cont’d

• Anatomy Inguinal Find Surface to Superficial How Ring the

Surface LI • the Anatomy Level at Visualizing Structures Vertebral

Anatomy Using Viscera Surface Major Abdominal Quadrants • to Locate

Spleen Where to Surface • the Anatomy Find

The terminal with pelvis the parts vertebral interrelated associated of and perineum column. bones and the are regions pelvic two pelvis divided The into regions: is

of and false the related abdominal upper the parts vertebrae lower superior the is (greater The lumbar pelvis) pelvis to considered generally cavity pelvic of (Fig. is bones and part region 5.1).

parts coccyx, of pelvis The inlet pelvic is has pelvis) related and outlet. and an true an inferior bones, (lesser and the the to sacrum,

pelvic the and bowl-shaped walls, enclosed true cavity pelvic by inlet, floor. The the pelvis of consists This and with and reproductive elements abdominal systems. the contains is cavity the continuous superiorly gastrointestinal, cavity urinary, of

(Fig. perineum The outlet. the is the boundaries of 5.1) pelvic floor inferior pelvic to form its the cavity; genitourinary and gastrointestinal genitalia external contains the openings The of external perineum the systems. and

Contains tracts reproductive the and bladder, canal, anal supports rectum, and

pelvic and the anteriorly Within the is cavity, the bladder the in rectum posteriorly midline. positioned

the the it superiorly into abdomen. As bladder expands fills, by floor. It by adjacent pelvic the and is the of pelvic elements bone supported floor externally (Fig. perineum, the pelvic urethra in the to opens where, it women, passes through The it of penis the men base (Fig. enters 5.2A) and in the 5.2B).

to at rectum terminates level the the at perineum. the into Continuous the vertebra sigmoid of the canal, with which floor anal penetrates SIII, pelvic the colon open is canal the posteriorly on anal rectum. The angled maintained is pelvic the floor by This and defecation. muscles flexure during is relaxed of anal passes through A muscle sphincter canal associated urethra the as skeletal pelvic is each the the floor. with and

cavity tract the in the men. part of pelvic women in tract and of most reproductive contains The reproductive

vagina In the pelvic the penetrates pelvic cavity. uterus with floor in the women, connects and the rectum The bladder. positioned between and is the uterus the (fallopian) the A to open side tube ovary. extends near pelvic toward each wall laterally on the uterine

In and men, the cavity of reproductive the tracts. between the site urinary contains pelvic connection reproductive system—the prostate contains with glands and vesicles. the It major associated also seminal two

of the the Anchors roots external genitalia

area half anchored which a membrane, the penis, the are the of (Fig. perineal fills of margin anterior firmly clitoris both roots pelvic bony genders, and the external fibrous, outlet, of In the and thick, the the genitalia, the to: 5.3).

consist The roots tissues of skeletal associated (vascular) of erectile the external and muscles. genitalia

is completely inlet somewhat pelvic (Fig. bone heart ringed shaped and by The 5.4). the the is promontory. by the of body the into as sacral SI, bordered inlet inlet vertebra which Posteriorly, projects the (wings) of wing-like alae this side contribute the called On transverse of to inlet. vertebra, margin processes the each pelvic where midline. the are prominent continues forward joined inlet rim to in pelvic symphysis, on two pubic bone a pelvic Laterally, boundary the the bones the the the of

inlet. cavity between pelvic through Structures and the pelvic the pass the abdomen

childbirth, the abdomen, pelvic through the and During pregnancy, has the uterus passes passes the during from which into outlet. through fetus then the inlet expanded pelvic

The of true bone, the forming with muscle, coccyx, of them. and the inferior bones the sacrum, half of pelvis much and ligaments, walls pelvic predominantly of consist

ligaments—the sacrotuberous because architectural they and of ligaments—are (Fig. the and elements each important the sacrospinous coccyx bone the to Two pelvic sacrum walls link 5.5A). lateral and bones—the sciatic also notches—into two notches walls. the on ligaments pelvic convert the on foramina These greater lesser pelvic

piriformis the internus (Fig. obturator muscles Completing the are walls and and hip foramina to the on pelvis sciatic joint. the which 5.5B), arise exit act the in through

(Fig. is by both The formed bone and ligaments pelvic diamond-shaped outlet 5.6). anteriorly symphysis. the limited It the in by midline pubic is

inferior a ischial each bone end the pelvic from symphysis prominent projects margin the tuberosity, to laterally posteriorly pubic the and of side, in the On tuberosity. anterior which of the the forms margin elements pelvic half Together, arch, outlet. the the construct pubic of these the margin the posteriorly this tuberosity sacrum. The and to coccyx from sacrotuberous ischial ligament continues symphysis, can tuberosities, palpated. be pubic The and coccyx all ischial

fascia pelvic and the separates (Fig. which by The cavity the pelvic perineum, formed muscles floor, from is 5.7).

walls attach levator Two muscles other join each at and raphe. peripherally tissue by midline to pelvic the ani a the connective muscles. of the the Together largest pelvic diaphragm, is completed which bowlor components they the as coccygeus structure the posteriorly funnel-shaped by are known the overlie the the a muscles spine. bone, the ischial sacrum the margins and pass spine latter between ligaments coccyx sacrospinous prominent and on pelvic These of the and

of regions pelvic with most The is forms in the system. contains pelvic a urogenital associated floor anterior of U-shaped diaphragm which elements and its the defect,

orifice the The to from through passes in pelvic the canal a posterior perineum diaphragm. anal pelvis the circular

the anteriorly the perineal membrane, and The deep in pouch. muscles pelvic is floor by: perineal supported

posterior pubic a border arch, is a has the arms free membrane the thick, that triangular The perineal fascial the sheet between (Fig. fills and of space 5.7). narrow region deep The to perineal is perineal a the pouch superior membrane.

into in margins The with the diaphragm and perineal pelvic deep U-shaped merge defect pouch muscles associated the the of viscera walls below. the of the in

perineum. urethra the The the the pass penetrate vagina cavity pelvic the and from to floor pelvic to

the pelvic peritoneum the that (Fig. cavity pelvic continuous The the superior drapes but the is reach floor does cavity pelvic aspects most viscera, by peritoneum with of the in over abdominal not lined of regions, 5.8A).

pelvic the The midline cavity. in pelvic of viscera the located are rectum the is The posterior. and bladder is anterior the In (Fig. the and uterus between lies rectum bladder women, 5.8B). side walls association of peritoneum vessels viscera. nerves, deep lie either structures, as in on the Other the and and the with pelvic to such pelvic

perineum the limbs between lower pelvic to The inferior the (Fig. lies floor 5.9). by is the margin outlet. pelvic formed Its divides perineum between line An into two the the ischial tuberosities triangular imaginary regions.

in of Anteriorly, contains the women, of the triangle the genitalia the external urethra the roots openings vagina the (Fig. and and, urogenital 5.9A). enclosed by distal and In the urethra of is erectile men, opens part the end (Fig. at penis the tissues the of 5.9B).

the anal triangle anal contains the Posteriorly, aperture.

the at pelvic is (Fig. the cavity The the abdominal true inlet of continuous with pelvis cavity 5.10A). All and cavity inlet. as nerves, colon and pass via and pelvic the the abdomen, major ureters, between lymphatics, vessels, sigmoid structures as passing the including well cavity. deferens ductus wall and men, the the the the abdominal side inlet over each enter through In passes to pelvic anterior on to the and ovaries, which inlet. lie In pelvic vessels, pass on through to ovarian lymphatics inlet reach just nerves, the women, the inferior each side

communicate (Fig. in the lower wall apertures Three pelvic limb with the the obturator lesser foramen. greater the sciatic foramen, sciatic and canal, 5.10A): the

region adductor the aspect canal the cavity a the tissue the of membrane, passageway between muscles fill in superior The foramen, obturator pelvic connective that the bone, formed foramen. and thigh, is of a and the obturator between and forms

inferior between the region provides foramen, The (Fig. which the to gluteal sciatic lesser floor, the and communication pelvic perineum lies 5.10B).

the a the cavity between communicates perineal (Fig. and the pubic symphysis with perineum directly membrane through pelvic small The gap also 5.10B).

cavity posteriorly projects pelvic The

(Fig. plane vertical iliac in the and lie superior same anterior anatomical the In spines superior edge pubic symphysis of the position, the the 5.11). Consequently, abdominal from horizontal relative the the the plane, 50°–60° angled inlet forward posteriorly to is the cavity. cavity pelvic and projects pelvic

of whereas posterior more the outlet arch) pelvic urogenital of nearly (the vertically. Meanwhile, pubic positioned oriented a in the is the part is outlet horizontal the part plane, triangle of faces perineum triangle the while posteriorly. urogenital therefore anal the The faces inferiorly, more

in the the Important pelvic cross structures cavity ureters

ureters the The the and pelvic down course the kidneys, abdominal cavity. enter inlet pelvic cross the drain to wall, posterior and connect with pelvic inferiorly base along ultimately the bladder. the They wall of the continue lateral

the of cavity the the women—in men An in cervix pelvic women, the ureters artery important uterine and ureter crosses in crosses uterus to the structure the lateral (Fig. both in the ureter and bladder the just men, (Fig. posterior crosses deferens to ductus over 5.12A), the 5.12B).

uterus to the and women anterior prostate in are rectum in The men the

is above men, the the In immediately prostate gland the rectum, floor pelvic (Fig. just to situated anterior 5.13). palpation can a felt during be digital It by rectal examination.

sexes, by the be anal rectum during the canal also both and rectal a lower clinician. can In evaluated examination a uterus part of women, also the of the the lower and palpable. are In cervix body lower the be and structures wall. can in clinician’s placed the hand is bimanual these examination a anterior palpated abdominal the hand on with a where fingers middle index placed vagina other the more easily are of and However, the The are hands. two organs felt between This used ovaries be can also the to examine technique tubes. uterine bimanual and

is by perineum The innervated spinal sacral

L1 tend the in by anterior cord the for nerves to associated men cord levels spinal Dermatomes S5, except be abdominal with from (Fig. wall are S3 level to perineum regions, which the both women by innervated and spinal of 5.14). lower the L2 of are predominantly in S2 to Dermatomes limb.

of spinal sphincter muscles the innervated floor, the Most by to S4. external contained the are external anal in cord and the urethral S2 perineum sphincter, skeletal including pelvic levels and

somatic levels from the innervation motor S4. provided sensory S2 the by perineum Much the nerve is pudendal cord spinal of and of to

are to bone related Nerves

the of pudendal is pelvis of spine the directly perineum nerve The major is (Fig. and with the the associated ischial nerve 5.15). the of and wall. foramina body, sciatic the lateral the separate each foramina attached from pelvic these on lesser ligaments sacrospinous spines the sciatic On the side greater

pelvic pelvic The foramen passing immediately then sciatic nerve the sciatic inferiorly cavity around foramen enters to (Fig. through and floor the perineum through the leaves the by the the ischial greater and lesser spine pudendal 5.15). The in nerve women landmark and a that for administering spine the transvaginally used palpated can ischial pudendal can be block. be is

S2 S4 cord erection innervation controls from Parasympathetic levels spinal to

(Fig. spinal The genital women S4 parasympathetic from cord innervation and men to controls in S2 erection both levels 5.16). of pelvic nerves parasympathetic spinal the leave plexus the inferior sacral wall. the anterior and side, on rami hypogastric preganglionic plexus) enter (pelvic lateral On nerves each the

plexus that the on the with abdominal plexuses in wall inferior hypogastric posterior the association forms of inferior abdominal are abdominal two extensions The aorta. prevertebral from in penetrate derived penis the to erectile clitoris innervate the tissues pelvic the floor and of women these plexuses Nerves in men. the

at and and intersect Muscles body the perineal perineum fascia of pelvic the floor

floor at perineal intersect pelvic with in structures of perineum body Structures (Fig. the the the 5.17). lies perineum, approximately defined center midway between at two poorly fibromuscular the tuberosities. the the This ischial node of ani muscle and in muscles the levator perineal the triangles with the and urogenital of including the associated diaphragm, skeletal at anus. vagina, of sphincters body perineum, urethra, the the and the pelvic anal Converging are: muscles

in of the course urethra The men is different

inferiorly bladder and opens and is the short into passes women, urethra through floor directly In the (Fig. the from perineum pelvic the 5.18A).

coursing the penis the deep (Fig. penis through men then through tissues opening within the and of pouch becomes and perineal end erectile perineal the before of membrane urethra passes before In the prostate at the the enclosed 5.18B). part of angles: The penile has urethra the male two

in The anteriorly membrane. through root fixed of passing important perineal is the after the where of penis the the more bends these urethra angle a

the part Another the this erect, curves unattached angle penis angle second disappears. of penis where the inferiorly—when occurs is distally

consider is to in injuries and important and urethra men pathology. pelvic evaluating the the when of catheterizing perineal women courses and different It patients when

the surrounded by bones elements pelvic column. is the The of and inferior of the body region the vertebral the pelvis encloses is which cavity; is of pelvis major the true two pelvic divided regions: the (lesser) cavity. region false It into pelvis, the abdominal inferior (greater) and region is the the is superior part the

the continuous is cavity above pelvic abdominal bowl-shaped cavity. with The inlet) rim completely pelvic of encircled pelvic is bone. (the The the cavity by structure from separating is the The the perineum below. fibromuscular above a pelvic pelvic cavity floor

is pelvic by inferior formed pelvic and the floor its outlet. The is to margin the perineum terminal opening gastrointestinal and reproductive of perineum the external roots of openings external The and urinary the genitalia. systems, tract, the of the the the contains:

pelvic bones, (hip) of sacrum, and the and left pelvis The the coccyx. consist of right bones the the lumbosacral articulates with joint. sacrum superiorly vertebra The the LV at and the joints pelvic the other articulate at at pubic symphysis. the The anteriorly with sacrum sacro-iliac bones with posteriorly each

separated oblique bone major and two irregular of the surface shape an has by in medial (Fig. line pelvic on the The bone is parts 5.19A):

the part false of The pelvic above this bone represents abdominal which lateral cavity. is the wall pelvis, of line the

pelvic pelvic wall the which this cavity. represents the lateral bone true the contains of line below The pelvis,

inlet. pelvic and terminalis the line linea this margin the of of to The two-thirds contributes the is lower

surface forms with joint the a socket, which, lateral the The together has the of large femur, of the acetabulum, (Fig. the head articular pelvic hip bone 5.19B).

membrane. closed is a connective flat the by Inferior obturator of large tissue the foramen, to obturator acetabulum the which is most membrane, membrane between limb the remains and cavity. bone, the route a the small of obturator between adjacent providing superiorly pelvic open canal lower communication A and

two by is the The lesser the the greater separated notches of by posterior and sciatic notch, ischial sciatic notch. margin spine: marked bone the

The posterior ischial terminates as tuberosity. the margin inferiorly large

inferior is anterior the by spine, the marked spine, the bone The iliac the and anterior superior margin pubic anterior irregular of tubercle. pelvic iliac

of Components pelvic the bone

pelvic ilium, elements: ischium. three bone Each is by and formed pubis, the connected and single later, of a years these cartilage at 18 by bone age, 16 bones the area the in acetabulum; they between (Fig. are At of into fuse birth, 5.20).

in position. of pelvic is the most the the ilium the components Of bone, superior three

a surface ridge the upper into (Fig. on lower The ilium by is medial parts separated and 5.21A).

Posteriorly, sharp to is articulates bone ridge lies surface of sacrum. the that with the immediately and superior the the support articulating of the the with area that expanded, sacral large joint ligaments the sacro-iliac sacrum a for for and has This attachment L-shaped surface roughened an strong the facet (Fig. posterior 5.21).

and is the the ilium termed ridge line. rounded the separating Anteriorly, arcuate lower and the upper of parts

the of The arcuate line and terminalis part forms linea the pelvic brim.

true wall of the to the part the line of the the pelvis. pelvic The the to arcuate inferiorly lesser of lying portion or and ilium ilium is contributes

expands bony pelvis. provides flat, part fan-shaped the to the abdomen, for of a lower upper form support false or which ilium The “wing,” This ilium the muscles for limb. the with lower associated functionally of attachment part provides of and wing the fossa. surface iliac forms is the The anteromedial concave and region The the (Fig. by to of marked the limb the is related gluteal lower (gluteal) roughenings wing and is lines external of surface 5.21B).

crest), as abdomen, prominent terminates and attachment anteriorly of thickened iliac is the for superior muscles the a crest and ilium anterior spine limb (the The the which iliac entire superior the of back, of the form posteriorly superior and site and fascia iliac to posterior as lower spine. margin is

to posterior the end projects of laterally end the the form tuberculum tubercle, the near crest, the anterior of tuberosity. A crest; prominent of thickens iliac crest iliac the the

to anterior a is the of on of anterior superior margin ilium, Inferior iliac inferior the protuberance the the called anterior crest, iliac spine rounded the spine. the and the of thigh joint. structure the ligament for the attachment femoris iliofemoral muscle the of compartment This serves point hip rectus as with associated the anterior of spine along to A the of of margin superior the sciatic forward notch. the greater surface posterior the sacral of posterior the angles inferior border where the form iliac bone less prominent occurs ilium,

part bone is pelvic (Fig. anterior pubis the The and of the inferior 5.21). two body arms has and It a (rami).

body the is flattened other the dorsoventrally pubic symphysis. the bone and articulates on body pubic The the side of at with the tubercle. has pubic a as superior pubic laterally body its that surface ends prominent rounded The crest on

and projects The positioned pubic the acetabulum. the which toward posterolaterally and from body base, with ilium superior is at joins ramus the its ischium this of The pelvic pelvic of the the termed triangular surface is pecten line), bone of terminalis margin pubis (pectineal inlet. the part linea superior which and forms the sharp with line part crest, the linea and is also which terminalis this is inlet. pelvic continuous the Anteriorly, pubic of canal. upper the its pubic groove, surface ramus on marked obturator obturator is by margin inferior of which forms the superior the The

the of ramus inferior to ramus with join the inferiorly laterally and The projects ischium.

and The posterior ischium the is (Fig. of the part inferior pelvic bone 5.21). that projects projects inferior to to the a the a has: of large the join the the ramus It ramus with and ilium anteriorly superior pubis. ramus superiorly and pubis, join with body that of

prominent above. posterior marked separates the ischial from the notch, below, lesser of sciatic margin by The the notch, bone greater is that sciatic spine a

feature of aspect is tuberosity) posteroinferior The bone. tuberosity ischial the on most a prominent (the large the the of ischium muscles lower an is attachment site the for body sitting. This for the tuberosity important of when and limb supporting

(Fig. inverted triangle, the the of five an appearance sacral which is sacrum, has the formed fusion vertebrae The by of 5.22). the LV, and vertebra with coccyx. the The articulates base its of with articulates sacrum apex the with of of Each for a of the lateral surfaces bears facet the ilium L-shaped articulation large pelvic bone. the bone for Posterior is attachment that of large the to a support the facet ligaments the area joint. roughened sacro-iliac by an and wing-like the side superior surface each expanded of process termed of by ala. is vertebra is characterized transverse body aspect of the sacrum superior The the SI flanked the on of anterior the projects the forward as body The edge vertebral promontory. the anterior The surface of the convex. sacrum surface is is posterior concave; the posterior of through separate S4 to S1 intervertebral rami nerves transverse emerge of spinal the processes adjacent bifurcation lateral foramina. the to fuse posterior the anterior to nerves lateral into sacrum anterior from rami, the and spinal vertebrae and position of of the and Because foramina sacral are foramina four of the the and on anterior posterior pairs surface for of rami, sacrum pairs sacral posterior the surface for anterior of four There sacral on foramina the anterior posterior rami. the canal is as of hiatus. the terminates sacral that a canal vertebral continuation sacral The

the is (Fig. part of four terminal which fused vertebral coccyx, vertebrae the column of consists coccygeal small The the shape has like sacrum, triangle. 5.22) an inverted the of and, coccyx directed of superiorly. the base is The sacrum. articulate to the surface articulation two or with bears from superior cornua, fuse and sacrum horns, one a that each downward-projecting The for the project on side, similar or facet cornua with upward modified present processes other on inferior vertebrae. These are and that are articular processes superior transverse vertebra. small first coccyx the has from surface the rudimentary extending Each of process, coccygeal a lateral are vertebral no in absent arches canal is the present vertebrae; bony Vertebral from coccyx. coccygeal therefore

lumbar superiorly sacrum the of articulates the vertebral with part column. The and SI bodies lumbosacral superior joints the consist articular the and joints, (Fig. LV LV between inferior of: and are vertebra that The between disc adjacent two formed zygapophysial and sacrum vertebrae and of which intervertebral processes, occur joins an the 5.23A).

those is are the on LV. other that joints These with vertebra angled similar posteriorly the exception to vertebrae, between sacrum the posterior between intervertebral of thicker part. result, bones disc As the is the part anterior a two than the

expanded ligaments The joints are respectively and of vertebra sacrum, and the to the transverse extend ilium iliolumbar processes LV (Fig. the lumbosacral by that strong reinforced lumbosacral from 5.23B).

transmit from The forces column. limbs to the the vertebral lower joints sacro-iliac facets the surfaces the are bones the lateral and L-shaped the of the sacrum pelvic parts on They on joints iliac articular (Fig. between synovial of similar facets 5.24A). contour to resist an The have surfaces and movement. interlock irregular joint joints completely age become may ossified. often and with The become fibrous

stabilized of and inferiorly is fibrous membrane (Fig. the the anterior which by ligament, a runs ligaments: thickening is to of three joint joint capsule the the Each sacro-iliac and joint anteriorly sacro-iliac the on two bones immediately interosseous expansive joint the ligament largest, positioned the adjacent (Fig. and which attaches filling of ilium is the sacrum, the and the ligament, posterosuperior and gap between to to sacro-iliac strongest is 5.24B); the roughened three, areas thereby ligament, covers sacro-iliac sacro-iliac posterior 5.24A,C); and which ligament the (Fig. interosseous the 5.24C).

pubic lies bones the of adjacent surfaces between pubic anteriorly symphysis The (Fig. the 5.25). midline the by fibrocartilage. across cartilage surfaces is joint’s Each and is adjacent the covered by linked surfaces of to hyaline superior with The the above are: joint and located of pubic the fibers the major ligament, it. is by and interwoven pubic two the ligaments below located collagen associated it layers surrounded ligament, joint, inferior

the iliac of is anterior symphysis the the same In edge in spines vertical of front that anatomical position, the the so lie pubic oriented pelvis the top and the superior plane (Fig. 5.26). the pelvic anteriorly, nearly are positioned tilted pelvic is the facing inlet, ground. the entrance arch to bodies which and consequence, to plane the horizontal the a and face pubic a As cavity, the bones in pubic the marks of

pelvises passing of woman’s the number a differ and which during of childbirth. with to The pelvic cavity have of many ways, in a men a do baby women of through

in The women pelvic (Fig. circular is inlet the compared pelvic heart-shaped 5.27A) (Fig. with inlet men. 5.27B) in women. partly promontory alae is by and in broader less caused the shape more The circular distinct

two than is women formed (80°–85°) of pubic arms (50°–60°). larger the angle arch men in by is in the The it

ischial they women not do do pelvic as the medially The project spines into as generally men. in far cavity in

inlet, outlet. wall, has a pelvis The true an and an and is cylindrical floor the and above, the below. is the separates closes cavity, The from perineum, whereas outlet the open, pelvic inlet pelvic

the and cavity. the structures circular pelvic abdominal pelvic between which opening is through abdomen the the between cavity inlet traverse The and pelvic cavity bones joints is (Fig. completely by It surrounded and 5.28). The of into forming in the its the the sacrum protrudes midline. inlet, posterior margin promontory by the either formed promontory, is sacrum. of margin the the alae side On the of symphysis. pelvic the or margin the pectineal arcuate to crest) inlet pubis along the the pubic then line, line, crosses The (i.e., terminalis joint pecten the the sacro-iliac and of the continues pubic and linea

inferior of consist of coccyx, the the pelvic walls the terminalis, linea the ligaments, the bones muscles. The to and two pelvic two cavity sacrum,

Ligaments the wall of pelvic

(Fig. sacrotuberous ligaments and The sacrospinous 5.29A) adjacent which the pelvic of help pelvic the apertures that cavity structures components regions and pass. define the lateral between walls major are through

the and and base attached two, attached spine triangular, of the the The ligament, sacrum coccyx. is smaller to the to its with the the apex its sacrospinous margins related of ischial

is the ligament and also superficial to The is ligament. triangular sacrospinous sacrotuberous and base Its iliac coccyx. superior the the of and broad onto the the pelvic margin of along has a attachment spine of the the lateral surface posterior dorsal the sacrum, from aspect that bone, dorsolateral extends Laterally, ligament ischial medial to is tuberosity. apex the the of attached margin of the the

sacrum bones pelvic tilting aspect resisting by on the upward the (Fig. ligaments of inferior the of sacrum the the These stabilize 5.29B). lesser also pelvic convert the foramina into (Fig. They notches the and greater sciatic bone of 5.29A,B).

The sacrospinous greater to lies the sciatic spine. ischial foramen the ligament and superior

ligaments. spine The the ischial lesser sciatic sacrospinous sacrotuberous sacrospinous between and inferior and the lies foramen to ligament

Muscles pelvic the of wall

lateral and walls to the of muscles, pelvic obturator contribute internus piriformis, Two the cavity. the the femur. attach in These originate muscles but to the peripherally pelvic the cavity

a obturator that of bone pelvic muscle the (Fig. that the obturator and deep membrane internus surface The from obturator of foramen associated flat, fan-shaped from regions originates the surround the is and 5.30 Table 5.1).

form lesser of ischial through sciatic muscle between internus and the foramen, tendon the fibers cavity trochanter that spine obturator the femur. then posterior and makes to the The bend joint insert leaves greater a the around ischium 90° a on the the ischial the pelvic of hip converge tuberosity, to passes to

wall internus the large of pelvic cavity. part of The a obturator anterolateral forms the

The in piriformis four anterior bone foramina. and the triangular originates sacral the of bridges is between inserts the femur the internus It posterosuperior the laterally (Fig. of the joint, through insertion crosses sciatic passes greater the muscle above obturator hip greater of trochanter the the on aspect and foramen, of Table 5.1). and 5.30

wall part cavity piriformis. the pelvic formed the large A the posterolateral by of of is addition, into muscle the one the separates below. greater foramen above two and regions, In one this sciatic muscle and region gluteal regions. two these pelvic through nerves pass the between and Vessels coursing the cavity

Apertures pelvic wall the in

major pass regions: other has between and lesser cavity pelvic wall through greater and the pelvic the Each sciatic apertures structures the lateral foramen. foramen, the which obturator canal, sciatic three

the of is associated pubic ramus membrane, bordered the the At canal, and (Fig. the which top obturator superior obturator the obturator foramen obturator by the muscles, is 5.31). vessels canal. thigh this The nerve through the the to from cavity pass pelvic and obturator

and pelvic route (Fig. The foramen a major the lower limb is between of the communication greater sciatic cavity 5.31). the It notch sacrotuberous bone, sacrospinous and pelvic ligaments, is sciatic and the spine ischium. formed in the by greater the of the the

sciatic through foramen, piriformis two parts. dividing muscle the The passes greater into it

gluteal pass superior above piriformis. The foramen nerves the through the and vessels

to nerve, the internal pudendal foramen quadratus and the internus through inferior nerve, femoris nerves, the posterior piriformis gluteal muscles. Passing are vessels, vessels, pudendal femoral the the below nerves the sciatic and the cutaneous the obturator and the nerves

ligament the bone, (Fig. and the ischial formed sciatic the the lesser is pelvic The by sacrospinous lesser of sciatic ligament, sacrotuberous spine, the notch foramen 5.31).

limb. the gluteal muscle passes of through to obturator of region internus enter the foramen The tendon lower this the

between as is a and of positioned foramen region. below the the gluteal pelvic it sciatic acts attachment route of the Because communication the perineum the lesser floor, through the pudendal then of the lesser and perineum. the The through between vessels and (above the cavity pelvic sacrospinous pass (below and spine by pelvic the to the greater sciatic first ischial around pudendal sciatic foramen the internal foramen the passing and enter pelvic looping cavity pelvic ligament pass to floor) out perineum the floor), nerve obturator nerve internus The a similar course. to follows

defined mainly shaped, predominantly outlet pelvic with by part the anterior diamond is and part The the bone diamond ligaments posterior (Fig. the of by 5.32). anteriorly, outlet the symphysis. the the the is pubic of midline In boundary pelvic ramus the side of boundary posteriorly, and the pubis, Extending the ischial the the of laterally the the inferior each on inferior is and of tuberosity. of body ischium, pubis, the border the ramus the Together, elements pubic sides arch. the on form both

both From ligament medially to continue the along sacrotuberous the boundaries ischial sides tuberosities, the on coccyx. posteriorly and the

parts pelvic tracts pass gastrointestinal through the and outlet. urinary and of the Terminal the vagina

enclosed area the the outlet floor of boundaries is the and pelvic perineum. below The by the pelvic

deep diaphragm in perineal pouch. The and, the formed pelvic and pelvic the anterior by membrane perineal the midline, floor muscles the is the in muscles is coccygeus from diaphragm sides. both by The the levator and formed pelvic the ani pelvic The floor separates above, from the below. perineum, the cavity, pelvic

The pelvic diaphragm

The diaphragm of floor. the pelvic part is pelvic muscular the ani coccygeus attached consists a funnel of pelvic it to and and the the walls, superiorly muscles or Shaped bowl (Fig. the levator like 5.34 5.2). and Table

greater each the foramen. on sciatic diaphragm’s sciatic passes, attachment line foramen pelvic The lesser the side, circular between pelvic cylindrical of and to wall the limb a Thus: the pelvic gluteal level between sciatic the of the the region region is lower communication situated sciatic foramen pelvic the and greater of of lesser cavity floor floor, the the is communication route lower providing situated and and between pelvic limb; perineum. the gluteal the the of is and above of route foramen below the a

medially pelvic the levator muscles wall, each midline. and the two together The inferiorly, of ani in originate side join course from and of of called wall of thickening wall circular muscle, the of The follows internus in the linear bone, arch, and a fascia spine the body attachment aspect ischium. the pubic the posterior contour pelvic the the the includes: to and the tendinous obturator the the covering

blend aperture and vagina posterior anal together At the muscles both the in sexes. to midline, the women the around in coccyx. Posterior to ligament (anococcygeal ligament as and raphe come body) aperture, muscles anal the a together the the the called anococcygeal to attaches or separated U-shaped are defect muscles or urogenital a the the hiatus. Anteriorly, gap termed by muscles the the merge of and the with hiatus perineal The this with margins pouch walls deep associated in of viscera below. (in both (Fig. to through and and urethra diaphragm the women), pass hiatus (in the men women), the vagina allows pelvic The 5.34).

site of levator midline: the iliococcygeus at muscles. divided viscera based ani origin three fibers, the the to puborectalis, into muscle and the The are in collections relationship on and least of pubococcygeus, muscles

the the midline coccyx. and pubococcygeus originates far the to pubis from as body posteriorly the as courses attach The back of along the part the basis the (levator with the into of is of association on pubovaginalis, and prostatae), in structures puboprostaticus midline the further subdivided puboanalis muscles. muscle the This

the fibers, part form of puborectalis a of tract. the the to A terminal inferiorly muscle originates, around muscle, from of pubis association pubococcygeus and muscles, each gastrointestinal the collection levator on sling ani in the side the major with portion second passes or the called perineal an junction. angle muscular at anorectal the flexure, maintains This sling flexure, the the of gastrointestinal end of angle as keeps the mechanism functions that This part system closed.

iliococcygeus. is the muscle part of final the ani The levator the This fascia from the part originates internus obturator of that muscle muscle. covers the in ligament that muscle joins form the to the midline other from extends side to aperture anal a raphe the It coccyx. or on the same the

and help rectum pelvic maintain the of The the closure vagina. muscles and support ani levator viscera S4 They anterior of innervated of the directly branches (S2 are S4). by to from branches by pudendal nerve the and ramus

(Fig. of coccygeus and side, together the they part sacrospinous The muscles, are triangular pelvic ligaments; the two each diaphragm overlie the on one posterior complete 5.34 5.2). and Table margins the the coccyx to sacrum. ischial and, of lateral and of adjacent spines tips attached, the of the margins They are to by apices, the bases, their their by

the are muscles and by the The posterior aspect floor. S4 innervated rami coccygeus pelvic the branches from and anterior of in of participate S3 supporting

The membrane perineal deep and

(Fig. triangular is bony the membrane pubic a perineal of arch The attached the thick to structure framework fascial, 5.36A). is free a in posterior plane margin. and oriented the It has horizontal there a is small gap arrow (blue in Anteriorly, Fig. and ligament pubic the with (a ligament the pubic associated between membrane inferior symphysis). the 5.36A)

deep The to related space the membrane is thin space) perineal pouch perineal (deep (Fig. called perineal a above and layer a muscle skeletal of neurovascular contains 5.36B), elements. which various

not of above from perineal is fascia. separated distinct layer more is structures deep by a pouch open The and superior pelvic are of in even perineal the the the and membrane of the deep of parts elements contribute usually structures pouch, urogenital though therefore The cavity, and enclosed pouch in parts membrane above, urogenital and perineal considered perineum. to the hiatus perineal by support perineal the the pelvic the system floor deep

muscles for arch membrane roots with external the attachment pubic perineal of the adjacent The and and associated them provide genitalia the (Fig. 5.36C).

to passes circular perineal it a cavity, The urethra penetrates from below. perineum, vertically hiatus above, pelvic the membrane through the in as the vagina to a through in passes membrane hiatus the In women, perineal the also the just posterior urethral hiatus.

perineal sphincter, a functions sheet as deep and perineal edge muscle posterior of membrane pouch, urethra, (Fig. of of skeletal Within mainly a stabilizer the a the the as for the 5.37 Table and 5.3).

urethral and muscle the urethra form fibers external a of group surround sphincter. collectively the Anteriorly,

Two additional are women. the with muscle vagina in urethra groups associated and of fibers group which and One the as the urethrovaginalis, vagina surrounds unit. urethra sphincter forms a to side, ischiopubic urethrae, the the meet The second rami and on from originate compressor which the each group forms urethra. anterior sphincter facilitate and the urethral Together the urethra. external the compressor sphincter, urethrae closing with urethrovaginalis of

men and free parallels transverse deep muscle both the its at a of the margin side partner perineal and each with perineal joins In midline. membrane the women, on edge of to the muscles along which perineal the is posterior the a thought are structure perineal body, These position midline of stabilize the membrane.

attach body perineal muscles the connective the and structure an pelvic but into of important which The (Fig. tissue is floor perineum ill-defined 5.38). to It it the of border attaches. membrane, is in the positioned perineal which posterior midline along the it. levator of in is posterior muscles hiatus the to end ani The urogenital also connected the

body. at the body; sphincter the intersect The the perineal perineal perineal urethrovaginalis in attaches muscles deep also to transverse women, the muscles the muscles, bulbospongiosus of sphincter, that body anal the and perineum. Other the superficial muscles the external to perineal connect include perineal transverse

of pelvic include urinary The the reproductive and the parts system, system, viscera gastrointestinal the system. is the to pass arranged front and back; supply neurovascular that The from the pelvic walls. through nerves vessels medially branches with from viscera in midline, are the associated

the of pelvic of anal sigmoid the part Pelvic is parts consist rectum cavity although (Fig. mainly colon gastrointestinal system the the the the in canal, terminal of and also 5.39).

at with through below, as SIII, end level canal the passes penetrates structure rectum the the floor about colon the and above, this the sigmoid continuous: pelvic and with anal to vertebra anus. as The of perineum the is

of rectum, of most contour sacrum. and The anterior immediately follows the element concave to the is the posterior the pelvic viscera,

of the moves canal flexure) anorectal forward The direction in (perineal muscle, as anal puborectalis the passes part the levator ani through pulled posterior by the the a junction action is pelvic floor. it of inferiorly so

In the the the the to to the conforming and upper right in lower general three has left. lateral to addition plane, of curvature curvature and to rectum sacrum the curvatures; the the middle curvatures anteroposterior lower to expanded rectum The part rectal of form is the the ampulla. rectum of taeniae and sacculations the (haustra omental colon). unlike distinct coli colon, the Finally, appendices, the muscles, lacks

the anal begins it ampulla the narrows canal at the The terminal rectal end of at where floor. pelvic the anus the It terminates after as through passing perineum. through sphincters, surrounded internal anal anal external normally and entire passes its keep by length the it the As it canal the pelvic floor, is closed. along which

anal to reflect features fetus lining the of the membrane the terminal characteristic the the end the skin the in in transition the of anococcygeal canal (which developing bears approximate (Fig. of fetus) of closes position the The adult mucosa and in from gastrointestinal system a gastrointestinal that structural number 5.39B).

anal by folds canal the that are of similar valves. mucosa a anal the and is which The lining termed united by as inferiorly known oriented longitudinally crescentic folds anal upper is rectum of by part distinguished columns, number lined to anal to is valve termed sinus. a Superior each an depression pectinate around valves which circle marks The a the anal anal the anal a fetus. the canal form the in known at as the line, together membrane position of location approximate

anal known a zone by as pecten, epithelium. the squamous lined stratified to which is nonkeratinized is line Inferior the transition pectinate at the lining anal ends line the skin. anocutaneous canal pecten of inferiorly anal or where line”), true The becomes (“white the

extremely cavity could uterus a colorectal invade and to example, position the in accurately proximity in the the of rectum and its other organs, pelvis, to Given the important colon tumor stage or is for bladder. it abdominopelvic the tumors: involve tomography, scanning, occurred ultrasound spread imaging. may whether Assessing magnetic resonance has and computed

proximal urinary system of the The and terminal ureters, part consist the of the of bladder, the pelvic urethra the parts parts of (Fig. the 5.40).

the from by cavity ureters pelvic abdomen through passing inlet. pelvic enter The the the of the common artery. each the the in side, and bifurcation enters iliac pelvic to inlet the the pelvic anterior the crosses On cavity ureter area the of floor bladder. the join it and continues this base From to point, the wall pelvic along

the by: pelvis, men, ureter women. crossed the deferens in artery is ductus the in and In the uterine

anterior is viscera. The most the bladder the of element pelvic it (Fig. cavity into Although is full in when the situated when entirely expands superiorly the cavity abdominal empty, it pelvic 5.40).

one that lie has over its on (Fig. like tipped pyramid bladder shaped to empty a of three-sided The margins is 5.41A). has base, a inferolateral superior and surfaces. apex, two a surface, an It

umbilical bladder from ligament contributes top to wall pubic umbilicus. it the symphysis; The median that the of is the embryological remnant formation the of the urachus structure of the toward as up superiorly bladder) a abdominal (a of known apex to the continues anterior the directed the

an The is the triangle base of inverted shaped faces bladder like posteroinferiorly. and the inferiorly corners ureters urethra corner the the upper two at base. of each base, of of and enter The bladder lower the the drains from the loosely elsewhere of the the where attached the folded muscle coat attached in mucosal bladder and mucosa bladder wall. is Inside, firmly base the the is the the smooth underlying smooth the to wall—unlike lining on of to and urethra bladder of ureters openings trigone the inside The on the as the triangular smooth the known the (Fig. and of between is area 5.41B).

diaphragm. of and cradled of inferolateral are surfaces muscles of levator internus between the ani muscles the the bladder diaphragm The the attachment obturator pelvic the adjacent the pelvic above the superior as domed when The is slightly the is bladder it surface balloons upward fills. empty; bladder

Neck bladder of

bladder two The surrounds urethra of the the of the surfaces where inferolateral the neck origin base intersect. and the the at point

the The of is and also the most inferior neck part most the bladder part. “fixed” into connect bands, It part each fibromuscular and a pair which of urethra pubic aspect neck the is of position the tough pelvic posteroinferior anchored the bone. to by of

ligaments these (Fig. bands pubovesical termed are women, fibromuscular In 5.42A). membrane the and associated and Together muscles, levator pubic the ligaments support the with these bladder. help the bones, ani muscles, perineal

they and men, the prostate, as bladder which neck the the part (Fig. are with of the ligaments paired of fibromuscular capsule bands because urethra puboprostatic fibrous blend the In known the surrounds of adjacent 5.42B).

be considered the to is adult, it the in higher position a Although has pelvic in bladder children. upper At the is pubic the approximately of almost at bladder symphysis. begins abdominal; entirely the birth, margin the urethra puberty after the until With the it position. adult descends when bladder age, assumes

the the ends and of opening external at begins The bladder base the an with urethra in perineum. men. the significantly paths differ and by women taken in urethra The

being In long. 4 about women, cm urethra the short, is opening floor passes (Fig. It inferiorly minora the membrane the labia the perineal deep a the that slightly and before pouch travels between into course it lies passes in perineal through where pelvic through curved the as vestibule perineum, it 5.45A).

in the urethral opening opening anterior the The vestibule. to is vaginal anterior bound surface aspect vagina. The the inferior the of to of urethra the is the Two mucous the small end of glands para- with urethra. glands) urethral (Skene’s lower associated are that duct onto lateral urethral of drains orifice. the the a via Each margin external opens

bends 20 the In its course is urethra long, and along (Fig. about twice cm, men, 5.45B). the and at immediately root perineal the and prostate, the the base of pouch penis. inferiorly perineal it the through passes the passing deep Beginning membrane enters through and of bladder the bends deep to the of forward the course root urethra As anteriorly the in perineal it exits penis. pouch, time body When the is the from when root inferiorly, of another bend, this urethra the penis. passing flaccid, penis the the to makes the body root the erection, of and the During penis between disappears. bend

into and in The prostatic, membranous, preprostatic, urethra parts. is divided spongy men

Preprostatic part. about base bladder fibers (the to associated from and of 1 the cuff urethral smooth with the urethra a circular muscle extends of prostate, preprostatic cm sphincter). the The is is long, of the part internal the bladder semen prevents sphincter retrograde of of this into Contraction during ejaculation. movement

Prostatic part. of urethra the The prostatic part (Fig. 3 is 4 is and 5.45C) by the to surrounded prostate. long cm this lumen midline of urethra In (the the is a mucosa of fold region, crest). marked the longitudinal by urethral each crest of the prostatic into ducts the on the these two prostate of the The depression side sinuses. empty is sinus;

colliculus). to is circular urethral a the Midway form along seminal enlarged length, its elevation (the somewhat crest the prostate. the the In prostate to of transurethral transection used seminal of position determine the during is gland colliculus men,

the onto women)—opens utricle of of the the prostatic in (thought to small A be seminal homologue pouch—the uterus colliculus. blind-ended the center system. each the reproductive duct opening the ejaculatory of prostatic male the of On of the is utricle side and Therefore between prostatic the in tracts part the reproductive of connection urinary urethra. men in the occurs the

Membranous part. deep is through and the perineal passes The urethra narrow pouch part (Fig. the of membranous 5.45B). through urethra, surrounded During and is in of sphincter. muscle skeletal by urethral this transit the women, men both external the its pouch,

Spongy urethra. tissue penis. is spongiosum) corpus erectile spongy by of urethra the surrounded (the The

end fossa penis form (Fig. to at is It to a the of again penis at the form the base the bulb of enlarged navicular and the 5.45B). urethra. open deep the in male the pouch spongy The bulb reproductive part and into are perineal glands of system two the the bulbo-urethral of slit The end is orifice external at sagittal of the penis. the urethral the

system (Fig. reproductive components perineum in the has abdomen, The in men and pelvis, 5.47A). penis each and duct a ejaculatory and and the ductus are midline. testis, components in The side, on major deferens, urethra the epididymis, prostate, three system: a single of glands. glands and vesicles, a seminal a accessory In pair types addition, are the of bulbo-urethral associated pair of with

of ducts tubules. the of is The design basically men in reproductive a series and system reflects the The linkage development. to of tract and parts arrangement its urinary embryological

abdominal of the develop testes before normally posterior wall into perineum. and The the through in scrotum originally birth, anterior and descend, canal wall the inguinal then high the abdominal on the their vessels, the lymphatics, descent, and (vas as testes carry deferens) deferens nerves, the their ductus principal During drainage with as ducts, well them. therefore or inguinal nodes testes of aortic is The or in lateral the lymph pelvic to the lumbar abdomen, the to the lymph nodes and nodes. drainage not pre-aortic and

projects into the is scrotum. the with within which continuous ellipsoid-shaped testis end musculofascial abdominal is pouch, enclosed wall the Each an of anterior elongated and the is wall. connection and cord scrotum spermatic The abdominal in the between the the tube-shaped pouch

and connected (the abdominal of which a cavity. by originally sides peritoneum covered the are testis of sac The aspect closed anterior vaginalis), tunica the to remnant. closes, the fibrous descent, connection leaving Normally a after testicular

(Fig. Each testis of composed albuginea). interstitial is tunica surrounded and a by seminiferous tissue connective capsule tissue (the 5.47B) thick tubules tubules. by seminiferous the are Spermatozoa produced of connective are which vertically testis) mediastinum tissue seminiferous the to tubules wedge straight aspect (the become posterior 400 highly rete oriented the thick, 600 The linear chamber a end collecting a of to testis), gonad. each (the to modified coiled tubules, into from projecting capsule the in at connect capsule, penetrate the end 12 the connect to 20 testis, originate ductules the of the Approximately rete upper and epididymis. from efferent with

(Fig. along courses side epididymis of testis the The the posterolateral 5.47B). the duct the at enlarged sits mass inferior of along the components: and which of and as epididymis of posterior and the on testis. the long the margin the superior posterolateral true efferent inferiorly that the tail It which single, form of pole into the the efferent epididymis; testis testis the a all of pole is ductules, enlarges two coiled body head to epididymis the which coiled which forms and epididymis, has ductules the an the distinct continues the of drain, form

and ability move epididymis, through to an egg. During the passage spermatozoa acquire fertilize the ejaculation. spermatozoa stores also until The epididymis with continuous of The end ductus epididymis is deferens. the the

The (Fig. spermatozoa tail the to duct a that the deferens scrotum the the in the from pelvic of in muscular transports epididymis cavity duct long ejaculatory is ductus 5.47A). anterior spermatic It in scrotum wall. inguinal the abdominal as in canal a passes component of the ascends and through the the cord

inlet medially passing and artery the artery external inguinal to inferior the epigastric pelvic side ring, crosses at and of After the lateral around iliac through cavity. the pelvic bends ductus the vein external the the enter iliac the deferens deep

the wall, the ureter the peritoneum, The and to pelvic medially descends deep on crosses duct bladder. posterior the to the duct. almost joined inferomedially where form to the base along the is of rectum, by duct to bladder, it the continues the midline, ejaculatory seminal of the vesicle the anterior to It

ductus expands deferens. and ejaculatory Between ductus form duct, to the the the the ampulla deferens ureter of the connect prostate to through penetrates duct with urethra. prostatic gland the The ejaculatory

system is an that Each ductus tubular blind-ended a seminal accessory (Fig. gland the deferens male reproductive from develops vesicle of the as outgrowth 5.47A). to rectum. between The and by tissue is encapsulated the is situated with form outgrowths coiled an tube elongate bladder and numerous pocket-like structure connective of base vesicle deferens course at the of bladder. to follows the the the ductus is seminal immediately lateral The and

seminal deferens ejaculatory the joins of The ductus (Fig. duct form the duct the to vesicle 5.48). significantly from the to seminal contribute of volume vesicle the the ejaculate (semen). Secretions

(Figs. reproductive that urethra the unpaired the cavity surrounds The of in pelvic prostate is structure accessory the male system an and 5.47A 5.48). and the the inferior bladder, pubic lies It to rectum. to anterior posterior immediately the symphysis, to

the and which is rests narrower a the bladder, which apex, rounded above like with pelvic of on prostate with inverted larger is an below floor. base, neck cone shaped a continuous The the are the them. the of the muscles ani between with in that The cradle together surfaces prostate inferolateral levator prostate contact

the surrounding glands, 30 grow epithelium the individual develops urethral into the complex which 40 urethra. as to prostate of from The wall which the wall on of the own known into into glands prostatic the is posterior empty the Fig. lumen the their as prostate; ducts, what urethra retain aspect enlarge (see individual the however, urethral Collectively, of these sinuses the independently glands 5.45C).

formation from contribute of Secretions from secretions together vesicles, seminal semen to prostate, the during the with the ejaculation.

through an aspect of to into the direction ducts ejaculatory almost vertically anteroinferior pass the urethra. open in prostatic the posterior The prostate

The bulbo-urethral Fig. glands (see the on one perineal deep small, pea-shaped mucous each side, pouch. situated glands 5.47A), within are of They the lateral part are to membranous urethra. the each the duct the from to spongy bulb passes the through the urethra membrane, penis. the gland at of into of The root open perineal inferomedially

lubrication from Together pre-ejaculatory contribute small length the the of the the with urethra emission and urethra, along the positioned glands to of spongy the glands penis. bulbo-urethral

reproductive cavity uterus although pelvic the is the contained during pregnancy, in mainly women expands in the into tract abdominal cavity. The perineum, and Major and of the vagina, the clitoris uterus, consist of: on ovary side, (Fig. each system a components an in and midline 5.50).

greater the accessory a with vestibular In glands) glands pair tract. are associated (the addition, of

and in the posterior on testes abdominal high descend men, then Like develop and with their birth, bringing vessels, them nerves. lymphatics, before the wall ovaries the into the canal (Fig. testes, on the the through the inguinal wall perineum, but cavity the a ovaries migrate of Unlike position assume pelvic and the not short do lateral stop 5.51).

the production sites ovaries (oogenesis). The egg of are openings tubes. ends uterine by the of on tubes into are the Mature peritoneal the and cavity into the cilia of normally the uterine directed ovulated adjacent eggs

adjacent inferior pelvic the the The just to ovaries inlet. wall lie lateral to pelvic almond-shaped and of ovaries is a a the by mesentery extension 3 mesovarium) cm ligament. suspended is posterior of Each two long broad the (the is that about

The the midline the muscular between in uterus Fig. bladder (see is a organ thick-walled and rectum 5.51). cervix, joins and it body of inferiorly It a the and a consists vagina (Fig. 5.53). into uterine project Superiorly, laterally cavity immediately the to ovaries. adjacent uterus the open from the and peritoneal tubes

flattened of above origin level of the and, is The of uterine anteroposteriorly tubes body uterus the (Fig. the a uterus). has superior (fundus the 5.53), of end rounded like The is laterally, uterus narrow the triangle, is slit, shaped when of and viewed the an body cavity anteriorly. inverted viewed a of when inferior central uterine with the of with the the a of continuous the lumen the of is the canal cavity Each tube; cervix. continuous corners is corner superior of

blastocyst of normally occurs of Implantation in uterus. the the body the the expands superiorly the into abdominal cavity. dramatically pregnancy, During uterus

broad tubes margins each the the the portions (see pelvic of 477). within uterine wall mesosalpinx side upper uterus of the and extend to enclosed the the of body of ligaments end of p. The superior from lateral are the over, the the are terminate posterior ligaments, of laterally uterine superiorly from suspended to, aspect ovaries the the tubes ovaries. the pass Because and broad

superolateral curves (the Each infundibulum), ovary pole trumpet-shaped (Fig. around uterine the the expanded of has an end which tube related 5.54). finger-like of rimmed fimbriae. termed with small margin projections The the is infundibulum the The narrowed opens tube into peritoneal end the uterine lumen the the infundibulum. at of cavity of the isthmus, to the to Medial of expands tube infundibulum, uterus. form the ampulla the joining with narrows to before then and form the the body

from fimbriated ovary. collection The infundibulum the of facilitates the eggs ovulated ampulla. Fertilization normally in occurs the

channel. a a cylinder broad forms central the like inferior with is and the uterus narrow cervix The of short, part shaped on (anteflexed the bladder body of forward normally the surface of the emptied (Fig. uterus over the superior arches The cervix) 5.55A). into anterior that of the cervix end cervix In upper on aspect (anteverted) the the of the vagina. the inferior vagina is forward so projects the addition, angled it Because cervix fornix, wall (Fig. gutter, bulges is the is vagina, around the of vaginal formed dome a into joins of or the the the and it shaped, margin end where the cervix 5.55B). os, tubular canal The the uterine central os, and, of above, the into the the external vaginal the below, internal cavity. opens, cervix into cavity as as

The in vagina organ is the women. copulatory extends pelvic (Fig. that the distensible fibromuscular and tube cavity is floor perineum into the through pelvic It the a from 5.57A). The of vaginal form the a canal vault. called region end to is internal enlarged the

wall the wall. bladder urethra the the base of related anterior in, of in vagina to, is anterior urethra; to fact, vaginal the the or the is fused embedded to and The

to vagina principally the is rectum. related Posteriorly, the

posterior the the vestibule the vagina immediately into external perineum opens opening the the urethra. Inferiorly, of to of into margin by posterosuperiorly the to courses the membrane of anterior vagina cervix. pelvic external attached opening perineal cavity, the its the through its circular introitus), wall is it and the From where (the

of margin vaginal the fornix cervix the is and recess between the wall. the formed vaginal The anterior two fornix and fornix, on an the is Based position, (Fig. subdivided fornices a lateral into posterior fornix, and Fig. see 5.57A 5.55).

with is anterior that in the the canal normally The vaginal is contact so collapsed posterior wall wall. a canal, domed cervical see the can of open speculum By vaginal inferior and canal the the physician fornices, a patient (Fig. os to cervix, using vaginal the external a in the the end of 5.57B).

in is the semen deposited vault. vaginal During intercourse, of cervical the cervical then canal the into the through through the in canal, uterine tubes cavity, uterine external occurs their and way into ampulla. uterine the fertilization continue normally the the cavity make pass os Spermatozoa into where

of walls, the vessels to pelvic bases the nerves in and in viscera, reach the pelvic blood that viscera the surrounds medially lines midline. the cavity and forms sheaths course pelvic pelvic the Fascia around the from walls the extraperitoneal pelvic is found layer a the in connective of tissue fascia continuation abdomen. This

(Fig. vagina a rectovaginal women, the of rectum posterior the surface the In separates from septum 5.58A). ligament) the cardinal lateral the from walls anterior posterior to cervical fascia ligament), cervix pelvic (Fig. that of Condensations ligaments or (transverse form extend ligament), (pubocervical and (uterosacral 5.58A). ani the perineal with the together uterus and to ligaments, the levator thought cavity. are the stabilize perineal These pelvic the muscles, body, in membrane, the side of important and most the transverse from cervical cardinal which The these cervix related extend to laterally pelvic vault ligaments each of vaginal ligaments, the or wall. are

the from continuous of rectovesical condensation the a which prostatic prostate the contains the posterior (prostatic and septum, of the lateral and surrounds separates and base plexus fascia) In fascia with of the of around (Fig. the bladder anterior rectum the of posteriorly veins surface is and men, region prostate 5.58B).

the is The at peritoneum continuous with peritoneum the of pelvis the the pelvic abdomen. inlet of the viscera forming: between the peritoneum over the and drapes adjacent viscera, and ligaments viscera the pelvis, between pelvic in In and walls. midline, folds pouches pelvic

remnants the arteries, embryological and median the and medial urachus peritoneum umbilical Anteriorly, respectively (Fig. folds umbilical cover of of 5.59). the out pelvis wall. onto and ascend the These of anterior abdominal folds peritoneum; third is anterior the anterior lateral the rectum over upper the of and of at is rectum, rectum of the covered surface by lower drapes peritoneum all. of but of not the the third third covered Posteriorly, only the middle the aspects

(Fig. the women, the the and pelvic walls and aspect to In lies bladder uterus from the between the the superior tubes uterine extend lateral of rectum, uterus 5.59A). As Douglas) vesico-uterine bladder and pouch rectum. and between pouch occurs occurs uterus posteriorly, a the consequence, (pouch a deep of and the anteriorly, recto-uterine between shallow uterus, a tube on superior each in addition, uterine and pelvic a to the margin peritoneum and is ovary In ligament), lateral a fold side of its broad located walls. attached with uterus enclosed an (the posteriorly, of extends the large

over posterior the the uterus to midline, of descends vaginal In and surface wall the peritoneum the the posterior cervix the fornix. and adjacent onto vaginal of reflects It walls then the and onto rectum. lateral the anterior cervix, uterus, posterior The of vagina formed recto-uterine and of surfaces surface between of pouch. peritoneum the the the and rectum the is deep pouch anterior the peritoneum near of fold) ridge sickle-shaped pouch. (recto-uterine occurs on sharp the each A side recto-uterine base of recto-uterine cervix pelvic posterolateral pelvic extend walls. the are which fascia the from overlie the ligaments, uterosacral to folds of that condensations The

lateral the that (Fig. and in uterine posterior aspect and the sheet-like suspends ligament plane oriented pelvic tube to in uterus, runs superior a from margin peritoneum, wall coronal the its is broad from of encloses its The the the fold ovary 5.59A). of are of the and ligament the The uterine the ovary parts uterus the arteries ligament to respectively. the ligaments, cross within and the enclosed and broad related ligament round at the ovary broad ureters uterus, of base the of the ligament broad superior body the the posterior broad most ligament, the broad which three the the broad part the extension suspends a the mesovarium, the attaches lateral of pelvic largest and ovary. cavity; the The the parts: part ligament, of the which the to mesosalpinx, extends which pelvic ligament, in to uterus; of the uterine the of has tube mesometrium, from walls

the ovarian The of with surface is continuous (see mesovarium (germinal) the peritoneum Fig. epithelium insert). 5.59A plane. positioned axis The are the in with vertical ovaries their long of raised the and are peritoneum, position fold superior ovary covered by the enter with contains (infundibulopelvic a lateral ovary nerves, from structures suspensory the The another it ovarian which the ligament). of the pole and of ligament lymphatics forms vessels,

attached uterus anterolaterally the inferior the of round then ligament band in margin a uterus The (the mesovarium ovary the continues fibromuscular the of to which tissue ligament ovary), of courses to as the (Fig. of medially the of the and is pole 5.59A). The the majus of canal in passes ring perineum. then connective round tissue to pelvic inlet end courses related to reach the inguinal over in uterus labium and deep through ligament inguinal the the to the the and ligament the the gubernaculum, round which the ovary Both of gonad the of the the to labioscrotal ligament in the embryo. are attaches swellings remnants uterus the of

vesicles top then visceral over In (Fig. rectum the the drapes of the of bladder poles the and the men, peritoneum superior of the surfaces the lateral onto and onto seminal reflects anterior 5.59B). bladder pouch A and between the rectum. rectovesical occurs

in the and generally and plexuses blood plane wall the the the cavity sacral coccygeal on are posterolateral of pelvic and situated The between muscles vessels. occur plexus to enter a the They rami Co, lumbar ventral L5, are of with the significant contribution which L4 (Fig. from pelvis S1 and by formed from the 5.60). muscles lower and limb of to of innervation perineum. the pelvis the and plexuses somatic from mainly Nerves contribute these the posterior the Cutaneous medial most limb, foot, of over the of aspect supply the the lower the of skin side perineum. and branches

sacral L5) to trunk of lumbosacral the (Fig. (L4 side and plexus anterior S4, rami on formed by is the S1 each and The 5.61). piriformis The pelvic part the is plexus the of wall. muscle, which posterolateral relation to the is anterior in formed of surface contributions to anterior wall. and Sacral the the the plexus inferiorly foramina sacral on course out of pelvic pass laterally and L5, lumbosacral anterior the passing to immediately courses of abdomen The L4 of all trunk, the anterior pelvic the the of part cavity into sacro-iliac anterior by joint. and ramus of ramus consisting the vertically from of

the each to of of the Gray ganglia connect with periphery anterior and the fibers postganglionic (Fig. communicantes sympathetic sympathetic carry the from for trunk rami rami destined nerves somatic 5.62). S2 S4 from to special fibers to preganglionic the In addition, plexus the visceral nerves) originating splanchnic pelvic part of (pelvic nerves prevertebral parasympathetic (Figs. deliver and 5.61). 5.60

with ramus to other combine similar ventral nerves Each anterior divisions divisions has form terminal levels that dorsal and from (Fig. 5.61). only has ventral of S4 a anterior The ramus division.

nerve, the include Branches limb, nerves, which nerves and the 5.4). is nerve sacral of (Table which the sciatic lower the gluteal perineum the nerve of major are of the plexus pudendal and supply smaller Numerous floor, pelvic limb. and wall, branches lower the

originating gluteal the of from leave muscle, the to plexus piriformis sciatic Most pelvic greater enter lower and inferior limb. the region sacral nerves foramen cavity the the through passing by the the into the directly pelvic cavity using the not nerves different pelvic cavity in Other course nerves cavity. pelvic and few do routes; muscles the a leave leave the through medially and pelvic foramen two through lateral cavity pass structures in around and pelvic the foramen sacrospinous the the nerves that to lesser and ischial sciatic loop wall. perineum supply Finally, spine leave ligament the sciatic greater

nerve. Sciatic the nerve body from L4 S3 the sciatic The is and of to (Figs. carries largest contributions nerve and 5.60 5.61). (common lateral L4, leaves the the and two muscle pelvic into the the thigh, through major the divisions the and to L5, are surface ventral the nerve—dorsal peroneal sciatic inferior fibular greater the innervates fibular S1, gluteal it L5, anterior in of carried of through foot S2 cavity leg thigh and the in of into forms the from the are foramen the foot; region the the S3 of tibial the part; part L4, and on and common S1, nerve piriformis the leg. where and the muscles piriformis; of in passes sensory carries S2, common carried nerve) its It: muscles branches, of the nerve and and tibial compartment divides skin and fibers posterior in divisions

Pudendal nerve. the the (Figs. of The forms divisions piriformis part to anteriorly pudendal of S4 ventral lower nerve to muscle S2 from 5.61). 5.60 and pelvic the its floor, the sciatic attachment external lesser pelvic spine, the perineum); the perineum, through urethral sacrospinous by cavity, and region; the of to muscles foramen where leaves the skin the the around and nerve the course foramen, into and It: takes sphincters. courses around and ligament, the immediately the ischial the the muscle, is external peripheral the perineum of accompanied pudendal ligament cavity anal and vessels; joins throughout internal sciatic enters passing (this and into by greater gluteal of the piriformis through the skeletal innervates out inferior course the including pelvic

of branches plexus. the Other sacral to (Figs. thigh) the inferior inferior nerve the motor nerve levator aspects to branches thigh the region gluteal plexus ani); and of sensory Other posterior quadratus and and and the nerves, to nerves leg cutaneous nerves and nerve branches of to gluteal internus piriformis, include: inferior nerve femoris gemellus, over the skin region, sacral nerve superior posterior cutaneous obturator and muscles upper gemellus, to gluteal pelvic of to wall, floor (superior of pelvic and and (perforating 5.60 5.61). and

in superior by fascia muscles tensor lata) muscle to leaves cavity The the pelvic sciatic (tensor gluteal foramen fasciae S1, and to gluteal and L4 nerve, through supplies gluteus of from region—gluteus medius, the branches greater minimus, the piriformis the superior dorsal divisions of the muscles. formed latae

muscle greater leaves divisions The gluteus the in formed muscle the piriformis gluteal S2, pelvic the supplies sciatic dorsal the through L5 and foramen the by maximus, inferior inferior the nerve, gluteal to the region. branches to from of largest cavity

by superior gluteal inferior accompanied arteries. nerves Both and are corresponding

gemellus internus the originates nerve pelvic the cavity The inferior to muscle. the foramen obturator and divisions ventral the L5 to through muscle leaves and superior S2 greater associated the from the piriformis to sciatic of internus around levator ischial of through of attachment the perineum muscle, the foramen enter ani muscle. medial spine and and the the pudendal supply passes from the the sciatic Like the the obturator muscle lesser nerve, inferior it the to side to

respectively, the the lower muscle The to cutaneous inferior to gemellus course femoris inferior leave nerve and of muscles through femoral and nerve the the piriformis posterior the the and greater the sciatic skin, muscle, cavity (posterior quadratus cutaneous to nerve) foramen in muscle thigh and limb. also pelvic the

directly penetrating ligament by of over and leave the plexus, below aspect skin the pelvic Unlike sciatic sacrotuberous of the then through through the from leaves foramen the either most sacral the the which to nerves buttocks. piriformis cutaneous above pelvic cavity nerve or other originating the greater cavity the courses inferior muscle, the perforating

their cavity. the number of and plexus into pass originate piriformis and nerves the directly from coccygeus levator pelvic to The ani the small a muscles to sacral target without the and nerve leaving muscles

lumbar plexus. a to (L2 is branch obturator of L4) nerve The the the medially pelvic muscle, inferiorly the psoas, wall. along to wall iliac from common artery posterior passes to at passes then inlet, of psoas within the posteriorly and courses the the surface the emerges abdominal artery lateral iliac the It and medial along the pelvic internal through traveling by supplies the thigh. the obturator the leaves of pelvic cavity adductor region canal and It the

by small is and has from The S5 minor and formed plexus mainly a of the anterior coccygeal S4 rami contribution

floor. inferiorly originate to the Co, which pelvic coccygeus (Table S4 penetrate a muscle form trunk, to nerves single from ramus to pelvic anterior the enter with join the the 5.4). which cavity and originate anococcygeal They of small the triangle perineum. penetrate and overlying the anal of pass These muscle innervate ligaments the sacrospinous skin and sacrotuberous and to superficially in the nerves

trunks sympathetic in by visceral The is inferior (Fig. of paravertebral pelvis system ends part the the of the nervous represented the 5.63A). trunks Each pelvic the the ala the sacrum lumbosacral abdomen and iliac posteriorly over passing by cavity to of trunk vessels. to medially enters the the the from foramina. anterior along the the of trunks the The surface sacral where they to anterior inferiorly are positioned sacrum, course medially each ganglia Four occur along trunk. impar). terminal a ganglion two the the form trunks Anteriorly to coccyx, ganglion to (the single small join

pelvis perineum. the sacral to periphery, of is deliver distribution to The to of parts limb nerves principal sympathetic mainly fibers of in postganglionic lower anterior and function the the the for to sympathetic rami trunks the This is rami gray anterior by the communicantes, sacral the connect to rami. accomplished trunks which

sacral splanchnic branches the with plexus (the nerves) In associated gray to rami contribute join the other pelvic to addition innervating communicantes, prevertebral and (Fig. pelvic of part viscera 5.63A).

extensions Pelvic plexus of prevertebral the

afferent the The parasympathetic, prevertebral carry fibers and pelvic sympathetic, (Fig. plexus parts of visceral 5.63A). erectile perineum. Pelvic are and of pelvic with the parts of the tissues viscera plexus associated innervating

nerves, enters vessels (Fig. each cross two as one the internal hypogastric on medially to pelvis the the pelvic side, plexus iliac prevertebral inlet The that 5.63A). plexus, into the hypogastric separation nerves are in formed right fibers by hypogastric The bundles. superior the and left of the superior vertebra sacrum bifurcation the between of of and The hypogastric to plexus situated promontory LV the is the anterior the aorta.

splanchnic are hypogastric by are from pelvic preganglionic carrying to nerves (Fig. When nerves parasympathetic (inferior joined formed S4, plexuses pelvic the the S2 plexuses) fibers hypogastric 5.63). around inferior side, plexuses, pelvic and somatic hypogastric The one inferior the each on vessels in direction walls, nerves. medially major to an course plexus. give and plexus, the innervate the to They the rectal subsidiary the which plexuses, vesical viscera: plexus, the plexus, uterovaginal pelvic origin the following prostatic

deep and innervate of (Fig. the inferior the clitoris and pouch in Terminal of penetrate hypogastric the penis the plexuses branches pass perineum tissues and perineal the erectile through 5.63B). called of are In nerves, prostatic men, the cavernous these nerves, plexus. extensions of nerves they women distribution but similar pattern is likely the The entirely are clear, extensions in plexus. of uterovaginal not of

branches hypogastric of sympathetic (sacral (Fig. splanchnic Sympathetic sacral from and nerves) from the parts upper the trunks of the inferior nerves plexuses hypogastric the enter fibers 5.63A). preganglionic cord Ultimately, to nerves L2. fibers from spinal leave mainly that are anterior the these T10 roots, derived in the of

the with muscle important contraction internal and blood the urethra semen of men smooth sphincter and sphincters in into These and the form during glands the contraction in reproductive vessels, system, to in men accessory moving with internal and reproductive cause and in associated the anal both are the ejaculation. epididymis tract smooth of associated women, secretions cause urethral the fibers: from innervate muscle glands

Parasympathetic that plexus S2 fibers levels cord the spinal pelvic S4 splanchnic (Fig. originate pelvic from nerves in to enter 5.63A). enteric abdomen). pelvic (in and erection, mesenteric in of to vasodilatory, colon stimulate superiorly the nervous to viscera, the modulate plexus pass bladder nerves, some flexure the the the into pelvic separate distal from plexus fibers the the contraction, addition inferior prevertebral of They: colic the generally are left plexus, and system as stimulate of of or course activity

fibers to fibers the afferent course the parasympathetic sympathetic cord. spinal the Visceral of follow and fibers the however, pain; carry fibers from and the lumbar with fibers fibers levels may pain levels some cervix pain generally nerves lower bladder levels cord enter thoracic and urethra the the of and to in cord. spinal that from parasympathetic accompany sympathetic Afferent sacral

(Fig. perineum on the artery major artery is of and iliac The the internal side each pelvis 5.64). providing the to tissues to gives rise blood addition perineum, erectile and including this artery limb. walls viscera, and structures and branches of into the clitoris most the floor, the gluteal of in pelvic nerves In of region a follow to lower the pelvic penis, that the supply sacral the arteries. to abdomen include artery supply that pelvic and structures the Other in contribute women, and, median vessels originate ovarian in the of the

the joint the side, (Fig. iliac originates approximately common The and iliac the between level each of artery internal and disc on SI, the at lies intervertebral anteromedial sacro-iliac LV from artery to 5.64). the courses pelvic the of divides then at anterior border posterior The trunks and superior greater level of inlet foramen. sciatic over and the into vessel inferiorly the and from posterior pelvic posterior Branches lower the the contribute supply region. gluteal the to the posterior trunk abdominal of wall, wall, the the supply fetus, region, the the in trunk viscera, and, placenta. the from the the pelvic thigh, perineum, Branches of adductor the the gluteal region anterior

of artery, lateral the internal superior of artery and are (Fig. the the sacral trunk iliolumbar Branches iliac the the gluteal artery, artery posterior 5.64).

and a out of branch laterally lumbar the artery into and branch. divides iliolumbar ascends back pelvic an iliac The inlet passes branch foramen wall, small quadratus spinal muscles, cauda and The the to of abdominal and intervertebral between and the the LV through via supply psoas lumbar that contributes equina, SI. branch a posterior lumborum branch iliac laterally muscle supply passes and the to bone. The fossa into iliac

the usually wall. from artery medially of pelvic the and arteries, iliac posterior The along originate sacral course two, division and the lateral posterior internal inferiorly sacral and give pass tissues, skin structures the muscle soft posterior and foramina the to and related anterior branches bone to supply the to vertebral (sacral) They canal, that into sacrum. in rise

iliac of is artery the of superior gluteal and largest is posterior continuation trunk. The branch terminal internal the artery the the through posteriorly, lumbosacral foramen region the cavity It anterior muscle leave piriformis the the of gluteal to usually S1, the sciatic limb. trunk greater the courses and passing lower the between ramus and enter pelvic above of pelvic the supply the supplies walls. substantial and branches This muscles also in region makes bones of vessel and contribution the adjacent of blood a skin to and muscles gluteal to

artery, obturator vaginal include the artery iliac inferior vesical (Fig. gluteal of artery, artery, uterine Branches the internal anterior artery, artery, the the artery the rectal and the of artery, artery, pudendal vesical middle superior inferior the trunk the the internal the umbilical artery, the 5.65).

forward travels origin gives to pelvic trunk and vesical branch anterior the of margin The just of to the umbilical first the which is the inferior the inlet. artery then superior artery, the leaves internal pelvic cavity aspect to ascends reach the on the anterior umbilicus. and Anteriorly, abdominal wall of the vessel the the the the from blood fetus, and In carries the placenta. large is umbilical to fetus artery the eventually vessel becomes artery vesical the distally a the origin cord. birth, closes to and of solid After superior fibrous the wall, fold. anterior termed umbilical peritoneum abdominal raises the medial fold a the of On cord artery the umbilical itself of remnant fibrous umbilical The medial the ligament. is

and of parts ureter. the superior distal of The inferiorly artery bladder and the medially artery supply courses vesical originates root the the to from normally superior the umbilical and aspect of it supplies artery the also rise men, In may give that to ductus an deferens.

branches inferior seminal vesical prostate. ureter, occurs and The the artery and men in supplies bladder, to vesicle, branches bladder the to in the inferior artery of adjacent descending is rectum. and, vesical artery to equivalent and of the the vagina, vagina the The parts women and to in vaginal supplies men trunk, artery may anterior originate common or arise the the independently. artery a together uterine as vaginal vaginal and from branch The may artery

supply middle courses rectal medially rectum. artery The the to originates internal the artery, the the inferior artery and originates mesenteric rectal the from abdomen, artery, with anastomoses which the the which perineum. in inferior artery superior vessel in pudendal rectal The from

canal. The and anteriorly the pelvic wall obturator leaves artery obturator courses the cavity the along via pelvic enters below, Together with obturator above, and region adductor the supplies vein, obturator the the it thigh. of and nerve,

artery leaves muscle. and foramen inferiorly piriformis through the to cavity the internal origin pudendal the pelvic in inferior The the its anterior from courses sciatic greater trunk and side, to lesser In the enter vessel laterally with its the the nerve spine foramen association ischial to the medial on sciatic through then passes the perineum. pudendal internal is artery pudendal main the of the artery perineum. The the the the tissues Among erectile the are and penis. structures of clitoris it supplies

a large iliac artery inferior the The the trunk gluteal of artery. terminal internal branch of is anterior and the S2 and muscle. S2 anterior the It the through the and rami passes between sciatic foramen sacral pelvic greater plexus cavity leaves piriformis or to of S1 S3 the inferior and gluteal contributes supply region blood the the around the of vessels anastomoses network and joint. hip with enters to It of a

cervix reach and ligament artery in the the in anteriorly the base to (Figs. women broad uterine of The courses medially and 5.66). 5.65B the lateral its the course, ureter passes vaginal crosses fornix. the and to superiorly Along vessel the anastomoses it tube, ovarian and artery. laterally to uterus uterine along reaches margin the Once cervix, it the where ascends vessel curves the reach the with the of lateral uterus artery major supply during enlarges significantly blood uterine The and pregnancy. the the is to the well. supply of contributes anastomoses the other blood the arteries, as to ovary and vessel vagina with Through

ovaries. the then supply aorta vessels In (ovarian) and pelvic descend to originate the cross the abdominal women, gonadal the and from inlet They of uterine (Fig. with the arteries terminal anastomose parts 5.66). ligament) the pelvic ligament they ovary vessels side, the in suspensory the travel each inlet as ovary. the the On (the infundibulopelvic to of cross mesovarium the artery. of uterine and reach anastomose the mesometrium the through Branches to pass ovary ligament the to with broad through the blood arteries the during to ovarian augment significantly supply. uterine The enlarge pregnancy

(Figs. median The artery sacral and the superior bifurcation originates posterior surface aortic from level LIV abdomen. the 5.65A in 5.66) to the just of vertebral aorta the at pelvic the the surface of crosses along the anterior It and midline, the sacrum courses coccyx. inlet, then descends in and iliolumbar sacral last anastomose the lateral arteries. gives the branches and to with of and to that rise lumbar pair arteries It

branches all artery artery Pelvic course the the iliac (Fig. of iliolumbar the and for internal the follow artery except of veins umbilical 5.67A). common and to each pelvic veins, superior veins iliac the inlet. side, situated cavity drain which the lateral pelvic On iliac join into internal veins leave to just the

interconnected the viscera associated vagina). the cavity, the extensive (bladder, surfaces of are rectum, and with plexuses Within venous pelvic uterus, prostate, pelvic Together, veins. the of plexuses plexus these form The inferior mesenteric rectum the into part venous drains the anal and into system. veins) (tributaries inferior hepatic rectal portal surrounding of plexus veins and rectal of and middle canal via veins superior caval via the the system, portacaval blocked system important an This plexus shunt pelvic portal (Fig. when the hepatic is is 5.67B).

and of inferior plexus parts, canal an around has internal The an part the two rectal external. anal the internal plexus the lining and internal the epithelium anal tissue between the The sphincter in connective rectal canal. is in column. superior arranged longitudinally rectal with one lie plexus vein anal the that each This branches connects of superiorly by these form line mucosa. are originate enlarged, above varices colonic or covered internal When hemorrhoids, and branches which pectinate the rectal The the plexus external and circles anal is sphincter subcutaneous. external external rectal in Enlargement of vessels in external results the hemorrhoids. plexus

and drains that internal erectile artery penis the vein does the tissues deep dorsal branches into of The pudendal single pelvic the of follow the clitoris not cavity. pubic membrane. and margin the perineal gap the Instead, into anterior of this arcuate passes directly vein through the a pelvic between the cavity ligament formed of and the veins in of The prostatic vein the plexus plexus veins women. vesical joins (bladder) in men saphenous are that vein clitoris in the regions skin the tributaries into the veins which the (Superficial drain corresponding of drain great the of and thigh.) penis the of veins, external pudendal

to the and leave median sacral in respectively, vein, pelvic veins internal veins and and ovarian ovarian addition iliac the abdomen: to cavity median join parallel the artery, of tributaries veins courses sacral the artery of the In

single veins either sacral form left vein The the of to two median the coalesce the junction vein common the that common inferior or iliac veins a vena joins form to iliac cava.

on join on and, abdomen. vena left right, they left, of the in they the veins ovarian the inferior follow the join the corresponding vein renal the arteries; The the cava course

viscera nodes internal and lymph most mainly arteries associated distributed Lymphatics iliac external into their iliac pelvic (Fig. from and the along drain branches the the with common of with 5.68), into lateral lateral or abdominal associated associated iliac which aortic aorta. nodes the drain arteries surfaces into the then nodes lumbar and TXII. origin duct at the of lumbar the nodes drain continue the these trunks, turn, lumbar lateral into vertebral which In or thoracic aortic level to approximately

drain, ovarian of the uterine pelvic tubes Lymphatics cavity parts in the vessels accompany lateral directly and nodes or related that nodes anterior leave superiorly the the surface cases, on lumbar into and and, the ovaries uterus and some aorta. via the of from pre-aortic into the aortic arteries,

region pelvic the In to also lower limb internal perineum. artery addition gluteal of from iliac of the from nodes the areas viscera, drainage deep and the along receive draining

floor is the inferiorly The between positioned to region a the diamond-shaped pelvic thighs. perineum (the muscle the pelvic levator pelvic of coccygeus the the is Its formed narrow pelvic attachment its peripheral diaphragm boundary walls of and the the outlet; below walls are levator ani lateral its the (Fig. cavity muscles); ceiling ani and by is 5.69A).

anterior posterior a urogenital triangle. into is divided perineum anal The and an triangle

the and of external the associated genitalia. openings the to the reproductive systems functions and triangle urinary is anchor with The urogenital systems

contains The anus the and sphincter. external the triangle anal anal

major the (S2 and The pudendal and S4) to the pudendal region. internal nerve artery artery are of the nerve

margin perineum lateral The at (Fig. point, at points and inferior coccyx posterior the the ischial each is pubic its border of marked the at the point, the tip of by anterior its of of tuberosities the the symphysis 5.69A). formed lateral margins The posteriorly. ischiopubic anteriorly the by rami and the by are ligaments sacrotuberous pubic coccyx can ischial tuberosities, on be the and The the the symphysis, patient. palpated

imaginary by two two perineum between The the tuberosities ischial triangles (Fig. is an into divided line 5.69A). posterior anal is the line triangle. to the the urogenital the and Anterior is triangle to line plane. the not same Significantly, triangles in two are the oriented the In plane, line faces anal triangle upward transtubercular so triangle that it the in tilted the whereas at the the anatomical horizontal is posteriorly. more position, is urogenital

the of ani the the roof cavity, separate The pelvic levator formed is mainly that below. from the perineum, above, by muscles perineum each one side, at apex a its pelvic inferior funnel-shaped anal the the triangle. muscles, with in aperture diaphragm, form These on anal coneor

of urethra the the defect urogenital urogenital the vagina. a allows in the the Anteriorly, in triangle, passage muscles, and U-shaped hiatus,

perineal membrane pp. The (see a is triangle fibrous that (Fig. the thick urogenital 449–451) fills sheet 5.69B). to has the is free the attached laterally It is pubic in perineal border, posterior arch. and to a midline which anchored the body tissues. a deep perineal layer and region Immediately of neurovascular the superior pouch, to termed membrane skeletal containing thin the perineal a is muscle (see Fig. p. skeletal 451, in the pouch Among the muscles external the is sphincter. urethral 5.37)

external genitalia, the pouch provide which The deep surface. are for to its membrane support attached perineal perineal inferior and pouch provide ani the the to above. for in pelvic the perineal support membrane deep parts urogenital inferior viscera, the Also, perineal levator and of hiatus the

leaves the perineal urethra The pouch cavity and through perineum pelvic deep by perineal membrane. passing and the enters the also through vagina structures the posterior In the urethra. women, passes to these

two (Fig. below, the pelvic the and levator inferiorly aperture muscles to walls, their the levator walls anal inverted the as origin pelvic on gutters from urogenital ani the course ani and structures hiatus, lateral adjacent occur between above, muscles medially wedge-shaped diverge Because 5.70). anal are gutters, the In termed one fossae. each the on these anal ischio-anal side aperture, of triangle, by obturator ischium, fossa The sacrotuberous the of internus each mainly formed lateral and ligament. muscle, wall is the is muscle. levator medial ani The wall medial the the attaches ani levator and muscle. fascia to muscle overlying converge walls lateral where superiorly internus the The obturator pelvic during ischio-anal canal fossae the movement expansion defecation. of The and the allow of diaphragm anal

that ischio-anal recesses are triangle fossae continuous triangle urogenital The with of to the superior the anal deep project the pouch. into perineal anteriorly sides their three-sided the fossae anterior of onto shaped that pyramids have of been These are like tipped one (Fig. recesses ischio-anal 5.70C). pyramid is of The points and anteriorly closed the apex toward pubis. each with related posteriorly fossa. its open and ischio-anal base is continuous The inferior each is perineal of wall the pouch. The deep pyramid ani the is muscle, internus superolateral wall the by the The mainly superomedial formed levator wall and obturator muscle. is are normally filled The recesses fat. fossae anterior their with and ischio-anal

anteriorly the tuberosities, margins the posteriorly a faces of and The by sacrotuberous perineum defined anal medial and the by ligaments, line the is by laterally of horizontal posteroinferiorly triangle ischial two the coccyx. between and the pelvic the which anal levator the coccygeus muscles. ceiling of ani triangle is diaphragm, formed by The is either triangle aperture the in on anal anal centrally is and to The an related ischio-anal occurs side fossa. the The muscle triangle anal anal external sphincter. major in is the

three inferior superior consists from The anal superficial, parts—deep, muscle skeletal along to by (Fig. the sequentially sphincter, of which surrounds is anal and canal, external canal formed and subcutaneous—arranged the 5.5). 5.69B, Table anal circles of part the of canal levator deep ring-shaped The and the blends a ani the fibers thick part muscle with upper is that muscle. the anchored the ligament. surrounds but the part and coccyx to is superficial perineal body anococcygeal canal, anteriorly also posteriorly the to The anal and anal that surrounds beneath just is flattened the disc a the part subcutaneous aperture skin. The of muscle horizontally and nerve external S4. is The pudendal by innervated branches directly branches ramus the sphincter of inferior from anterior the anal by rectal of

the triangle and urogenital is half of the the perineum horizontal in of is oriented perineum The anterior plane. the (Fig. the of external the contains roots genitalia It the system. urogenital of openings 5.71) and the

between defined: imaginary by ischial the rami, an of triangle laterally urogenital tuberosities, and by the line symphysis. ischiopubic margin by the The anteriorly pubic is the inferior posteriorly

is ani anal the triangle of the ceiling roof levator muscle. or the the triangle, with urogenital As

a platform, (see membrane triangle triangle, the pouch urogenital Unlike and pp. the perineal fibromuscular deep anal the contains strong support perineal arch. to which the is attached 449–451), pubic

levator extensions between side. pouch fossae deep muscle ischio-anal the each Anterior ani of on perineal the the occur and

perineal Between of the perineal fascia membranous and superficial pouch. membrane superficial layer the is the muscles. the this erectile and and of are in The penis associated pouch clitoris the skeletal tissues principal structures

the Structures in perineal pouch superficial

women, are bone. clitoris attached structures form pouch erectile together erectile associated in with superficial contains: structures to of that and adjacent men to mainly the the perineal membrane skeletal penis and The that parts in join the muscles and the perineal

a tissue core erectile connective of consists vascular structure and Each of its central surrounding expandable capsule. tissue

to and the Two erectile clitoris. join the penis of structures form sets

arch. their A cavernosa, corpora urogenital pair anchored of shaped the ends side cylindrically triangle, each one of are on to by proximal the pubic parts (from often or the attached the These Latin penis. termed the of crura are “legs”) clitoris for the to men. the which The in the distal ends bone, form of dorsal are and body parts the the of body the penis of clitoris in corpora, not attached of women the

tissues of openings erectile second urogenital of The the system. surrounds the set

membrane are firmly to of vaginal situated, side, termed of on anchored are pair each the the the structures, one and the bulbs a opening at vestibule, women, (Fig. perineal erectile In 5.71A). ends of these the which to the to opening mass, the the a of pea-shaped anterior bands midline positioned is erectile in urethra. clitoris, tissues the the the connect bulbs Small at glans single, clitoris of small, of anterior and of erectile end body the

men, spongiosum, equivalent structural the a erectile women the is the interconnecting bands bulbs (Fig. the in mass, erectile vestibule, single In tissues the and glans of corpus large clitoris, of the to 5.71B). anchored at corpus its is membrane. perineal spongiosum the to base The over of the penis part ventral attached, form is body which proximal the end, body the of the Its glans of to forms the penis and the penis. end the expands not of from men This of opening the across midline the pattern of absence development. in and embryological the during results fusion from a vaginal structures originally paired that the part urethra. the urethral form channel the most fuse, they and penile becomes opening an erectile enclose additional ultimately As structures the of of and the the enclosed opens this the a end of corpus in fusion consequence the and spongiosum penis. As men, of is by at urethra growth is of is where not tissue vestibule by clitoris women, urethra erectile in into the the of the situation perineum. the directly enclosed This and unlike opens the

The of and clitoris is cavernosa (Fig. composed glans clitoris corpora two the 5.71A). (root) an free the and part a (body). penis, part As has it attached in

the of the of consists of clitoris Unlike two the root only penis, root technically the the crura. vestibule thin the attached not the in they of are glans included clitoris.) bulbs (Although the tissue, to the by bands of are the erectile attached clitoris part of

of only and unattached by The perineum. posteriorly parts the the two in the of formed connective cavernosa, the which is angles body clitoris, embedded corpora of the tissues is

The clitoris body of attaches pubic suspensory the a that is by to superiorly supported ligament symphysis. the attached the of of clitoris by tissue. of the glans vestibule end the The small body to erectile to bulbs connected and bands is is the distal of through is can glans exposed the body clitoris the clitoris palpated the in perineum be and skin. The

contains is of (Fig. and the the corpus mainly cavernosa single corpora penis which spongiosum, composed The urethra the two 5.71B.) part free a clitoris, attached (body): in has an part the and (root) it As

spongiosum corpus the pubic parts of of the the and the the part bulb perineal the penis, which which crura, two of of of cavernosa arch, anchored are consists penis root proximal the is to The proximal corpora membrane. to attached the the

cavernosa and related corpus the by skin, tethering proximal spongiosum. the part entirely two of which the of penis, The is the of the is free formed free parts covered body corpora by the of

the to the bands the linea and the that the fundiform ligament body superiorly (attached the above to on The penis and abdominal inferiorly). ligament pass positioned of the two is superficially of suspensory into wall and anterior penis of of penis by side pubic base ligaments: each supported two more of the alba symphysis), below split penis of the unite the (attached

dorsal erect, defined position in reversed corpus of penis the body is the and the of nonerect positions the Because penis. the the spongiosum are as even ventral, are single corpora as anatomical in though penis the the paired (flaccid)

form expands over the ends head the penis) distal the of (glans of spongiosum the to corpora (Fig. penis The corpus cavernosa 5.71B).

the ultimately of clitoris the pelvic the the perineal to event hypogastric enter and pass S4, of parasympathetic S2 generated rami erectile Erection penis to in through inferior the deep splanchnic the innervate and a carried tissues. plexus membrane vascular of anterior by nerves which prevertebral is part pouch fibers from perineal and tissues the nerves Stimulation in specific of relax. these causes arteries to erectile become penis causing the and allows to clitoris blood fill the to tissues, erect. This

carry clitoris. internal S4) the artery; from clitoris nerve pudendal branches are supplying of penis the and Arteries the general and nerves pudendal (S2 of to penis sensory the branches

glands) glands greater The vestibular (Bartholin’s are in seen women. the each of female opening in glands the bulbo-urethral of to They posterior vestibule side lie pea-shaped small, that men the are are (Fig. glands of vaginal and on the mucous the homologues bulbs 5.71). are superficial glands However, the the the are perineal vestibular the greater in glands bulbo-urethral whereas deep perineal pouch. located within pouch,

opening. vestibule the the the The of along margin posterolateral each the perineum vestibular opens vaginal greater duct of into gland of

men, vestibular arousal. glands secretion sexual greater bulbo-urethral produce during in the glands Like the

pouch pairs The superficial muscles perineal of transverse perineal contains superficial (Fig. muscles: the and ischiocavernosus, bulbospongiosus, three 5.72 and

5.6). Table associated of penis with and pair these is with roots clitoris; other of pairs Two three perineal the the muscles associated of the body. are the

penis The clitoris muscles the cover crura (Fig. the ischiocavernosus of two and 5.72). to forward the and Each sides margin related of ischial and passes crus, tuberosity erect penis inferior the the the and attach is clitoris. forces related blood of muscle the the the to and body anchored to and of medial from ramus into ischial surface crus

the two are mainly spongiosum and bulbs the bulbospongiosus of the attached of in with men muscles vestibule (Fig. the women part with in The associated corpus 5.72).

vestibular the body the gland perineal of bulb the is to greater anterolaterally vestibule women, bulb over of perineal (Fig. anchored and courses bulbospongiosus the to muscle and of the the to membrane the each In related surface to posteriorly the and attach inferior surface 5.72A). body clitoris. of the the ischiocavernosus others anteriorly blend muscle, the and with arch of Other travel anterolaterally fibers still course fibers the and to over

in the In the raphe bulb on inferior muscles are the penis. joined to a the midline of of men, the bulbospongiosus surface body. perineal to is raphe posteriorly anchored the The anterolaterally, side, perineal to cover the penis and the body bulb. tissue to raphe from each each membrane the of attach side fibers and course Muscle the the of on of and bulb perineal connective the to ischiocavernosus and to muscles. with associate Others attach the extend anteriorly crura anterolaterally

vestibule attached more erect men regions, and mainly the of into In of and force bulbs the muscles both distal the the bulbospongiosus glans. compress and blood parts corpus women, spongiosum men, muscles two the In functions: additional have bulbospongiosus

emptying the urethra of following facilitate of They part the penile urination bulbous (micturition).

the semen from for ejaculation responsible Their pulsatile the contraction emission is during of reflex penis.

a course posterior perineal membrane of transverse perineal muscles surface paired to inferior superficial the the The parallel (Fig. follow of the margin 5.72). which ischial attached to body. midline and in These muscles, the perineal and medially band-shaped to extend body flat the perineal rami, the are tuberosities stabilize

of features genitalia Superficial the external

form with apparatus, clitoris together (Fig. vulva vestibular tissue the and of In women, the folds, a and number skin 5.73). On are two termed the of minora. either skin the thin of midline labia folds side region and them, open, into vestibule. enclosed and is which vagina the between urethra the The each minora lateral bifurcate, and a labia the medial Anteriorly, forming a fold. the that medial glans form the frenulum clitoris. joins to unite of the clitoris, folds The body prepuce the clitoris and ventrally form the of of clitoris the to clitoris The folds (hood). unite the glans lateral over the glans body clitoris prepuce The related extends skin. the anteriorly deep palpable of and the and to clitoris from is the the of minora the to frenulum a minora Posterior fourchette). vestibule, unite, (the the small forming fold, labia transverse the labia

the small opening. hymen, vaginal to central Within degrees completely the close a surrounded the a of is membrane, which vestibule, varying ring-like may have orifice the by or perforation may vaginal fold fringe intercourse or of (resulting Following remnants first injury), hymen the from the irregular rupture opening. vaginal hymen the sexual of

the the orifices are of vagina glands. with of The urethra and the openings associated one The each ducts urethra. (Skene’s the the of glands into para-urethral of side vestibule, the the margin glands) open lateral of on margin the in vestibular glands) greater open The orifice remnants the the of the of to hymen. posterolateral (Bartholin’s between vaginal of opening the ducts the crease and vaginal adjacent glands

majora, mons to broad labia form unite pubis. which to are the minora the Lateral labia folds, two anteriorly the the symphysis and to clitoris. anterior the vestibule inferior pubis aspect The is overlies and pubic mons the of the by depression labia not the of the position majora which posterior overlies and the separated unite perineal do are termed a body. Posteriorly, the commissure,

men Superficial consist the scrotum of components the (Fig. penis organs and of the genital in 5.74). homologue the scrotum The majora is male labia of the in women. associated and swellings the musculofascial blood In coverings, from vessels, in labioscrotal midline, descend resulting nerves, scrotum fetus, lymphatics, single their the across abdomen. testes a fuse the and into the which drainage ducts on sac, The fetus midline visible the the labioscrotal and as body scrotum a the inferior that line fusion the scrotal extends onto of of of the raphe penis. in from the skin longitudinal the the the anus, between swellings of is over the remnant of aspect

The a penis body. of and consists root penis posterior root is the urogenital to triangle in the attached the of scrotum of perineum. the palpable The by body covered is skin; pendulous tip of of the is glans the the The penis of covered entirely (body the penis. by penis) part

orifice The urethral slit, positioned a tip normally glans. sagittal of is the external the at the fusion orifice the is inferior glans margin of which develops in midline the continuous The represents fetus. line of the raphe urethra with penis, the urethral a a formed in as of to median of more glans to glans. skin continuous the base attached glans, this is a which skin attaches the with fold frenulum is the the raphe loosely that of The proximal of expanded the the raised of glans base inferiorly is raphe midline join corona (the corona the lateral the of ends glans); the The a of two circular glans. the at form margin to of posterior is the depression of neck The the to corona glans. the thicker of skin loosely anteriorly to thin the the neck to at continuous skin posteriorly the tightly a with glans with of and Normally, the skin is that fold glans attached body. adheres the fold, extends glans. cover to prepuce, known forward This the as glans male exposed. The the removed leaving is during prepuce circumcision,

triangle fascia Superficial the of urogenital

fascia the The the of fascia continuous triangle anterior on superficial with abdominal similar wall. urogenital is

has the a As membranous layer its surface. abdominal wall, the the on fascia superficial fascia deep with perineal of anal (Fig. and the This therefore extend the perineal not is posteriorly into does triangle fascia), membranous membrane layer attached: to (Colles’ therefore ischiopubic the lateral not urogenital thigh triangle that to (Fig. extend and does the rami 5.75), of and form into the the borders 5.75).

the and lines limits the the penis body superficial the defines perineal labia, clitoris. and or around external pouch, of extends It of scrotum the

layer and layer anterior membranous bones Anteriorly, of the symphysis the the with is over on abdominal membranous pubic wall. fascia of fascia pubic continuous the attached abdominal In fascia deep ligament. the the inferior fascia abdominal layer the to the of just is thigh lower membranous the to of inguinal wall, lateral

and superficial of encloses pouch wall. in the fascia or track can out onto the the perineum abdominal membranous fluids infectious and that accumulate wall, continues pouch Because up the lower perineal materials the of abdominal anterior the layer borders or the This fuses the will at thigh deep because track fascia tissues regions. triangle anal into the of material the these not with

of is pudendal the somatic the major perineum nerve. The nerve plexus from fibers from carries S4. cord to levels This the sacral nerve and originates S2 spinal medially greater through pelvic the the triangle perineum sciatic passes It the leaves sacrospinous around then of lesser to foramen. piriformis cavity the inferior the enters the sciatic ligament, the foramen muscle, anal passing through by and the ischio-anal and is the in fascia tubular courses covers wall lateral enters the that in perineum, internus fossa it As along formed pudendal a the canal, which muscle. through travels obturator the it compartment of the canal This accompanying artery also and contains veins. pudendal pudendal the internal

nerve (Fig. pudendal The three branches branches—the terminal nerves internal and the and inferior major accompanied the pudendal rectal 5.76) nerve of of has perineal clitoris—which the (Fig. artery penis or dorsal by are 5.77).

of through related of The external anal medially ischio-anal pudendal sphincter inferior innervate the and across to fascia nerve and is the levator courses the rectal the the regions often penetrates canal, ani fossa muscles. multiple, nerve also sensory is the skin for of The general anal triangle. the

gives perineal and passes motor triangle and rise the branches. nerve into to The urogenital cutaneous The pouches. deep superficial in muscles and the perineal branches motor skeletal supply The the largest posterior the posterior scrotal in women. nerve of men labial nerve in and the sensory is branches

the deep of perineal nerve clitoris The enters (Fig. the and dorsal penis pouch 5.76). the exits margin pouch It and along of it to penis. inferiorly passes perineal membrane where the clitoris the the inferior meets through the the pubic symphysis in then body or a by the just passing lateral of position the reach courses to surface body the the of dorsal glans. along It to glans. The particularly the dorsal is and to penis sensory clitoris, nerve the

anococcygeal branches and genitofemoral, the perineum femoral ilio-inguinal, are and that mainly enter Other sensory posterior include of cutaneous, somatic the nerves. nerves

Visceral nerves the two enter routes: perineum by

region to sympathetics, the mainly nerve. consist skin, pudendal of postganglionic the Those the which into delivered are along from anterior rami gray join to sacral nerve Fig. 481 spinal These (see the of nerves pudendal and that the sympathetic p. the fibers rami parts trunks communicantes connect of pelvic the 5.62).

inferior erectile by mainly perineal Fig. hypogastric Those passing pouch to the through region p. in enter and (see 488 the deep tissues the the plexus pelvic from cavity 5.63B). via fibers enter S4 pelvic levels that (see inferior the Fig. erection cord nerves of spinal plexus hypogastric from are parasympathetic splanchnic stimulate to The fibers, which S2 5.63A,B).

(Fig. artery significant pudendal the of The most the perineum internal artery is 5.77). external arteries. the the the cremasteric arteries pudendal, area include entering and the Other testicular,

artery branch a the internal of in trunk (Fig. pudendal of The the artery the originates iliac anterior pelvis as internal 5.77). leaves inferior nerve, muscle. Along it with pelvis piriformis to the the the the foramen pudendal greater through sciatic the the to lateral spine, the the fossa. the foramen, canal by enters wall pudendal perineum passes artery and ischial pudendal nerve, the nerve the the on through lesser around the in lies It accompanies lateral of sciatic ischio-anal coursing where

rectal to internal the arteries, perineal (Fig. and erectile those of the penis artery the clitoris and in nerve and The of include of and the pudendal branches are to branches tissues perineum the similar the pudendal inferior 5.77).

to medially ischio-anal the cross internal from fossa inferior supply pudendal originate and rectal branch or the related (Fig. anal more arteries skin and muscle and artery triangle One the in 5.77). middle canal. and and the that iliac inferior internal form vessels anastomose They artery, the a anal respectively, the arteries mesenteric and superior supply network rectal rectum from with to of artery

artery The skin perineal pudendal canal labial the a branch, and or a the surrounding transverse (Fig. perineal near originates end and of posterior artery gives scrotal off anterior tissues to and 5.77).

the artery pudendal of internal part Terminal

The or the perineal tissues. the the perineal pudendal tissues the part erectile pouch to terminal into deep and of and nerve accompanies deep artery pouch penis the branches in dorsal the internal clitoris supplies of

in erectile supply the penis, of the Branches (Fig. of include to deep penis that urethral the and the artery bulb men the artery dorsal the of the the tissues artery, penis, the artery 5.77).

gland and the spongiosum. bulb the artery branch to corpus supplies the then The the the of has of membrane penetrates that supply penis perineal bulbo-urethral a

to supplies and artery urethra penetrates membrane erectile tissue the urethral the the penile surrounding also perineal and glans. A

branches. bifurcates internal deep the margin two the pudendal pouch, the terminal into of artery perineal anterior Near penis penetrates to and the and cavernosum of supply crus crus A of enter membrane body. the artery the perineal the the deep corpus of margin the of surface meet membrane of dorsal penis penis. to the the penetrates The of body the the the anterior perineal dorsal artery with penis; penis urethral dorsal the deep to the the the artery. the medial and surface nerve, along glans courses of vessel and the of superficial artery also and anastomoses dorsal The penis, of the it of the tissues supplies branches penis

women those Branches to men. erectile in similar in that are the tissues supply

vagina. of of bulb vestibule bulb and Arteries the of the the supply the related vestibule

the crura arteries cavernosum supply Deep of corpus clitoris of and the body. the

arteries clitoris Dorsal of the tissues glans. supply surrounding and the

The a arteries artery thigh. originate pudendal and deep the superficial femoral in a consist external vessel, which of from the vessel scrotum They perineum to the labia and and majora. clitoris skin anteriorly supply enter the course penis of or and the medially related

aorta into to inguinal supply canal from scrotum originate descend arteries the testes. abdominal the the In men, testicular the through and the of cord artery, branch originate cremasteric into external the Also, the spermatic which arteries, scrotum. the the epigastric accompany from inferior iliac

women, ligament cremasteric arteries round In the small canal. uterus follow the through the of inguinal

with Veins vein internal that (Fig. the connect generally the the join veins iliac in pelvis and perineum internal the pudendal the accompany arteries in 5.78). penis glans the vein drains The deep exception is and the the corpora clitoris the that or cavernosa. dorsal mainly of plexus or deep side The dorsal clitoris, arteries the and the women. each though of body the pouch, between the men the connects penis on midline the of surrounding ligament deep prostate gap in the dorsal in the bladder between perineal courses of vein with along and the veins pubic or passes inferior

drainage internal veins, anterior scrotum the of the majora in and with veins, labia pudendal of femoral or area the the of overlap vein the connect parts which External thigh. drain pudendal the with external Superficial of are veins drain that of the or dorsal pudendal penis tributaries veins. the clitoris skin

blood parts the internal from perineum mainly in pudendal deep pelvis. and drain into vessels Lymphatic the vessels of internal iliac nodes accompany the

the drain the the from Lymphatic into vessels superficial the clitoris penis do accompany from (Fig. lymphatic inguinal nodes, or mainly labia and channels external pudendal tissues majora superficial blood channels or as scrotum superficial of 5.79). clitoris, vagina end minora, iliac nodes. glans inguinal labia the external nodes inferior and into deep glans The drain of penis, and terminal

cord, aorta, and course nodes drain LII. the around testes the spermatic from channels vertebral the pre-aortic directly and at abdominal nodes connect or pass lumbar inguinal the the posterior via LI canal, ascend Lymphatics aortic through wall lateral up to in that approximately with and levels to not the disease high inguinal from nodes and to iliac testes wall superiorly Therefore tracks abdominal or in the nodes. posterior

Surface perineum of anatomy the pelvis and

the of landmarks orientation bony Palpable soft the tissue the structures, pelvic of visualizing the as features locating inlet, and are of used for: defining margins pelvis perineum. the

a is structures The ability of the in the of part to appearance an examination. recognize normal physical essential perineum

be a can visualized opening the vaginal women, canal speculum. using directly cervix by In the

the assessed by the size the cavity through and can In pelvic texture of digital be aperture. men, the anal palpation prostate in

of pelvis the anatomical perineum the and position Orientation in

position, the spines the iliac same the symphysis anterior In lie and superior edge anatomical pubic vertical in the plane. superior anterior the of inlet faces pelvic The anterosuperiorly. an posteriorly inferiorly, anal in almost and horizontal triangle vertical and triangle The the the oriented of faces whereas more perineum faces plane (Figs. is urogenital is 5.81). 5.80 and

of define to How perineum margins the the

the palpable and patients of on tip symphysis, used sacrum of the The ischial and perineum. to boundaries can the define tuberosities, are pubic be backs on abducted flexed with (Fig. their done lithotomy best in with and patients lying the thighs position their is This 5.82).

masses bony thigh fold) The and (gluteal on gluteal crease tuberosities palpable the region. as are between skin each ischial near side large of the the corners lateral of perineum. the mark diamond-shaped They

posterior posterior of perineum. the midline to The tip aperture marks the of limit is most and in palpable the anal the the coccyx

of anterior limit The symphysis. perineum pubic is the the the deep palpable is in to In this midline pubis. mons the women, the penis palpable is body wall. the joins men, to symphysis the the superior immediately lower pubic of abdominal where In

tuberosities that front, the behind, with of in coccyx the tip lines diamond-shaped and the join the with ischial symphysis perineum. the outline pubic Imaginary tuberosities ischial line triangle An perineum anteriorly into posteriorly. two between the triangles, anal the additional urogenital the divides triangle and of membrane. This posterior position the margin perineal the the also approximates line of the the location central perineum. The tendon the line perineal body this or midpoint of marks of of

the anal of triangle Identification structures in

the posterior triangle The anal perineum. half is of the the is and an triangle tuberosities. joining imaginary the line The anteriorly ischial faces two base of coccyx be the tuberosities. by the the to joining of of ischial approximated apex can lateral The margins coccyx; the the is triangle tip lines the feature of In is aperture women in major triangle the anal the the triangle. the center anal the both of and men, (Fig. the of Fat side fossa ischio-anal aperture fills anal on each the 5.83).

women structures Identification in the triangle of of urogenital

urogenital half perineum. is the triangle the of anterior The is tuberosities. and the the base line joining an The imaginary two ischial of triangle faces posteriorly the pubic apex symphysis. triangle The the of is symphysis can lateral to approximated margins lines by tuberosities. pubic be ischial The the joining the which lines rami, the These palpation. be overlie on ischiopubic deep felt can

form major the In the urogenital women, clitoris, and together skin of vulva contents vestibule, the folds are triangle that (Fig. the the 5.84A,B).

enclose and them folds, the which skin space the the thin between labia a Two open minora, (Fig. urethra vestibule vagina the into termed 5.84C). mound tissue traction on a the labia soft and the lateral which reveals Gentle opens urethra the minora vestibule opens. on between side, and the The the each open minora crease into urethra skin the para-urethral labia glands, on (Fig. one (Skene’s) 5.84D).

urethra is the opening. the Posterior to vaginal originally usually the vaginal and opening ringed closes ruptured The is orifice first is (introitus) remnants intercourse. during the sexual by that of vaginal the hymen skin glands, on the the vestibular crease and the between adjacent ducts minus one side, The labium (Bartholin’s) each hymen the greater of into open (Fig. 5.84D).

medial into The and lateral labia minora folds. bifurcate anteriorly each medial form clitoris. at the the folds unite to midline frenulum the The of that glans distal the clitoris. unite the the prepuce covers and also to body clitoral The of of midline lateral parts the form or across clitoris larger hood the folds the vaginal fold Posterior the labia to join, forming skin a orifice, fourchette). transverse (the minora

majora minora. positioned broad lateral to labia labia are folds the The of aspect together pubis, symphysis. the the mons inferior front overlies form in come to pubic They the which The position the the ends by commissure, of perineal a termed posterior labia majora of posterior are overlies separated the depression body. which the

The opened is vaginal when cervix the a visible speculum with is (Fig. canal 5.84E). cervical the os surface cervix. dome-shaped opens of external onto the The based the is gutter, subdivided, fornices. fornix, between and into A lateral occurs location, cervix the vaginal the termed or on and anterior, posterior, recess wall and further

features surface to The the and clitoris of occur attached of deep and to membrane. perineal the ischiopubic rami perineum are roots the the

bulbs the (Fig. vestibule of The side composed erectile of of the minora the 5.84F), to on either deep labia lie tissues, vestibule. erectile These masses continuous, clitoral of clitoris, the hood. thin under glans with via visible which the are tissues, erectile is bands on side posterior to occur vestibule bulbs the of greater either glands the orifice. vestibular of vaginal The the

ischiopubic the attached, each The of rami. side, one clitoris crura on are the to cavernosum. is formed the by Each crus corpus part the of attached curve the detach erectile from corpora body form posteroinferiorly, and bone, clitoris. unite to Anteriorly, of the these

underlies clitoris anterior hood of skin ridge The clitoral (prepuce). to of the body the immediately the positioned end at the clitoris. of is body glans The clitoris of the the

triangle Identification of men structures of the urogenital in

root triangle men, of In penis. contains the urogenital the the into abdomen, during physical although the associated the and penis generally a they evaluated The migrate are with scrotum structures, from examination. the testes

majora The in women. homologous scrotum is to in the labia men readily testis Each oval (Fig. the is the palpable skin of scrotum through 5.85A). tissue, often that vessels a an lymphatics to testis as deferens. ductus and mass the epididymis testis, contains the the and ridge and raised elongated is visible Posterolateral of of blood (Fig. raphe A midline 5.85B) the on separating left and scrotum. sides the right visible is skin of of of individuals, the glans. anal the the this is to the some ventral of prominent scrotum penis, extends surface the from and the over In raphe body along frenulum and the aperture,

parts penis The the corpus the formed the root cavernosa. attached of by and of the corpora spongiosum is a mass easily palpated membrane perineal body. The large as spongiosum is to corpus to anterior can the be the and perineal attached is mass, the muscles, bulb is of which This by penis. bulbospongiosus the covered

from penis), of (shaft spongiosum anteriorly, ventral (Fig. and the the the becomes perineal the terminates of penis the membrane part corpus glans as of expanded penis body eventually The detaches 5.85C,D).

corpora each and of are are penis, cavernosa on one ischiopubic the crura the attached rami the to anchored crus the side, The of parts (Fig. 5.85E). the paired of anteriorly erectile The the dorsal of corpora become and form unattached body that penis. masses the are the cavernosa part the anterior of corpora the glans ends The caps penis cavernosa.

Fig. perineum. and 5.1 Pelvis

Fig. pelvis reproductive and and perineum and of 5.2 urinary, support contain systems. gastrointestinal, parts the The terminal A. In women. B. In men.

Fig. the genitalia. roots of and anchors external the The contains perineum 5.3 A. In women. B. In men.

membraneAB of foramenIschialtuberosityPerineal tuberosityRoot genitaliaBody of penisOpening foramenIschial of membraneRoots clitorisUrethral penisPerineal of Obturator orificeGlans of clitorisObturator of urethraGlans orificeVaginal of penisBody external

Fig. 5.4 inlet. Pelvic

sacrumSacro-iliac body ramusPubic tuberosityPubic superior spineObturator of iliac jointCoccyxIschial foramenIschial spineAnterior inletAla symphysisIschiopubic Pelvic tubercleSI

Fig. 5.5 Pelvic walls. A. ligaments pelvic and Bones the of walls. pelvic B. the Muscles of walls.

foramenSacrotuberous tubercleAnterior ligamentIschial spineMargin Greater ramusPubic inletA sciatic foramenLesser of ligamentSacrospinous superioriliac tuberosityIschiopubic sciatic foramenObturator pelvic

muscleB pelvic of inletPiriformis muscleObturator internus Margin

Fig. Pelvic 5.6 outlet.

tuberosityCoccyxSacrotuberous spineAcetabulumMargin superior foramenAnterior Ischiopubic ligamentPubic symphysisIschial ramusPubic outletSacrum pelvic of tubercleObturator iliac

Fig. Pelvic 5.7 floor.

Fig. Pelvic peritoneum. 5.8 cavity and A. men (sagittal In section). B. (anterior women In view).

perineal deep iliac of Pelvic pouchLevator arteryInternal pelvis)BladderUterusB iliac cavity peritoneumAPerineal membraneand artery(artery inletExternal linedby aniRectumAortaPeritoneumPelvic

Fig. Perineum. 5.9 A. women. In B. men. In

orificeRoots membraneABUrethral of Roots orificeUrogenital genitaliaLevator apertureUrethral trianglePerineal of aniSacrotuberous genitaliaPerineal apertureAnal triangleUrogenital triangleAnal aniAnal external external membraneLevator orifice ligamentAnal triangleVaginal

Fig. communication between regions. other and Areas of 5.10 pelvis the true A. abdomen, limb. true and lower the pelvis, Between

B. perineum regions. the Between and other

membrane• internus Obturator floor• Urethra• and arteryB perineal clitorisSacrotuberous Pudendal Vagina• ligamentOrifices nerve• sciatic pubic foramen• ligamentSacrospinous muscle• between Internal vein penis Gap vein and of pudendal AnusLesser Dorsal and in symphysis

Fig. the the pelvis Orientation 5.11 of cavity pelvic anatomical and in position.

perineumPelvic Coronal superioriliac planeAnterior of ligamentSacrotuberous spinePubic triangle tuberclePubic of perineumUrogenital symphysisSacrumSacrospinous ligamentAnal inlet triangle

Fig. in pelvic Structures cross the cavity. ureters 5.12 the that A. In women. B. In men.

Fig. gland. 5.13 prostate the of Position

Fig. 5.14 perineum. the Dermatomes of A. In women. B. men. In

Fig. 5.15 nerve. Pudendal

ligamentPudendal of S1S2S3S4Sacrospinous nerveIschial coccygeus(pelvic levatorani spineAttachment floor) and

Fig. levels erection. nerves Pelvic spinal 5.16 control from S4 to S2 splanchnic

triangleProstateNerves erectile nerveInferior S4)Urogenital S2 ani of tissue pelvic floor(levator to splanchnic to Hypogastric hypogastric triangleAnal and nerves(from coccygeus)Pelvic plexusAttachment

Fig. 5.17 Perineal body.

Fig. Course urethra. 5.18 of the A. In women. B. In men.

Fig. pelvic 5.19 Right bone. A. view. Medial view. Lateral B.

Fig. Ilium, ischium, 5.20 pubis. and

Fig. pelvic the Components bone. of 5.21 surface. Medial A. surface. Lateral B.

Fig. and coccyx. Sacrum 5.22 A. view. Anterior view. Posterior B. view. Lateral C.

Fig. joints associated ligaments. 5.23 and Lumbosacral Lateral view. A. view. Anterior B.

Fig. and ligaments. associated Sacro-iliac joints 5.24 A. Lateral view. Anterior view. B. view. C. Posterior

Fig. and symphysis 5.25 Pubic ligaments. associated

Fig. 5.26 position). of the (anatomical pelvis Orientation

Fig. bony 5.27 pelvis. the of Structure A. In women. B. In men. middle approximated the men finger index the for index the be between for by in arch thumb women the The can by angle and shown pubic and as the between insets. the angle finger finger angle formed and

Fig. 5.28 Pelvic inlet.

of symphysisPubictubercle crestLinea PromontoryMargin terminalisPubic alaSacro-iliac jointArcuatelinePectenpubisPubic

Fig. ligaments. 5.29 and Sacrospinous sacrotuberous right view side A. Medial of pelvis. of B. of ligaments. the Function

Fig. of pelvis). piriformis internus (medial Obturator 5.30 and view muscles of side right

Fig. the in wall. Apertures pelvic 5.31

Obturator obturator muscleLesser femoral belowpiriformis nerveand foramenSuperior femoris canal vesselsPudendal nerve, muscleGreater obturator nerve and nerveto inferior gluteal internalpudendal vessels and sciatic gluteal internus and vesselsObturator sciatic nerves,and gluteal, quadratus nerve internal and cutaneous,and and inferior vesselsSciatic foramen,above internus the pudendal – posterior

Fig. 5.32 outlet. Pelvic

symphysisIschial Pubic archPubic pubisCoccyxSacrotuberous tuberosityBody of ligament

Fig. woman. pelvis magnetic T2-weighted abdomen lower the image a of 5.33 and pregnant of Sagittal resonance

Fig. 5.34 diaphragm. Pelvic

Fig. defecating showing MRI defecation. sagittal active in plane 5.35 proctogram

Fig. deep pouch. Perineal and membrane 5.36 perineal A. Inferior view. B. Superolateral view.

membrane pouch. and Perineal deep perineal view. C. Medial

membrane ramusIschial perineal membranePerineal for attachment aniDeep margin hiatus of ofurogenital of tuberosityPubic levator Obturator ligamentPerineal for foramenIschiopubic pubic urethraLine symphysisOpening pouchBAInferior

of membrane muscleSacrospinous Obturator ligamentRoot internus muscleCoccygeus ani muscleAnococcygeal perineal penisCDeep ligamentLevator pouchPerineal

Fig. Muscles deep the in 5.37 pouch. perineal A. women. In

B. In men.

Fig. Perineal 5.38 body.

Fig. Rectum anal canal. 5.39 and A. Left bone pelvic removed. Longitudinal section. B.

Fig. 5.40 urinary parts the Pelvic system. of

iliac bladderBladderFull arteryUreterUrethraNeck of bladder iliac bladderEmpty iliac arteryCommon arteryInternal External

Fig. Bladder. 5.41 A. Superolateral view. B. The trigone. away. cut with bladder of the view Anterior anterior part the

Internal urethralorificeOpening surfaceApexTrigoneTrigoneMedianumbilicalligamentABBase uretersUretersUretersUrethraUrethraInferolateralsurfacesSuperior of

Fig. the bladder urethra of bones. pelvic the the pelvic the to Ligaments anchor and that part neck of 5.42 A. women. In B. In men.

Fig. portion in Intravenous stone ureter. a lower urogram the the demonstrating 5.43 of A. radiograph. Control B. Intravenous urogram, postmicturition.

Fig. Intravenous bladder. in the of small a urogram wall tumor 5.44 the demonstrating

Fig. Urethra. 5.45 A. women. In B. men. In

men. part in C. the urethra Prostatic of

4. duct1st sphincter(smooth Spongy urethral Vaginal part bend pouchPerineal perineal when glandPara-urethral membraneExternal membraneExternal orifice3. muscle)Deep gland urethral membraneGlans gland sphincter(skeletal (Skene's deep fossaDeep urethral and Skene's of gland)Greater urethral orificeDuct flaccidABBulbo-urethral vestibular clitorisExternal in is gland perineal penis opening of muscle)External pouchand bendPenisInternal pouchPerineal perineal urethral perineal sphincterNavicular urethraBladderBladderProstate2nd Membranous urethra2. part of of Prostatic part urethraUrethra1. Preprostatic of part urethra

muscle)COpenings colliculusGlandular sphincter(smooth perineal of sinuses pouchPerineal glandularelements prostateProstateInternal tissue)Deep prostateFibromuscularstroma(smooth ofejaculatory andfibrous utricleExternal muscle)Urethral urethral elementsof ductsOpenings of crestSeminal membraneProstatic urethralsphincter muscle ofducts (skeletal connective Prostatic

Fig. 5.46 bladder. Ultrasound the demonstrating A. bladder. Full B. Postmicturition bladder.

Fig. Reproductive 5.47 men. system in Overview. A.

surrounding and structures. Testis B.

deferensDuctus arteryUreterProstateInferiorepigastricarteryAmpulla epididymisHead of iliac External deferensBulbo-urethral vaginalisMusculofascial epididymisBody inguinalringSuperficial gland of cordTestisTail in inguinal deep perineal pouchDuctus ringInguinal epididymisTunica ductsScrotumA of pouchSeminal ductusdeferensDeep canalSpermatic of vesicleEjaculatory

tubule testisTail deferensBody of epididymisDuctus of Capsule(tunica layerCavityTunicavaginalisVisceral processus albuginea)Seminiferous testis epididymisRete in ductulesHead mediastinum tubuleLigamentous epididymisStraight remnantof vaginalisBParietal layerEfferent of

Fig. gland. prostate The 5.48 Zonal anatomy.

urethralsphincterEjaculatory region(nonglandular)Penile seminalcolliculusExternal of zoneAnterior urethraAmpulla of Seminal ductusdeferens ductTransitionalzoneUrethraPeripheral zoneCentral vesicleArea

Fig. images Axial resonance 5.49 of magnetic prostate T2-weighted problems. A. a the A small peripheral prostate. prostatic of cancer in normal-sized zone hypertrophy. B. prostatic Benign

Fig. in Reproductive 5.50 system women.

ringGreater vestibularglandBulb inguinal of Glans tubeLigament ligamentof uterusDeep ringSuperficial clitorisBladderOvaryVaginaUterine inguinal of ovaryRound vestibuleUterus

Fig. ligament. and broad 5.51 Ovaries

ligamentof ring majorusDeep ovaryRound ovaryInguinal the vesselsMesovariumSuspensory of uterusLigament ringSuperficial inguinal canalLabium inguinal Ovarian ligamentof

Fig. demonstrating Sagittal image ovarian 5.52 magnetic resonance cancer.

Fig. 5.53 Uterus. view. Anterior vagina uterus of halves and The been cut anterior the have away.

BodyFundusVaginaOpening tubeUterine tubeCervix uterine of

Fig. 5.54 tubes. Uterine

theuterine of tubeRound of ligamentof uterusLigament ovary uterusInfundibulumFimbriaeOpening of AmpullaIsthmusOvaryAnteriorPosteriorMedialLateralFundus

Fig. and vagina. 5.55 Uterus A. Angles anteflexion anteversion. and of B. cervix vagina. the into protrudes The

ofanteflexionAxis fornixVaginal vagina of Anterior osExternal canalAngle anteversionAngle of cervixAxis of ofuterinebodyABPosteriorfornixInternal osAxis

Fig. through cancer. Picture 5.56 cervical into a inserted taken the demonstrating speculum vagina See Fig. of the view 519 p. for cervix. 5.84E a normal on

Fig. 5.57 Vagina. A. Left away. of cut half pelvis B. through cervix viewed as a and speculum. Vaginal fornices

fornixBladderABPosterior fornixBlade openingUterusRectumRound speculumBlade Lateral of fornixLateral speculumVaginal fornixCervixAnterior ligamentof vaultVaginaExternal vaginal of uterus

Fig. Pelvic fascia. 5.58 A. In women. B. In men.

plexus ligamentRectovaginal Anal of ligamentRectumProstatic fasciaRectovesicalseptumB canalProstateProstatic ligamentPubocervical A cervical veinsPuboprostatic septum ligamentUterosacral Transverse

Fig. the in 5.59 Peritoneum pelvis. A. women. In

B. In men.

of ligamentof surface(germinal)epitheliumRound ligamentof pouchLateral ovaryMedian umbilical foldLigament tubeMesosalpinxBroad broad foldRecto-uterine umbilical pouchRecto-uterine uterusOvaryUreterUterine ovaryAUterine epigastricarteryBroad ligamentOvarian ligamentVesico-uterine ligamentMesovariumMesometrium section uterusSuspensoryligamentof Inferior foldUreterRound of umbilical foldMedial arterySagittal

Fig. plexuses. 5.60 Sacral and coccygeal

musclesAnococcygeal quadratusfemoris nerves muscleObturator to coccygeus,levator to plexus)Sciatic nerveNerves nervesCoccygeal to splanchnic S2 gluteal lumbar to plexusL4L5S1S2S3S4Pelvic nerveNerve S4)Nerve femoralcutaneous trunkSuperior sphincter nerveInferior nerve(from and muscles Lumbosacral from obturatorinternus externalanal nervePerforatingcutaneous musclesNerve (parasympathetics piriformis superiorgemellus nervePudendal ani, gluteal and and nervePosterior to inferiorgemellus

Fig. 5.61 branches of plexuses. sacral and and Components the coccygeal

nervePelvic obturator muscleTo trunkCommon andinferior cutaneous levator external partTibial muscleAnococcygeal piriformis coccygeus, nervePerforating nervesPelvic gemellus quadratus nervesVentral glutealSuperior nerveTo fibular femoral cutaneous plexus plexusTo splanchnicnervePosterior and partS2S3S4S5CoTo internus anal musclesPudendal divisionsDorsal divisionsAnterior splanchnic L4L5S1Sciatic glutealLumbosacral ramiCoccygeal ani, nerveInferior musclesSacral femoris sphincter

Fig. the pelvis. trunks 5.62 in Sympathetic

ramus communicansSympathetic Gray trunksGanglion to plexus inferiorhypogastric imparSacral splanchnicnerves

Fig. the of extensions Pelvic 5.63 prevertebral plexus. A. Anterior view.

of view right of B. side plexus. Anteromedial

S2 ramicommunicantesSympathetictrunkHypogastric hypogastricplexusPelvic hypogastric S4)Sacral ascendingSympathetics splanchnic descendingA nerves(parasympatheticsfrom plexusInferior nerveGanglionimparSuperior nervesGray parasympathetics splanchnic to L5S1S2S3S4Pelvic

Fig. internal the of 5.64 of artery. trunk the posterior iliac Branches

Fig. the artery. of anterior the iliac 5.65 internal trunk Branches of A. Male.

B. Female.

vesical Umbilical of iliac pudendal S1S2S3S4Median trunk arteryA vesical gluteal rectal arterySuperior in sacral arteryMiddle abdomen)Internal artery arteryInternal artery penisObturator of arteryInferior arteryDorsal internal arteryAnterior iliac aorta arteryInferior (from artery

Fig. 5.66 vaginal and Uterine arteries.

Fig. Pelvic 5.67 veins. A. of with most left In viscera side the the removed. man pelvis of the and a associated canal. Veins with the and rectum anal B.

pudendal rectal canalPelvic venous rectal veinSuperior rectal veinObturator sacral veinsAInternal of sacral veinTo veinMiddle veinInternal iliac veinVesical plexusInternal floorRectumBExternal systemAnal veinInferior systemTo rectalplexus veinMedian caval caval pudendal hepatic veinMedian veinMiddle plexusProstatic rectal plexus portal Internal systemTo

Fig. lymphatics. Pelvic 5.68

Fig. ceiling the of Borders and 5.69 perineum. A. of perineum. Boundaries the membrane. B. Perineal

Fig. 5.70 their and fossae recesses. anterior Ischio-anal with wall pelvic A. left view Anterolateral removed. B. view. Inferior

diaphragm removed. pelvic walls C. and view with Anterolateral

muscleIschio-anal ischio-anal recesses muscleTendon ischio-anal perineal membrane fossaeLevator internus internus fossaeAnterior ischio-anal fossaeAnterior obturatorinternus of fossaeSacrotuberous membranePerineal ligamentSacrospinous ligamentCoccygeus recesses internus pouchDeep pouchPerineal muscleIschio-anal muscleAObturator recesses muscleAnterior Obturator of of of perineal aniCDeep fossaeBObturator

Fig. of clitoris Erectile 5.71 and tissues penis. Clitoris. A. Penis. B.

pouchSkinAB clitoris(cross cavernosaGlans of ofcorpus part of penis(cross penis(attached pouchBulbo-urethral urethralorificeNavicular vestibuleBulb section)Body part fossaof superficial penis(attached of deep cavernosum)Corpora of urethraCrus spongiosum)Glans clitoris(attached ofcorpus Corpora part ofcorpus cavernosum)Crus clitorisGreater glandwithin section)Bulb urethraBody penisExternal cavernosaCorpus of vestibular glandin spongiosumcontaining of

Fig. the Muscles superficial 5.72 perineal in pouch. A. In women. B. men. In

Midline rapheIschiocavernosus ligament muscleSuspensory bodySuperficial clitorisAB transverse muscleBulbospongiosusmusclePerineal muscleFundiform of muscleBulbospongiosusmusclePerineal perineal ligament perineal penisIschiocavernosus of bodySuperficial transverse penisSuspensory ligament of

Fig. women. perineum the Superficial features of in 5.73 Overview. A. external genitalia. Close-up B. of

commissureOpening aperturePosterior minusHymenFourchetteOpening labia tuberosity(palpable)Urogenital gland ofgreater Ischial duct vestibular of triangleUrethral triangleABMons openingVestibule(between symphysis(palpable)Coccyx(palpable)Anal ofparaurethral glandFrenulumPrepuce clitorisLateral of pubisAnal minora)Vaginal duct clitorisGlans of openingPubic foldMedial foldLabium

Fig. the men. of Superficial 5.74 in features perineum A. Overview. Close-up of genitalia. B. external

penisAnal cordSkin of urethral glansExternal overlyingbulb triangleSkin penisPrepuceNeck apertureRapheScrotumFrenulum symphysis(palpable)Coccyx(palpable)Anal of Ischial of glansAB of tuberosity(palpable)Urogenital spermatic glansCorona overlying orificeGlans trianglePubic

Fig. 5.75 Superficial fascia. view. Lateral A. Anterior B. view.

thigh membranouslayer membraneMuscles ligamentFascia Fused abdominal of iliac posterior ofperineal Membranous layerof of fasciato of superficial of thighPubic ofperineal margin margin fasciaAnterior superficial of lata wallInguinal membrane tubercleAB superior lata spineAttachment Posterior fascia to

Fig. Pudendal nerve. 5.76 A. In men.

B. women. In

nerve skeletal rectal penisSacrospinous obturator triangleA nervePosterior canal nervePudendal nervePudendal internusMotor in infascia to S2S3S4Obturator of muscle branches muscleInferior of scrotal internus urogenital nerveDorsal animusclePerineal ligamentCoccygeus muscleLevator

rectal nervePerineal nerve nerveB clitorisPosterior nerveMotor Dorsal branchesInferior of labial nervePudendal

Fig. the 5.77 in Arteries perineum.

of bulbUrethral fascia bulb in artery women)Artery of artery of pudendal vestibular clitoris of rectal penis bulb Internal women) artery of penis(dorsal of arteryPosterior arteryDeep arteryInferior in of arteryInternal to iliac internusDorsal women)Perineal of artery artery(posterior in pudendal women)Artery clitoris artery (artery arteryin penis(deep labial scrotal obturator in arteryInternal

Fig. veins. 5.78 Perineal

(or veinProstatic (or deep rectal scrotal vein Internal veinInferior dorsal women)Deep dorsal pudendal of clitoris in vein in plexus vein in veins(vesical women) labial plexus vein of posterior women)Posterior

Fig. drainage 5.79 Lymphatic of the perineum.

from majorain ligamentTestisLymph clitoris, ductLymph minora,and iliac aortic(lumbar) inguinal inguinal ofpenis nodes testisLILateral of part penis(glans women)Deep nodesLymph nodesSuperficial women)Pre-aortic lower labia and nodesExternal from and vaginain fromsuperficial nodesInguinal Thoracic scrotum(clitoris glans labia tissues

Fig. the view position of skeletal Lateral the 5.80 features pelvic area with indicated. of the triangle, pelvic The triangle anal inlet, shown. orientation the also urogenital is of and A. a woman. In B. In a man.

inletPlane tubercleAB crestHigh of iliac iliac of of triangleTuberculum iliac crestPosterior anal point superior Plane spinePubic urogenital iliac pelvic spineAnterior trianglePlane of of superior

Fig. of the pelvic area. Anterior view 5.81 A. In a position of the the symphysis. woman pubic showing B. the In symphysis, the position superior anterior showing of a man iliac pubic pubic tubercle, and spine.

Fig. the lithotomy Inferior in of position. 5.82 perineum view the subdivisions, landmarks Boundaries, palpable are indicated. and A. a man. In B. a In woman.

Fig. and indicated. the with Anal ischio-anal the anal fossae position aperture of triangle 5.83 A. In a man. B. woman. In a

Anal fossaPosition bodyPosition perineal perineal apertureAnal tuberosityIschial ischio-anal fossaCoccyxLabium of fossaCoccyxAnal minusAnal of bodyPosition ischio-anal aperture tuberosityPosition fossaPosition of tuberosityPosition ischio-anal triangleBIschial of triangleAIschial of of ischio-anal

Fig. in of triangle a woman. Structures the 5.84 urogenital A. of triangle of with features woman the major view urogenital Inferior indicated. a B. Inferior view the of vestibule. to open apart minora the The vestibule. have labia been pulled the clitoral are indicated frenulum glans clitoris. clitoris, Also the the and the of hood, C. view vestibule urethral showing vaginal the of and and the the hymen. Inferior orifices in apart minora Figure further have labia been 5.84B. pulled than The vestibular show the of D. Inferior into to regions the side the the which and greater pulled vestibule with open. vestibule labium left para-urethral glands the to of minus the view

the E. of View vaginal the canal through cervix. urogenital tissues F. with and of woman vestibule overlays. and vestibular indicated the triangle clitoris the with of erectile of the view a glands greater the Inferior

clitorisVaginal orificeExternal of clitorisFrenulumof of of External orificeRemnants urethral clitorisVestibuleSkin clitorisGlans hymenFourchetteArea of the ABCDGlans duct gland opening duct (hood) opening clitorisLabiumminusPosteriorcommissure(overliesperineal overlyingbody of opening the majusPrepuce of of opening(introitus)Vaginal body)Labium para-urethralglandArea the vestibular clitorisGlans of of greater urethral minusLabium the

(attached vestibular clitorisCervixExternalcervical glandMons part of EFSkin parts of cavernosa)Bulb clitorisBody vestibuleGreater overlying clitoris of (unattached clitoris body cavernosum) corpora of pubisCrus corpus osPosteriorfornixAnteriorfornixGlans of

Fig. 5.85 urogenital Structures a man. of triangle in the A. view. Inferior Ventral surface of the penis. of body the B.

showing of urethral the C. glans view the Anterior penis opening. D. glans. and of body of penis Lateral the view the

Inferior man the the penis erectile with of of of E. with triangle urogenital the view tissues indicated a overlays.

of Position surface penisGlans nerves, deferens,vessels, penisTestisTestisIschial perineal of of penisGlans bodyABBody penisVentral vas of and lymphatics tuberosityFrenulumRapheEpididymis, body

(attached corpus spongiosum corpus D (unattached and of part of surface of cavernosum)Glans CDorsal penis of glansGlans penisUrethral corpora penis penisPrepuceCorona ofbody parts perineal penis of penis orificeNeck corpus spongiosum)Crus of of of glansPosition bodyEBody part of cavernosa)Bulb of (attached

Fig. veins. the demonstrating Left plexus pampiniform venogram of 5.86 testicular

Fig. 5.87 a pelvic kidney. computed Sagittal tomogram demonstrating

eFig. angiogram. Digital subtraction aorto-iliac 5.88 A. Normal circulation pattern. B. left artery. Occluded iliac common

eFig. of 5.89 the MRI pelvic Sagittal cavity. A. Measurement a before embolization. fibroid uterine artery of the B. the of months a fibroid Measurement embolization. after 6 fibroid has of decreased. the The size

mm46.1 BA56.3 mm

pelvic Muscles Table the of walls 5.1

of the Table pelvic Muscles 5.2 diaphragm

perineal 5.3 pouch Muscles Table within deep the

(spinal participate) Table in do not parentheses of 5.4 Branches segments plexuses consistently the sacral coccygeal and

Table triangle of the anal Muscles 5.5

5.6 pouch Muscles of perineal superficial Table the

clinic In the

must diseases assess bone severity stage and In (e.g., of certain leukemia), problem. of marrow to the obtained the be sample a iliac for often is marrow such The biopsies. crest bone used to the iliac close is easily The palpated. and crest lies surface

cutting by performed is and bone the of anesthetic the crest. biopsy skin iliac A a in injecting needle cortical marrow through the passing bone a and marrow microscope. bone The viewed under aspirated is this be in metabolism. cortical obtained bone information about to bone provide also of Samples way can

clinic the In

can be viewed The series a rings. anatomical as of pelvis bony fibro-osseous There three and four rings are rings. major sacrum, parts of and The the ring bony pelvic forms of the consists inlet. ilium, which pelvic pubis, smaller subsidiary Two obturator the foramina. are rings and fibro-osseous lesser notches the formed and and sciatic form sacrospinous greater foramina by four lesser sciatic and the rings. greater ligaments sacrotuberous the The brittle pelvic and The the inlet rings. are are rings, the which obturator predominantly bony foramina), (i.e., on demonstrated which one fracture second side that without breaking fracture is terms the It to side the break side, be ring possible a ring, is other always of means one if the should in suspected. of clinical not a

isolation; warrant patients trauma special Fractures usually occur in and occur in however, may pelvis the mention. of they

produces the fracture that bleed surfaces Owing can bony a significantly. the pelvis, large to an of area bone of may and which organs compress as ureters. can be the produced, such bladder A hematoma large the will blood circulating hypovolemic will and, and rapidly, This may shock develop. unless the is volume loss this occur patient replaced, become reducing the blood

the damage. pelvis, contents nerve may potential bowel of the disrupt urethral disruption, and also leading rupture, fractures to Pelvic

In the clinic

with Common problems the joints sacro-iliac

with sacro-iliac weight-bearing discomfort changes and occur joints, cause pain many the and may the in with degenerative joints As region. arthritis, bowel the arthritis In with reactive seronegative such disorders associated antigen histocompatibility spondyloarthropathies), with arthritis addition, (the group specific associated referred inflammatory spondylitis, to ankylosing can disease, these joints. HLA-B27, inflammatory within major as psoriatic complex inflammatory produce as changes and

clinic In the

the Transverse and delivery. can woman’s vaginal measurements and likelihood a predicting sagittal of successful outlet pelvic inlet a of help in the inferior ischial the maximum inlet, symphysis). the sagittal These the diameter transverse the sagittal of inlet and (between outlet margin pubic outlet spines), distance symphysis), top coccyx measurements promontory the (the the and include: tip of of distance of the the bispinous the the the pubic between and (the between

carries These the fetus obtained or no using (Fig. imaging, radiation be risk for which measurements mother magnetic resonance can 5.33).

the clinic In

increased closure pressure the intraabdominal diaphragm of abdominal defecation, and by contraction is the of of the wall muscles. stabilizes At beginning larynx anorectal surrounding straightens relaxes, proceeds, junction angle. anorectal puborectalis defecation which As the muscle the the canal. move allow the anal external sphincters to and the the feces also through anal to Both internal relax canal an 90° of valve” defecation. the the “pinch anal Normally, a and between angle prevent the puborectal maintains as to and acts rectum about sling muscle angle to 140°. the When to increases the anorectal puborectalis 130° relaxes, about

the fossa of fatty size defecation. anus in tissue ischio-anal and anal during the and canal the The allows changes for position of junction pelvic anorectal and evacuation, back the moves descends down and floor slightly. During usually the

rectal undergo wave a push circular contraction toward defecation, During anus. to wall the the muscles of feces of the anus anus, and the anal longitudinal and back of the canal rectum return up, the to emerge expelled, As normal levator feces positions. and the bring the the ani are rectum feces from muscles their

that of is defecation, during phases magnetic function behavior of a different resonance new including allows technique A assessment musculature rectal this defecating imaging floor of the pelvic process. fairly and proctogram It organ potential cystocele formation rectocele or useful dynamic in pelvic abnormal is descent/prolapse scanning during (Fig. detecting and of 5.35).

In the clinic

may and be During torn. body childbirth perineal stretched the obstetrician the perineal episiotomy. is Traditionally if felt that an it proceed was with tear may likely, a body an allow to the is procedure to made in fetus vagina. is the in pass of a the incision the through This head perineal which There midline. incision episiotomies: episiotomy types body, mediolateral a from two a 45° median the are cuts while is of an the episiotomy perineal through been the The floor traumatic decreased to this result maternal less childbirth. in to pelvic procedure and thought to perineum of be after benefits dysfunction have suggests be that more episiotomy However, should not performed routinely. an evidence recent floor episiotomies. data a with has show use of Review failed pelvic of damage routine in to decrease

clinic the In

performed A index the the anus. finger placing digital and is by lubricated through examination (DRE) the rectal rectum into gloved palpated mucosa be the can the wall can and be in masses, and vagina women, cervix the palpated. for of The posterior anal abnormal evaluated or can the masses. extraneous for be In prostate nodules men, any

examination followed instances be In or by the proctoscopy many colonoscopy. may rectal digital the the may assess before be male structures prostate in probe the prostatic in rectum ultrasound a into the to gynecological placed biopsy. An and females performing

allows the A digital examination or bleeding rectal anemia. altered chronic detection with in acute fresh gastrointestinal or blood patients rectum in of also

In clinic the

rectum the of and colon Carcinoma

rectum of common and and Carcinoma disease. the often a colon (colorectum) lethal is and have Recent in slightly improved only survival chemotherapy surgery, radiotherapy, advances 5-year rates.

The biological behavior colon of rectum and the tumors of is predictable. relatively undergo of from change. tumors develop the of benign some which Most polyps, malignant of or and is The dissemination, the of or to: systemic presence lymphatic the the absence prognosis presence of through tumor the degree absence related penetration wall, bowel metastases. overall

stage uterus cavity and or colon example, other accurately colorectal rectum could the tumor important of the organs, in in the abdominopelvic position it bladder. its proximity invade the is to Given a and the to tumors; for pelvis, extremely (assessment whether spread involves staging). (local for occurred Assessing computed tomography has distal magnetic metastases) or and not usually imaging resonance also is cancer. staging instances rectal (EUS) in some for local used of ultrasound Endoscopic

In the clinic

injury the Iatrogenic of ureters

to various abdomen surgeries injured lie close and can during the planes. Ureters within dissection the pelvis they be as laparoscopic uterus, and are surgeries most total left anterior (removal of vaginal common that and and rectum, abdominal tubes The ureteric in open the result can hemicolectomy. the bilateral fallopian injury ovaries), laparoscopic of hysterectomy, resection hysterectomy salpingo-oophorectomy previous and irradiation, are (uterine, rectal) tissues of of of dissection or bulky of pelvic with more operations colonic, risk increased injury tumor all make patients difficult. At ureteric history a which a with those open, ureter be During the can or surgery, devascularized, cut crushed, avulsed. control It be also during to can cryoablation injured intraoperative electric or cauterization bleeding. the or also trauma ureter introduced the is tear the into to a can treat tumors ureteroscopy, course electrocauterization). Ureters where one undergo bladder (usually stones urinary through or a due of during the and small ureters a to procedure urethra of endoscope of

to cases in to Ureteric injury impairment. severe and most high infection leads morbidity to renal due ureter the is prognosis The is and when intraoperatively repaired made diagnosis is immediately. improved the and develop. leads to abdominal leakage sepsis, can pelvic injury of the diagnosis near the urine case uretero-vaginal vagina, development cavity, contamination in of fistula Delayed and a and the of is flow postoperatively, sometimes made percutaneous the diversion urine and nephrostomy performed. When is required is diagnosis of

the clinic In

some calculi In small (stones) patients, form the in kidneys. (Fig. the bladder pass These ureter, the may down causing ureteric into obstruction, and calculi further 5.43), on form salts calculi. precipitate insoluble where small larger these to with the bladder have) emptying, these in develop (or already bladder. leaves problems may residual Often, which patients urine precipitation urine, of may further This urine permitting the of the alters which pH salts. infected, become insoluble

transurethral stones small removed route If instruments. enough, a be the specialized may using via

necessary it are the to and a If too may stones retroperitoneally enter suprapubic incision be them. the bladder make big, to remove

clinic In the

catheterize the wall. abdominal certain In to instances it anterior the bladder is necessary through markedly For catheter, the urethral to pass when enlarged impossible and example, prostate is catheter may it a be a suprapubic is placed.

abdominal adjacent when bladder full structure the to The and lies wall. retroperitoneal anterior a is Ultrasound assessing in bladder structure other the of be this size may and, this from differentiating useful importantly, the structure abdominal visualization potential of masses.

the suprapubic procedure midline on and approximately in the is of pubic the passage symphysis. catheterization straightforward catheter cm involves above a The small of needle a 2 easily The into permits drainage. catheter structures other compromise bladder free of the without passes and

the clinic In

cancer Bladder (Fig. develop sixth of the an is is seventh patients tumor this although is tract the and decades, increasing 5.44) disease. urinary younger the common usually of to disease a and trend most there for

tumors multifocal; superficial to tumors of local bladder treatment. two-thirds amenable and Approximately one-third fortunately, are are

through walls and local may the wall pelvic including bladder lateral women), cavity. the Bladder and rectum, the tumors structures, uterus (in of invade spread Prostatic involvement patients. in is not uncommon male lymph internal the The via spreads disease nodes. iliac the to Spread distant sites lung. metastatic rarely includes

of invasion and including obstruction Large produce ureters. may the tumors bladder complications, and kidney failure. obstruct obstruction induce Ureteric then kidneys can the can pelvic of Moreover, cavity. invade other tumors structures the bladder

tumors bladder. the Treatment of local resection preservation includes for with early-stage bladder more (prostatectomy). and, be may surgical of chemotherapy; removal treated require with (cystectomy) men, extensive prostate may radical tumors local in the tumors Diffuse the bowel, of (formation commonly using in part after cystectomy of a neobladder) ileum. patients reconstruction the performed most so-called Bladder is

the In clinic

infection. men them the relatively susceptible in makes urethra The more than of bladder to women short length primary of symptom urinary of in infection The tract bladder women the inflammation usually (cystitis). is most can in complication. and without resolves instances by infection oral controlled The be antibiotics the can it In the and to failure. children year ureters kidneys, spread under lead of infection bladder where may age, renal produce from 1 ultimately to the via renal damage treatment diagnosis Early necessary. are and

In the clinic

patient when catheterization patient’s urine is from often to to Urethral unable bladder a drain is performed micturate. the important is inserting When catheters, urinary anatomy it appreciate patient. the of gender the to

In men:

immediately by the The perineal tissue urethra penis deep of is inferior the the to erectile surrounded of the spongy pouch. bulb short position and at relatively segment thin damage, during is urethra through perineal superiorly the wall angles to this this notably of to pouch; the cystoscopy. deep vulnerable The pass is of urethra

urethra runs deep the pouch. perineal it membranous part passes superiorly the as through The of

of a the takes prostate through anteriorly as urethra gland. curve the prostatic slight passes it concave The part

In and the to cystoscopes because is urethra catheters is pass straight. and much women, simpler it short without distended from a readily for may be rupture. concern bladder therefore Urine urethral significant drained

any a pass usually the to through of because urethral bladder, is there urethra or Occasionally, is stricture form instrumentation prostatic to it the drain enlargement. impossible ultrasound abdomen demonstrate will a cases, such the full lower (Fig. bladder an In of behind abdominal wall. the 5.46) anterior a small into bladder through under may trauma inserted anesthetic. with catheter the suprapubic A local incision minimal be

In clinic the

the of men. a testis small malignancies account in for percentage of Tumors (between younger patients in 40 years However, 20 of occur and generally age). they surgery by curable most diagnosed at When early chemotherapy. and of an stage, these tumors are

diagnosis Early extremely testicular tumors of is important. can detected palpation, be using ultrasound. Abnormal can by be made and diagnosis lumps can of stage. at the an usually early the reveal local tumor, Simple ultrasound scanning extent

the malignant removal is inguinal of an carried testis often approach. out Surgical using it is to than scrotal drainage different tumor the is tissues testis. a testis because incision, usually a which into the scrotum, through not the subcutaneous has possible removed cells spread The of lymphatic

In clinic the

testis, scrotal Interrupted of empty lie descent. route abnormal of along testis location of sac which descent anywhere leads usual to an and the the can inguinal the palpated. be in it can Most is commonly the testis present where canal, condition usually within or first This the life. at is diagnosed year of birth than testis premature occurs births in of (undescended) (30%) (3–5%). term in higher A births ectopic incidence first first watchful the the Normally, couple within can child therefore its waiting months. ectopic a born; is descent recommended testis after 3 for is complete months of the absent is months from the sac. specialist at the referral is 6 scrotal made A testis if usually still an appropriate torsion, inguinal and risk is make vaginalis). such be or processus or infertility, subfertility management as crucial reduce of testicular early malignancy, to It the to (due testicular complications plan avoid the hernia to diagnosis initiated that patent so can from is the ectopic the the correction If scrotum into required, is canal (orchiopexy). inguinal surgical moved testis mobilization performed to the must spermatic to tissues carefully the cord. During of avoid testis, be adjacent the nerve injuring of ilioinguinal dissection the orchiopexy, the hernia, At vaginalis repaired. is time closed present, inguinal of processus is patent any and if

clinic the In

the epididymis The transports the spermatozoa tail in of to the from scrotum deferens duct pelvic ejaculatory the ductus the in cavity. cord thick has inguinal spermatic the easily and smooth can it superficial be muscle between wall, the testes it ring. palpated the Because in a it surgical dissection it superficial to accessed through and be can fascia, because division. and surgical is skin amenable Also, contraception. When male a is patient is sterile—this (vasectomy), carried the is method bilaterally useful out for rendered this

clinic In the

commonly Prostate diagnosis. diagnosed disease often is one cancer the malignancies men, most is and advanced the at in of of Fig. occurs peripheral prostate zone typically the Prostate in (see the cancer 5.48) asymptomatic. and is relatively it examination digital In is diagnosed cases, by (DRE) a (Fig. many rectal which 5.49A) phosphatase (PSA). by and include serum antigen blood and prostate-specific acid tests, serum “rock” In hard. the prostate feels exams, rectal tumorous diagnosis number prostate. the a made of The by usually biopsies of is obtaining procedure measurements needle purpose of to for Ultrasound for is used during taking and biopsy image the prostate the the placement. the the called used through also by guidance, metal under or special radiotherapy markers, ultrasound can rectal aid direct near placing be into wall Ultrasound fiducials, planning to tumor. the healthy tissue. to This while maximization tumor of protecting the radiation allows dose

the increasing is most a (Fig. prostate men in with that age disease occurs hypertrophy prostatic Benign of 5.49B). the of It involves the central Fig. regions prostate generally (see more gradually 5.48), which enlarge. on “bulky” feels DRE. The prostate compressed, of urinary outflow a prostate, obstruction to number the central more the develops Owing the of change hypertrophic patients. in a is and urethra become in With the outflow obstruction. time, to response hypertrophied bladder may the urinary the and becomes or urine transurethral suprapubic severe that so necessary. male be catheterization is patients, In obstruction some passed cannot patients. on Despite many daily the effect marked benign of a a disease, therefore hypertrophy can benign prostatic being have lives

In clinic the

challenges the Ovarian oncology. cancer of remains in major one protocols ovaries and require cell which contain imaging numerous and different can ultimately The change malignant types, different undergo all and treatment of have prognoses.

sharp originate peritoneum mesovarium. transition zone that Ovarian ovarian a the tumors continuous with commonly the most surface of from is the at epithelium (germinal)

been Many linked a of family factors ovarian the strong have tumors, history. with including development

may cancer typically age, Ovarian any in more occurs women. older but at occur it

directly into and via blood peritoneal the spread may of the frequently metastasizes the lymphatics, Cancer ovaries and cavity. direct cells spread along easily. peritoneal from this the the cavity disease liver of where over allows passage the paracolic gutters tumor may disseminate and Such already (Fig. diffuse patients Unfortunately, have and many disease metastatic time diagnosis. of at the 5.52)

clinic the In

the ovary Imaging

can ovaries The ultrasound. be using visualized the water, patient drinks enlarged full. bladder enough If the and becomes behind may fluid-filled ovaries window, scanning be an This excellent acoustic which identified and ultrasound. uterus provides by the transabdominal with cavity a to technicians growth allows pregnancy. obstetricians This fetus technique record and and view also throughout its

uterus, close the vagina, recto-uterine permitting of a in case ovaries. of (pouch the contents into the of the and be the scanning, probe which pouch transabdominal passed for suitable Some may patients Douglas), visualization not are ovaries visualized laparoscopically. be can The also are cervical women called screening smear for for countries regularly have Many cancer where introduced programs tests.

In the clinic

the surgical the is hysterectomy A of removal uterus. the occasionally though the uterus, be is situ. cervix This and the left fundus, body, cervix may in of usually complete of excision (fallopian) removed the are uterine some as well. ovaries and In instances tubes salpingo-oophorectomy. called hysterectomy is This bilateral abdominal procedure and a total

such may salpingo-oophorectomy in and malignancy, cervical, uterine, cancers. who patients reproductive be oophorectomy, ovarian have performed Hysterectomy, as and a and indications reproductive include family excessive Other endometriosis, strong bleeding. disorders, history of may postpartum the be postpartum because of excessive uterus Occasionally removed bleeding. need to

incision). incision hysterectomy is transverse through (Pfannenstiel’s performed A suprapubic a is ureters. uterine without care the arteries to identify procedure During the the to tremendous damage and ureters to ligate distal taken the nearby

In clinic the

After fimbriae the tube. is gathered uterine egg unfertilized by ovulation, the the of egg the normally where ampulla. it the is tube into passes uterine The in fertilized in implants begins the cavity and development into wall. it the then zygote The where passes uterine uterine

method and reaching simple to the effective spermatozoa of ovum. the birth preventing control from surgically ligate tubes, A is uterine (clip) This anesthetic. under procedure is general short simple performed used to is passed identify equipment peritoneal into tubes. small A is the laparoscope the and special cavity

the clinic In

Carcinoma uterus and the cervix of

of the (Fig. Carcinoma cervix 5.56) and uterus is common disease. a Diagnosis by and imaging, cells), (D&C) is cytology and uterus. the (examination inspection, curettage cervical of biopsy, dilation the of

of be resection, cervix and may (hysterectomy), the local and uterus Carcinoma of chemotherapy. the by treated uterus removal adjuvant spreads nodes. tumor The via iliac the to internal lymph common lymphatics and introduced called cervical where tests. Many smear for regularly screening cancer countries are have programs women for varies country. on in the the women The of included population age depending screening

In clinic the

The pouch recto-uterine

(pouch situated uterus. The Douglas) the and region extremely between important an of rectum is pouch recto-uterine clinical infection the collect. and When where is and recto-uterine pouch of lowest is the cavity abdominopelvic position, fluids a is patient typically site the the supine the in portion is It impossible region digital by transrectal examined and it palpation. transvaginal transabdominally, be this but to can palpate If necessitating suspected, drained transabdominal the or through vagina rectum the without an is abscess may surgery. it be

the In clinic

Pudendal pain childbirth. anesthesia performed block to is with the relieve associated anesthesia use platelets, anesthesia, epidural less an provides the excellent since delivery). the it this Although who option for a have (e.g., close low to spinal contraindication women is procedure of to adoption too widespread neuraxial anatomy, of common in or pelvic are chronic blocks of and for also types procedures. urological rectal used some pain certain Pudendal usually ligament ischial is lateral the spine. injection attachment aspect sacrospinous where of nerve the given its the pudendal crosses to near the The the can ischial spine. vagina finger inserted into palpate a During childbirth, the to passed The of the is spine sacrospinous and around ischial medial ligament. aspect the the needle transcutaneously performed Infiltration anesthetized. is perineum and is the anatomical Pudendal on landmarks. or can localize the ultrasound) guidance blocks tomography, with nerve performed relying rather be computed (using also nerve fluoroscopy, than purely to imaging

In the clinic

perform cancer be prostate. to may surgery necessary cure It to radical of the attachments bladder, this, the of prostate be around To do must masse. en removed including its the vesicles, seminal base the and the innervate in give the this penis. Parts nerves inferior region of the to the hypogastric plexus rise tissues erectile of that Impotence if may preserved nerves removal be are or occur prostate. not of these cannot the during

reasons, a same pelvic similar For hysterectomy. sexual total the damaged surgery, if may experience women nerves during example, during for are dysfunction

clinic In the

performing way is innovative prostate and This with prostatectomy cancer. in new patients of a radical unit three on is a patient patient containing of table high-resolution operating and camera The arms an consisting a so-called near microsurgical instruments. placed the operates magnified console 3D on The a monitor images. field a the surgical computer as surgeon views and from robot into 2 and between inserted makes number 1 cm instruments camera The cm are through the which a pelvis. surgical incisions of the operator wide to usually into of precise very filtered and by the the The and movements are translated surgeon’s hand robot movements fine microtools. reduces damage prostate increases and of and risk This of the dysfunction. of nerve potential erectile postsurgical the removal markedly precision development

clinic the In

ischio-anal in fossae the Abscesses

is be mucosa feces. may anal The torn and particularly to injury vulnerable hard by easily crypts). and anal (sinuses or inflammation the infection of patients develop canal Occasionally, This fistulas. between producing infection spread sphincters, intersphincteric can the laterally into cavity the tract into pelvic the ischio-anal The infection can superiorly or fossae.

the In clinic

the venous A is or inside anal at sphincter. of engorgement hemorrhoid an plexus the the is a States. prevalence in approximately 4% has of complaint United common It and genetic sedentary movements, a hemorrhoids. bowel have can produce Hemorrhoids also and during straining lifestyle obesity, however, predisposition; slight swelling. and symptoms The pain, irritation, include anal external are verge (distal typically the boundary hemorrhoids. of Hemorrhoids anal canal) called the occurring at a and Internal occur the tendency bleed. hemorrhoids rectum have to inside are anal hemorrhoids hemorrhoids thrombosis outside that and painful. Prolapsed pass the undergo may which become and internal lumps, form canal

ligation or simple surgical the rubber There (dentate) line include above excision. for which bands are using hemorrhoids, treatments many pectinate Surgery anal sphincter. complications without this care be internal taken and is not to to must the region preserve

to may attributable of mind is concern the or physician’s rectal the In every hemorrhoids. be not bleeding that the symptoms back as a Therefore, is the treating the as excluding within hemorrhoids. important bowel tumor

In the clinic

Emission of and ejaculation semen

men, the is semen penis. the of In from expulsion formation and of the emission is semen, ejaculation

the system that nervous caused part from smooth of muscle system. by the the ducts reproductive of by a levels the is the innervated by vascular of sympathetic S2–S4, the the the erection is and of penis contraction of spinal is formation semen event visceral urethra of nerves glands generated in parasympathetic Although by of skeletal motor semen of is somatic action innervated from nerves. penis the muscles through the Ejaculation

in the and (T12, thoracic duct L1,2). upper spinal male levels muscle glands reproductive fibers the by lower the sympathetic innervated in Smooth the of is accessory tract system and lumbar from then the into fibers plexus distributed tissues. pass and prevertebral target are The to deferens, (prostate, from as contents the the luminal base ampulla glands in the the the of smooth structures. vesicles) by muscle at into ductus the walls is seminal contraction the are penis (epididymis, of the Semen ducts moved of formed deferens) urethra and ductus of

by that the contraction of muscle the of meatus. Pulsatile semen base generated from the emission the semen forces bulbospongiosus the of out penis of and the external urethral penis reflex from is carried nerve muscle is (S2–S4). the Bulbospongiosus pudendal motor by innervated somatic fibers in innervated the the prevents the of periurethral into system, urethral and sphincter nervous retrograde muscle, internal visceral by bladder. sympathetic of smooth Contraction ejaculation the part

In clinic the

erection. condition (ED) dysfunction are penile or is in maintain unable Erectile to a men which complex initiate with vascular well is partner, a as present. with affects this during sleep, and and/or erections impairment nerve self-stimulation as When is coronary artery recognized as ED with type disease. risk for of and factor generalized This age increases a Parkinson’s spinal surgeries with diabetes, nerve and injuries, radiation pelvic neurological conditions cord malignancies. from It for including associated frequently as or and multiple disease, damage cardiovascular disease, pelvic is sclerosis, erections. prevent states and testosterone erections impair consistently can Low sleep-induced Medications ED. (SSRIs), thiazides can including inhibitors anti-androgens underlie also serotonin reuptake and dysfunction—the neurological from underlie vascular When psychological only healthy partnered and the function. sleep erections normal factors problematic, are confirming erections social Most can low quality lessen all of well isolation. and to ED as in well-being person’s emotional of lead are self-esteem depression multifactorial a and as etiology, and markedly cases and life and

result major multiple from damage pelvic surgeries spinal absent) diabetes, conditions cord such sclerosis, as can in complications irradiation. disease, (or nerve pelvic after and injuries, Parkinson’s Delayed ejaculation pudendal (which prostate the is vesicles), nerve as also absent orgasm cancer but still radical for prostatectomy spared. seminal is the is Ejaculation after removes possible and and SSRIs, therefore often two health (marijuana, alcohol, are recreational the orgasm neuroleptics, in the and involved drugs as different). delay cocaine, heroin) though nerves coincide (even ejaculation,

is to Because likely in have cause penis, in men. compromised supply by blood the and the clitoris tissues the similar vulvar swelling erectile conditions same innervation ED that is of appears sexual rare female this it cause dysfunction. that However, a Reduced swelling is symptomatic. clitoral rarely type in as that sexual inhibitors such even conditions dysfunction (PDE5) (sildenafil) phosphodiesterase not diabetes. improve 5 Note do female though response congestion low of stimuli, genital arousal with in sexual sexual confirms to physiologically complaints find women healthy Research that have a visual increase they even do mentally in the arousing. normal sexually stimuli otherwise not and symptomatic sclerosis from genital orgasm. or Loss multiple of sexual diabetes sensitivity damage nerve highly can be from preclude somatic affect can also preventing women. orgasm in Medications men

the In clinic

rupture occur well-defined of anatomical at may a Urethral points. series

the commonest injury perineal proximal the membrane. of rupture urethra a The spongy below is or of The a is usually and the of the bicycle) urethra (e.g., a beam between are structures torn a crossbar perineum caught steel hard inferior arch. pubic object when scrotum the the deep anterior into the descends and and to into wall rupture onto fascia. escapes up the superficial Urine superficial abdominal through perineal the pouch

at deep the association may the with fractures, pouch. rupture In perineal pelvic prostatomembranous severe above junction occur urethral will The extravasate the true into urine pelvis.

serious and puboprostatic is to complete ligaments. pelvic disruption related there where of serious The injuries urethral is most rupture the worst pelvis. the the hematoma by the within only disruption dislocated prostate superiorly not true extensive but The also is ligamentous formed by made by be digital rectal examination. diagnosis prostate palpating the elevated a The can during

in scrotum. the family his 25-year-old he because man his had “dragging feeling” A side of left visited a physician other was He otherwise had and symptoms. healthy no the physician examination, epididymis. normal, nodular testes During the around and although palpated left of which he swelling superior the aspect testis, was the noted the soft worms” as findings notes, In (Fig. a clinical these “bag his of described he 5.86). worms bag was varicocele. a The of

runs the spermatic venous the cord. plexus the via that is of pampiniform drainage of The testis veins within arise the a dilated of from is that collection plexus. pampiniform A varicocele veins are legs. that in the develop veins to they ways, many varicose In similar which scrotum in day. a around patient end feeling toward usually the complains Typically, the the worse testis, dragging of and the is of the

treatment, through an recommended surgical for a inguinal with incision. physician recommendation surgery The family

inguinal skin technique A simple divides the ligament. around the surgical to anterior divided display The the abdominal in spermatic the cord. external wall of muscle the is aponeurosis oblique spermatic the the are cord veins, reveals inspection of ligated. surgically Careful which

is embolize to varicocele. option the Another

this placed right the technique, femoral vein. a is small catheter via In and the advanced and catheter is inferior The the vena vein into common along the vein cava. external iliac iliac a the and of in left left is catheter the the venogram The renal vein. origin then vein, to performed testicular demonstrate is positioned left inguinal plexus. advanced into canal pampiniform and of catheter the the down testicular the The is vein the veins withdrawn. occlude vessels to is the coils catheter are Metal the injected, and

after from operation. drain blood patient how would the The the testis asked

the collateral cord and outer drainage aspect the the the occluded, the of without veins around permitted small scrotum running had been the spermatic within of Although of varicocele. testis veins major recurrence

woman her visited because upper A young family had she practitioner pain. abdominal mild ultrasound the which pain. gallstones gallbladder, explained An demonstrated within patient’s the (Fig. sonographic noted behind a bladder, kidney when technician a However, mass the pelvis, to had which similar findings the she the assessed 5.87).

the sonographer did next? What do demonstrated behind the kidneys. Having mass bladder, both the pelvic sonographer assessed this The a right normal kidney. had patient its the not be found kidney place. However, in left could usual technician a The pelvic kidney. diagnosed

can pelvic kidney by embryology. be the A explained develop The that from series adjacent fetal the within originate complex pelvis. bladder a kidneys the of structures to development superior developing vena the parts the posterior adjacent and the attain abdomen on position As and they cava, aorta various the functions abdominal upper a abdominal kidneys change, of the to of inferior proceeds the wall. in developmental arrest or may prevent the complication from usual obtaining its kidney A position. a to have it Fortunately, unusual is symptoms any relating for to patients kidney. pelvic

This the attributable symptoms pelvic patient to discharged. was and kidney she no had

intermittent, abdominal initially the woman 19-year-old 36-hour history and pain presented a department emergency constant to of lower and later was becoming with A that sharp severe. reported once patient the feeling in and The vomited ER. also nauseated normally bowels 8 not diarrhea had She opened and hours admission. before her did have no had dysuria. symptoms of She tachycardic She slightly was at normal and blood pressure. 95/min, a had afebrile, 11.6 and x function liver tests. leukocytosis of results renal mild normal showed Blood 109/L and being with long-term sexually She a active reported partner. was negative. on never pregnancy urine and test admission the pregnant, was She

in examination the there with iliac tenderness physical guarding. right fossa was On in was tender examination a adnexal region felt. right mass vaginal the On underwent transvaginal patient ultrasound evaluation of subsequently pathology. examination The adnexal for a a cm with echogenic ovary to axis peripherally follicles. markedly distributed stroma and scan enlarged The up 8 right long showed in measuring color when was was Doppler no There applied. vascularity internal seen Douglas. A fluid of the free in was amount of pouch small was ovarian The of diagnosis torsion made.

compromised the blood venous, ovary and is an which to torsion Ovarian contains supply. ligament, so-called leading vascular vessels pedicle), a suspensory twisting its of lymphatic on arterial, (forming enlargement. Initially, venous is compromised, ovarian the and and circulation edema lymphatic resulting in due arterial is thicker and compressible longer flow walls. The maintained arterial less to tissue, the to eventually leads and of arterial results torsion necrosis. that in ovarian ovarian ischemia pressure internal thrombosis, Prolonged increased patient treatment generalized correct delayed, diagnosis sepsis. If develop and are may the the

symptoms are nonspecific, The diagnosis making challenging. the of ovarian torsion medical is history. past There significant often no

the hemorrhagic ovary At twisted the right pedicle with surgery, was degrees. necrotic 360 and left appearance. ovary The was in normal completely salpingo-oophorectomy and normal Right-sided histopathological any without confirmed tissue. examination ovary residual was performed, necrotic ovarian after quick intervention. surgical a made recovery patient The

Ovarian women prevalence. all of in is reproductive age have ages, torsion much of encountered but higher those or more and more in mobile or Torsion is adolescent fallopian uncommon pelvic tubes tube a as elongated factors. frequently of contributing is fallopian spasm, ovary normal seen ligaments, population, with mesosalpinx cited

his posterior of A in of and the young pain and thigh the around gluteal lateral in posterior the aspect right man developed leg. aspects the region, part foot, also pain of he On that the radiated lateral over the questioning, further lateral the the around reported particularly malleolus.

The dermatomes to S3 to nerves. L4 pain of correspond areas

began patient muscular predominantly following weeks, footdrop. develop the to weakness, the Over

sciatic a branch loss These sensory with the in and change common motor findings the limb. the nerve which nerve, is are in of fibular consistent of lower the function

pelvis the in abdomen revealed computed aspect the a of right and the posterior (CT) the tomography A scan of pelvis. mass side of piriformis rectum. was the adjacent anterior The mass and to muscle the to

nerve is the sciatic of belly piriformis On to S3 roots the the from anterior of nerves. muscle, L4 the formed patient’s the sensory nerve, compressed The in this his dysfunction. pelvis and mass motor producing

was excised. surgery, tumor the benign nerve and mass to was a During be found patient had long-standing deficit. neurological no This

was by buttock of and a intern 65-year-old man examined A he had because surgical history pain a impotence. examination to pulse on reduced peripheral the On he foot a compared right. the left had after that questioning, buttock revealed severe experienced direct left-sided he 100 walking pain the On patient yards. before yards could After symptoms walk short a recurred. another the 100 he same of period rest, was He past erection. noticed year unable also he obtain over an the that to

and treatment. no was drugs or He other smoked heavily on

nature. in buttock the ischemic pain left The in is blood gives lack relating flow typical to He muscles. the a to of history of similar occluded or present artery are femoral A branches is the finding when stenosed. muscular muscles intermittent similar calf in called patients pain develop Such (ischemic) claudication. the

to the get the muscles? gluteal does How blood

bifurcation the into at into arteries, vessels. common Blood and passes internal the then the divide iliac which iliac external and arrives aortic vessels the the supply give into leave The gluteal muscles. in foramen anterior to passing pelvis artery which then iliac internal greater sciatic the by that turn divides rise through and and divisions, posterior artery arises penis. from the and supplies internal internal the division pudendal of anterior also artery The iliac the

exists that an obstruction side, suggesting patient’s on that on only. occur symptoms side The the left

artery is iliac Because left in the occur common likely (eFig. on left side the symptoms the the only, patient’s lesion and flow is arteries on left preventing iliac 5.88) the blood internal and external into side. the

treated?” will asked be patient. the “How I

asked begin to smoking The was patient exercise. and stop regular ballooning blockage bypass by treatment Other include options to unblocking graft. vessels the by the reopen the lesion or surgical a

regular improved the Stopping smoking exercise and distance. walking patient’s able invasive less result to he The underwent as of have was patient ballooning the and walk procedure unhindered to vessel and (angioplasty) erection. the a an

resection was (hysterectomy) of uterus for to surgical A for admitted the woman cancer. hospital 50-year-old a to lymph ovaries). carry was (removal surgeon nodes also The and salpingo-oophorectomy uterine going of all pelvic and out remove bilateral tubes the underwent was and patient surgery. routine for procedure prepared The this her abdomen was after no was passed patient that surgery, urine Twenty-five expanding. and noted hours it the had ultrasound abdomen. fluid the An a considerable within scan of amount demonstrated was urine. tested Fluid to found withdrawn be from the and abdomen

the this during been postulated surgery. patient’s was It damaged that ureters had

and wall peritoneum external courses The pelvis the the the anterior pelvic ureter to iliac part the to lateral posteroinferiorly the on artery. parietal internal of of muscles. superior to the in levator course the It cm approximately a and superior passes anteromedially spine to and point to its 2 ischial continues then ani peritoneum. closely adheres Importantly, ureter the the to only men the the The ureter structure peritoneum ductus the is between in and that deferens. passes the on under uterine In as pelvic women, artery. ureter descends wall, however, passes the the it to the the fornix of lateral the posterosuperior continues enters especially the on vagina, and angle of bladder. close The the left, ureter

damaged. ureter that at It this point was inadvertently was the

recognizing the the the surgeons possibility ureteric and Knowing reestablish the of anatomy ureter continuity of surgically. to damage enabled days and a uneventful made The recovery. than longer few hospitalized an was expected patient

her pain woman with the a complaint A right admitted iliac to emergency was fossa. in department of 25-year-old rapidly and approximately over pain associated minutes with developed 40 vomiting. The cramps and was had surgical an diagnosis intern made The initial appendicitis. of

(intermittent waxing become which pain colicky history a iliac in typical waning) to The is a appendicitis abdominal, constant for of over hours and pain, period a central fossa. the localizes right The for poorly pain. typical of colicky central type is pain visceral a localized pain parietal localized. becomes the As becomes peritoneum the inflamed, not classical history fossa it must always this the for is pain, patients be (although appendicitis). not remembered for patient history that a typical have right does Although have iliac may appendicitis

for a senior asked surgical colleague intern opinion. more The an

other a anatomical senior The fossa right colleague iliac cause as potential considered lie pain. within of that the structures and the small the the appendix, These include cecum, bowel. Musculoskeletal causes. potential pain referred and also be could pain In tube, fallopian may from and ovary, also the uterus. pain women, arise organs In are rare. young a these of patient, diseases may and to occur Infection disease pelvic considered. patient need in be the inflammatory and younger

of no disorders. gave these The history patient

further menstrual patient her that questioning, Upon this last however, before period weeks examination. was revealed 6 the pain that The realized physician cause a uterus outside was senior the abdominal a potential pregnancy). the (ectopic pregnancy of in for was sac the rushed revealed fetus uterus. patient which The an or no abdominal ultrasound, have test. pregnancy to She a was noted also positive surgery fallopian by an found a ectopic pregnancy. The to and patient ruptured underwent tube caused have was

differences. gender-related pelvic apparent is consider anatomical a pain, patient has it the to Whenever important pregnancy should always considered be of childbearing age. women Ectopic in

abdominal a feeling practitioner visited in and A woman her family “bloating” 35-year-old increase she girth. an because had practitioner umbilicus. level the the abdomen, from revealed of mass superior to that extended the lower examined which the family a rami The pubic mass the but be of was less to margin The defined. appeared inferior easily margin superior palpated, well the

has pelvic mass. patient This a

whole abdomen. uncover of in a the the the When position, patient observer supine should the examining

revealed the umbilicus. lower level bulge of the the to abdomen in a Inspection a border, superior borders mass into with hard and lateral impression and mass slightly a pelvis. well-defined the and Palpation the inferior less well-defined continued revealed giving that irregular the The dull to percussion. was lesion reveal sounds. abnormal did not any Auscultation

arising from. doctor may mass this The structures be which pondered the is remember When important sex to pelvis, the it differences. examining men to and bowel, both bladder, Common and are musculature. women the rectum, states collections. development of Certain also including are pathological and both the to fluid sexes, pelvic abscesses common

an to diseases. rare benign men, be prostate such extremely is cannot it for enlarge extent to in transabdominally, and In the it palpated of bladder whole spread with Aggressive bowel often pelvis, symptoms. prostate obstruction throughout this the although severe is and the cancer can associated

In remnants embryological fibroids). uterus women, organs including broad develop and the and the the of (solid (pregnancy ovaries can and number tumors), ligaments, within a cystic masses, the large

further questions. asked The physician

always patient). It (occasionally, is the the pregnant a pregnancy surprise whether is establish to come important as may patient to

This negative. test patient’s was pregnancy bladder, the there change emptied in her no the was mass. patient After The physician might be the a of (fibroid). benign mass uterus common the thought tumor mass establish that from the he scan obtained uterus. of the diagnosis, the confirmed the pelvis, To which ultrasound stemmed an

was gynecologist, agreed patient the the regarding referred risks, a of and to that the course fertility, symptomatology, The and therapy. long discussion a (surgical and a her would appropriate hysterectomy be removal of surgeon an after patient uterus)

of of gynecologists, opinions whom sought was other appropriate series all the a The from option. agreed that surgery patient

removed complications. was The fibroid with no

to 52-year-old was woman referred a gynecologist. A uterine imaging presence of indicated resonance (MRI) the Magnetic fibroids. discussion and removal was long a of between the hysterectomy or she symptomatology, uterine embolization. risks, a regarding her the offered artery After choice (surgical fertility, uterus)

an uses is uterine inject A radiologist to arteries. particles interventional embolization artery a catheter a small where the procedure uterine into the to them to causes This blood supply the shrink. and reduces fibroids

embolization. The for the uterine patient opted artery

performed favorable size months after reduction showed uterine a of embolization MRI the the fibroids (eFig. 6 in procedure An the 5.89).

524.e2 524.e1

Relationship Regions Other Conceptual Overview to •

Fig. cont’d 5.10,

Fig. cont’d 5.36,

Fig. 5.45, cont’d

Fig. cont’d 5.47,

Fig. 5.59, cont’d

not (spinal Table participate)—cont’d Branches plexuses of 5.4 sacral the do and in segments consistently coccygeal parentheses

Fig. cont’d 5.63,

Fig. cont’d 5.65,

Fig. cont’d 5.76,

Define Anatomy • Surface to How Perineum of the the Margins

Identification Anatomy Surface Structures Triangle • of Anal in the

in the of Urogenital of Structures Anatomy • Identification Triangle Men Surface

Fig. cont’d 5.84,

• Identification in of Anatomy Urogenital of the Triangle Structures Men Surface

Fig. 5.85, cont’d

of Posterior compartment 615 leg

compartment 622 Lateral leg of

compartment 624 of leg Anterior

of ankle arrangement major retinacula, the at 642 Tarsal structures tunnel, and

644 of foot the Arches

645 sheaths toes of Fibrous

659 nerve Avoiding sciatic the

the artery in femoral the femoral Finding

660 structures around knee the Identifying

the Visualizing popliteal 662 fossa of contents the

gateway to the 663 tarsal tunnel—the the foot Finding

the 664 Identifying around and tendons in ankle the foot

665 Finding dorsalis pedis artery the

arch position Approximating the plantar arterial the of 665

strong to joint which anchored the to a the the sacrum. lower by link bone sacroiliac ligaments, and directly is limb skeleton pelvic by axial The the back, It abdomen, separated a by from and continuous perineum (Fig. is line and along ischial separate lower the superior which: the iliac the spine the medial the with joins the margin spine lateral separate the the dorsolateral the limb coccyx sacrum iliac abdominal the back; perineum. between pubic the the lower ligament, joins the of superior the and to ramus, passes anterior and inguinal posterior surface limb 6.1), (position the and iliac the posterior to from to from pubic the lower spine the of crest of sacrotuberous continues walls; muscles and iliac ligament) along the ischiopubic the of anterior superior symphysis tuberosity, to then separate the from to tubercle limb

the basis leg, of and is bones, and component landmarks major lower (Fig. region, The the on superficial limb thigh, foot into divided joints, gluteal 6.2):

the (gluteal skin fold) defines the lower region of between buttocks. and limit crest gluteal the the is of fold The posterolateral that and iliac

middle the posterior is the fold inferior of the hip the is thigh ligament gluteal to joint and the the knee the joint—the between just third the is and ligament, inguinal Anteriorly, between knee. and inguinal thigh

the joint. and leg The is ankle between knee

ankle foot distal is The to joint. the

of side (Fig. are regions structures as through well pass important ankle, transition femoral as the popliteal fossa, The areas of which between the and triangle posteromedial 6.3).

base thigh regions the formed forms muscles triangle by triangle. and which by of is The ligament, femoral pyramid-shaped depression the proximal the in a the the of inguinal under inguinal passing the abdomen the femoral major enter nerve) (femoral of one thigh blood the limb the into the triangle. the into supply from and ligament by The nerves of and

is by and and of region leg. formed muscles knee the thigh popliteal fossa the posterior diamond-shaped to a The is joint and popliteal pass Major through vessels the nerves and the leg fossa. between thigh

flexor posteromedial a canals of the ankle. side Most the tarsal and series of tendons termed on the tunnel) pass between and pass foot through vessels, leg that the (collectively nerves, canals bones The the tendons adjacent a which are position. by flexor formed in and holds retinaculum,

the weight Support body

of expenditure energy. A weight lower is support the with body the to function limb major minimal of the of is of standing in the to edge When anterior SII gravity vertebra (Fig. the the center the of pelvis erect, 6.4). on center the and of joints, ground the by knee anterior extension. the joints, the circular over ankle and and directly The hip formed the posterior the to slightly hip support vertical feet almost and joints line the in base to holds through is gravity knee

position energy knee organization articular of standing, knee, ligaments when facilitates position. maintain with particularly The the standing thereby joints, the the hip reducing of a to surfaces, required joints and at the together muscular at into shape of “locking” the these

the move A major of the is to body space. second through lower function limbs to integration the position foot body to on move and the of the limb the joints foot. in ground all at over lower involves movements the This the

at circumduction the rotation, hip abduction, medial extension, are (Fig. adduction, and and flexion, lateral joint Movements 6.5).

knee The ankle and hinge are primarily joints. joints mainly at knee flexion the extension are Movements and (Fig. 6.6A). the and of the at Movements (Fig. dorsiflexion dorsal plantarflexion side toward leg) ankle foot are the of the (movement 6.6B).

smooth, of maintain locomotion anatomical limbs body’s thereby contribute amount gait to reduce energy the and gravity minimizing center features of a of efficient walking, During the in (Fig. lower and the many needed produce fluctuations to 6.7). pelvic and plane, movement interactions knee, the ankle. in the in of hip, and the toward the knees plane, the flexion tilt the complex They midline, rotation include between transverse knees, pelvic of coronal normally result, and only walking, the As vertical both center during of lateral body’s cm directions. fluctuates 5 in a gravity

of (Fig. The bones gluteal the are bone the and the and femur the thigh pelvic region 6.8). is these ball hip bones joint. between The joint two the and socket large

bone thigh. the femur The the of is it with also At but weight-bearing is its major its the anteriorly the end, (knee cap). articulation distal with patella tibia, articulates in the the bone in The femoris tendon. patella sesamoid is body quadriceps the largest is embedded and

cavity. the and femur articulation of between joint knee femur and the principal tibia the same the is joint, but joint between patella the shares the articular The the femur knee the the main the Although at flexion also the joint on are movements tibia. allows rotate knee extension, to and rotation extended, This when of “locking” contributes the to fully standing. when particularly knee

leg two bones: contains The

is fibula, The tibia laterally medial bone. the larger is positioned than is position, the in weight-bearing and

The knee most joint—proximally, fibula tibiofibular take forms inferolateral the small forms joint and a surface ankle of not of the does the it the of part only the in part lateral (superior tibia. head the with joint) joint synovial

tibia and their by an linked distal interosseous fibula at little tibiofibular their and along them. are lengths joint, and fibrous between a ends membrane, movement by occurs The inferior and surfaces together a tibia of fibula distal the recess. deep form The one projects of foot The this (talus), the by is the bones part into which ankle and the of tarsal recess. joint formed recess of dorsiflexed. is most when The stable ankle

the and The metatarsals, consist the foot tarsal bones bones, the of of phalanges the (Fig. 6.9). rows between bone with medial bones, are two seven organized in an tarsal are There the side. two intermediate on which rows the bones. foot joints between sole at of of or occur inward the outward, and respectively, and foot, the eversion turning tarsal the the Inversion

limited bones the which only allow movements. The metatarsals with at tarsal sliding joints, articulate tarsometatarsal

the the effectively by restricted of together metatarsal the heads metatarsophalangeal movements bones Independent joints. which metatarsals transverse at deep are link of the distal ligaments, two. five the for except each a phalanges has the There has of digit (digit I), three toe each is metatarsal for and digits, great only which

more of the hand. flexion, The movement the joints the allow and extension, abduction, restricted than is metatarsophalangeal digits, but range in adduction of

extension. are hinge joints flexion and allow joints and The interphalangeal

flat they the a of ground. lie are bones so single in that organized on not The foot the plane metatarsals (Fig. the form tarsals and and longitudinal Rather, arches transverse 6.10). foot. medial the arch of longitudinal on side the is The highest supported flexible and The and are muscles in are arches nature by ligaments. standing. walking They absorb and and transmit forces during

of rotators, of abductors (Fig. and joint Muscles predominantly hip of gluteal extensors, region consist the the 6.11). limb) the a during fixed the to the the to weight walking. the while bearing or on (weight-bearing also swings stance body’s In pelvis forward of thigh relative pelvis, movement these control moving other limb limb muscles the addition (swing limb)

Major in muscles of the and not thigh. region major the iliacus) flexor originate hip gluteal (iliopsoas—psoas the do or descend end Instead, the the ligament to inguinal gap proximal the bone to are to (Fig. femur and they between abdominal wall the of the attach attached posterior through pelvic and 6.12).

thigh bones, three ligaments by separated and fascia, layers compartments Muscles and in the into (Fig. of leg are 6.13).

(adductor), In anterior and thigh, posterior the there medial are (flexor) compartments: (extensor),

joint. on medial Most the mainly muscles the act compartment hip in

on knee (flexion) act because muscles the posterior The attach the compartment both hip to of leg. the and large and in bones the (extension) (hamstrings) they pelvis

in (quadriceps compartment the femoris) anterior extend Muscles the predominantly knee.

(fibular), in divided leg compartments: Muscles posterior the into are and lateral anterior,

Muscles evert predominantly in lateral compartment the the foot.

compartment in and dorsiflex digits. Muscles extend the the the foot anterior

femur. can muscles of flex in posterior the compartment superiorly the and foot plantarflex the to Muscles the attaches the also knee digits; one the because it flex

support provide leg muscles the the also arches dynamic compartments each for the Specific foot. three of in of the in

the forces provide modify when the longitudinal when the and before the toes the tendons dynamic the the walking, stance for foot muscles) forward levering toe-off. in arches by just produced foot the on found entering (intrinsic support Muscles leg entirely of body limb particularly from

Unlike between in between and exit inlet, single abdomen, limb axillary the points most are through the and there a pelvis, the limb structures entry four in major and neck and pass lower lower the (Fig. upper perineum limb limb, where the 6.14). top lesser greater of the the the are: inguinal bone, the sciatic (at ligament obturator between sciatic foramen. pelvic gap foramen), and foramen, These the the obturator and canal the

bone directly The lower communicates gap with ligament pelvic inguinal the through abdomen limb the the (Fig. a and between 6.14). artery iliacus, the lateral nerves, femoral nerve thigh; though lymphatics. gap of and and the muscles—psoas Structures and and passing pectineus; nerves—femoral branch genitofemoral vein; and of vessels—femoral cutaneous the this include: major,

weak often protrusion abdominal between hernia). the inguinal abnormal and of in abdominal thigh into ligament This the the cavity bone pelvic a and is area associated the and (femoral contents gap wall the with lymphatic through occurs pass usually gap femoral the where the vessels (the hernia canal). type This of

lower Structures major the the communicate within through pelvis apertures (Fig. with limb two 6.14).

and foramen veins, muscle—piriformis; the inferior include: nerves; arteries communicate region gluteal through pudendal gluteal, nerves—sciatic, the vessels—superior and and gluteal sciatic Posteriorly, greater artery. with and and and superior structures the pudendal inferior and internal a

and the is of peripheral sciatic nerve nerve limb. is largest the the nerve The the body major lower of

thigh through the the between canal. the pass nerve Anteriorly, obturator obturator and pelvis vessels and canal This the foramen obturator life. the and obturator which of of membrane, bone at foramen formed during between top the the most closes is

perineum the between and region pass the Structures (Fig. lesser through sciatic foramen gluteal 6.14). with The tendon important internus of most to muscle. respect the is obturator limb the the lower

the pelvis perineum. lesser and gluteal pudendal through and sacrospinous artery ligament and pass pudendal artery of greater foramen enter and nerve) internal perineum nerve pass sciatic (the the ischial the then sciatic through immediately foramen around of to region the and the out into the spine the The

and by sacral is Innervation lumbar

peripheral by the and sensory the pelvic Somatic motor and lower limb plexuses the walls. of from abdominal general and on emanating sacral innervation posterior nerves lumbar is L1 of plexuses most anterior and by These L4 are to formed of to rami L3 and plexus). (sacral S5 plexus) (lumbar the L4

lower cord (Fig. entering to and carry sacral levels fibers Nerves plexuses from L1 limb lumbar and originating spinal the the from S3 6.15). segments Nerves sacral perineum. the lower from innervate foramina apertures exit the abdomen of the and through limb. enter and nerves pelvis and Terminal a number sacral clinically consequence innervation, of lumbar the lower and by tested examining limb. nerves are As this upper a in lower fascicular pins-and-needles resulting from In disorder pain, clinical signs limb. the muscle these as paresthesia, (e.g., the herniated and addition, lumbar intervertebral disc any affecting sensations, (such region) in appear spinal twitching) nerves

lower Dermatomes are Fig. limb shown in the in 6.16. reasonably thigh—L3, (digit of of be side minimal over are: autonomous of sensation of digit the (digit ligament—L1, medial the the tested II—L5, can and lower thigh—S2, the for medial little overlap) medial great and the thigh—L2, gluteal V)—S1, side over lateral (have Regions fold—S3. skin are the side toe back inguinal toe side that of I)—L4,

are perineum. S4 The the dermatomes tested in of S5 and

test myotomes used are Selected (Fig. joint movements to 6.17). For example:

by of the L2. L1 and controlled is hip Flexion primarily

L3 L4. knee and mainly of the by Extension controlled is

controlled flexion S2. Knee is to by L5 mainly

by Plantarflexion S1 controlled of S2. and predominantly the foot is

of S3. the digits and is by Adduction S2 controlled

both sensory unconscious motor In be patient, an levels somatic and somatic using can functions cord reflexes: tested of tendon spinal

on tap the L3 patellar ligament knee L4. at and the A tests predominantly

(tendon gastrocnemius tap the tests posterior and calcaneal soleus) S2. on S1 to the tendon and ankle of A tendon

innervated (Fig. by limb originate the major more Each or primarily or the sacral of the that and major in groups one nerves from muscle plexuses of is lumbar compartments the lower 6.18):

gluteal are the and gluteal superior region innervated the by Large in inferior nerves. muscles

fasciae innervated the compartment the anterior the in Most muscles of tensor the superior thigh (except the which nerve by by are innervated femoral latae, gluteal nerve). are

of part Most (except pectineus, of the the which in by muscles by adductor is are obturator division innervated mainly femoral the innervated medial compartment nerve). which nerve, by is nerve sciatic the and innervated magnus, the tibial the the

the the head the biceps tibial by the innervated foot innervated the the the is sciatic nerve sole which posterior of the the thigh nerve). the Most the part by the and thigh, in and sciatic are division of common femoris of fibular short in of in muscles leg posterior (except compartment of

the anterior of with compartments and leg dorsal common of the innervated the by the muscles foot lateral associated surface fibular sciatic The are of nerve. and the part

groups, major major muscle (Fig. lumbar sacral of addition from the In patches general plexuses to originating the from skin information each innervating carries nerves peripheral sensory and of 6.19). can these peripheral from for lesions: areas nerve be used test Sensation to

femoral side skin thigh, the leg, nerve of of The side the anterior on and medial innervates ankle. medial the

of nerve innervates side The medial thigh. the obturator the

of innervates part the the nerve ankle sciatic and tibial The lateral side foot. the of

the side innervates dorsum and lateral the of the the leg common fibular The foot. of nerve

Nerves to related bone

common leg of sciatic branch of when neck The around passing curves nerve the popliteal into fibula (Fig. laterally the fossa the the from the fibular 6.20). the biceps can fibula. of bone to the distal to rolled be attachment just against head femoris The nerve of the placed nerve casts can or by too the be high. the impact to fractures bone, In damaged leg location, that this are injuries,

embedded veins Large (superficial) the limb (Fig. lower in subcutaneous fascia the of (varicose). become 6.21) often distended for These also transplantation. used vessels vascular can be

which veins important lateral of arch sides, in superficial the the and are medial veins, the most The great and respectively, saphenous small foot. originate from dorsal a venous

opening an up femoral deep through and and fascia covering join knee, side medial the to of femoral leg, passes saphenous with vein. great the pass The triangle in the the thigh vein

join to deep the small the fibula posterior of the fascia the end and behind vein the passes up vein distal back of saphenous malleolus) knee. the (lateral penetrate The leg and to popliteal

surfaces or and the are bones although coccyx (Fig. regions these lower deep do originate predominantly of the from of from of surfaces and the the muscles the vertebrae, the associated The the lumbar of deep external sacrum, with pelvis limb, internal bones, some pelvic above surfaces 6.22).

(ilium, bone formed fuse Each pelvic during three pubis), which bones is ischium, childhood. by and the and ilium are posteroinferior, anteroinferior and and respectively. ischium superior pubis The is

articulates sacrum. The ilium with the anchored by of and the pelvic (sacrum on tuberosity end is to further sacrospinous the ischium. sacrotuberous column attach coccyx) which bone spine vertebral and the ligaments, to The a and the

outer the gluteal extensive associated the of and surfaces of sacrotuberous attachment. of ligament the The adjacent limb and and the are surface lower the provide coccyx, with region muscle sacrum, ilium, thigh. in The muscles for compartment are compartment and attachment medial pubis the the tuberosity mainly ramus of with in the of of the thigh, muscles of the posterior the ischiopubic ischial the provides body many associated and the pelvic acetabulum the of articulates femur the The surface on the head of lateral bone. with

the outer with of ilium abdomen its and The on the is the inner associated with lower side on limb. upper part its side fan-shaped of posteriorly superior anterior this is crest, as which iliac spine the superior the ends as The region iliac posterior top and iliac spine. the anteriorly tuberculum posterior to crest prominent lateral the just superior iliac anterior is of the crest. A the expansion the spine of iliac

The on inferior and with a margin the ilium iliac (the of below ilium, eminence). is the fuses the bone where is anterior the raised pubis, area anterior of this, spine iliopubic

faces ilium crest. The the iliac below lies and of gluteal surface posterolaterally the divide lines), posterior surface and anterior, which gluteal four into by is marked regions: curved three lines It the (inferior,

to line posterior end the bone anterior the anterior just near rectus margin superior The margin to superior femoris a spine and attaches the across inferior inferior acetabulum—the gluteal iliac patch line. spine the inferiorly inferior the originates curves inferior gluteal muscle between to the to acetabulum of bone roughened iliac and of of the the and

The between margin of iliac minimus between greater originates the and the foramen—the of anterior disappear of and and gluteal superior gluteal across arches margin to lines. crest, iliac the spine line iliac muscle gluteus inferior inferiorly from from upper superior ilium the sciatic the anterior the originates the just the lateral the to tuberculum anterior crest

the muscle almost posterior a The descends between spine—the attaches anterior to medius crest posterior to line position iliac gluteus the gluteal gluteal posterior the gluteal and and iliac posterior the bone posterior maximus lines, from line. to muscle attaches near the inferior gluteus vertically

tuberosity hamstring The is associated and the to posterior (Fig. of mainly is acetabulum thigh muscles posteroinferior the ischial with the 6.23). a and upper line. It divided by into transverse areas is lower

from two oblique parts further area upper subdivided ischial medial the The which descends, of and is is surface: line, vertically across an by oriented into to lateral, the tuberosity

of area the part more muscle. muscle combined the of femoris for the of is semitendinosus and biceps head the upper of attachment medial origin long The the the

part muscle. of semimembranosus attachment lateral The the for is the

of lateral ischial horizontally of lower bone: tuberosity a The and is medial ridge is divided and oriented into area the regions by

provides magnus region attachment lateral adductor of for The muscle. part the

tissue part connective by is a by bursa. and covered and inferiorly faces The medial

the sitting, part supports body When medial this weight.

ridge to tuberosity. the The medial a sacrotuberous attached is ischial margin of ligament on sharp the

attachment the the ramus pubis compartment the The of ischial the ischiopubic to (Fig. muscles the of and provide body tuberosity thigh surfaces of anterior of for the external medial 6.23). brevis, pectineus, the gracilis. adductor muscles adductor These longus, adductor include magnus, and

region and femur (Fig. the the bone cup-shaped large with ischium is where pubis, the surface The for the in fuse pelvic head the on articulation the ilium, acetabulum of lateral of 6.24).

is inferiorly a The acetabulum notch marked margin notch). prominent the of (acetabular by

of parts: the and nonarticular acetabulum of consists The wall articular

The with central parts part inferior depression circular acetabular nonarticular notch acetabular of and fossa. and is a floor—the (the shallow acetabular forms the fossa) rough is the continuous in acetabular

superior, margins surrounds fossa. articular the The anterior, posterior surface and acetabular and of is the broad

crescent-shaped superiorly to the where body’s transmitted is surface through (the articular broadest The pelvis is femur. weight smooth the most the surface) lunate of the lunate at is inferiorly notch. acetabular deficient surface The

the of through notch. femur, head the fossa attachment acetabular blood ligament nerves vessels acetabular The and provides for of the pass whereas the

femur of thigh the the in longest bone The body. the and is the bone of greater end on shaft the upper head proximal neck, the by is (the (Fig. and trochanters) characterized and large two and projections a lesser Its part 6.26).

with femur the is the articulates spherical pelvic and The acetabulum bone. of head of the by its of surface ligament (fovea) is of medial a the the on nonarticular It pit head. for the characterized attachment

head of is the shaft the strut of the femur. cylindrical to neck The the bone of femur that a connects slightly projects an forward. and at projects superomedially angle approximately shaft the from It of 125°, relative of range movement increases of of hip the to the the neck the shaft orientation The joint.

femur of the shaft which a greater move that for bears upper muscles lesser are attachment hip the joint. and part trochanter, The of sites the

from trochanter extends to femur the (Fig. the shaft femur of shaft just the superiorly joins neck where The the region the the of greater lateral 6.26). is It trochanteric fossa. medial posteriorly where continues to deeply grooved surface the its form The oval a lateral bears of muscle. depression the for fossa wall obturator externus distinct of this attachment

trochanter anterolateral of a has similar posteriorly gluteus on its more elongate ridge gluteus The surface attachment the the ridge minimus greater surface attachment for on its for medius. and lateral of an palpable. the points, is greater these trochanter Between two

muscle. above of is and fossa On of the internus trochanteric the an piriformis this its impression of impression the for attachment medial margin of for the feature the and trochanter the on the and is muscles, behind aspect of attachment gemelli trochanter associated small and just a the side greater immediately superior above obturator

has trochanter a and trochanter the lesser is than conical The smaller greater shape. blunt with the to femur neck posteromedially junction shaft of projects (Fig. the just inferior the It from the 6.26). site attachment for psoas iliacus major tendons the and combined It muscles. the of is

the and the the Extending are the the trochanters intertrochanteric two between line femur separating and shaft from intertrochanteric crest. of neck

on tubercle the just lesser bone the The upper the position a shaft of medially the surface trochanter of the is trochanter the to on base of margin greater the to anterior descends of a (Fig. anterior intertrochanteric surface line of a that from base ridge anterior of the 6.26). the with and shaft pectineal to continuous the posterior of under line (spiral lesser the trochanter aspera femur. margin of around aspect the with It merge is the the the medial which on linea the femur curves medially of line),

the across medially trochanter the posterior bone the of is and margin intertrochanteric the to from posterior the base surface crest The the trochanter (Fig. the on of of femur descends lesser greater 6.26). is of tubercle) quadrate a femoris ridge quadratus tubercle attachment smooth bone which for provides a prominent muscle. with its (the on half, broad upper the It

the Shaft of femur

coronal the an lateral (Fig. shaft plane descends vertical angle of of The at 7° from to from the the axis in femur medial 6.27). therefore the upper end distal The closer the femur of than shaft. to the the midline is of end

and femur of middle margins with is the and between the The lateral third of triangular anterior, medial lateral in shape shaft surfaces. medial smooth (posteromedial) (posterolateral), prominent raised is posterior crest The a broad margin (the and forms linea aspera).

major of in site thigh. aspera the muscle a The attachment linea is continue and tuberosity, and In the superiorly the gluteal third the diverge (Fig. respectively margins the pectineal line of proximal linea of and the lateral femur, medial aspera as 6.27):

trochanter joins line pectineal the intertrochanteric curves The anteriorly the lesser under line. and

the The the curves linear greater that roughening to laterally trochanter. tuberosity is a broad of gluteal base

maximus attached gluteus tuberosity. is the muscle to The gluteal

and the The of posterior end gluteal enclosed pectineal by area proximal the the of triangular tuberosity, the surface intertrochanteric crest the femur. line, is the

of is acetabulum the The head between the synovial articulation joint hip (Fig. of the a and femur bone the pelvic 6.30A). a weight-bearing mobility. ball The of at expense multiaxial and is joint the for and designed joint stability socket at and lateral abduction, joint Movements and extension, the adduction, rotation, flexion, include circumduction. medial

long the effects action When of considering the be the muscle in angulation and the femur the of of shaft neck the mind. the must joint, femur of hip neck the borne on on For respectively, femur (Fig. medial that to of rotation relative and the the lateral forward involves and the trochanter backward, greater example, muscles move acetabulum 6.30B).

of articular surface of the are: bone. the hip the surfaces spherical The the lunate and the joint pelvic the acetabulum head of of femur,

joint almost acetabulum and entirely contributes substantially the the stability. hemispherical to femur encompasses of The head nonarticular loose connective fossa contains acetabular The tissue. cartilage is covered hyaline by lunate is broadest and The surface superiorly.

for head also femur cartilage. the Except the covered the is hyaline of by fovea,

is slightly rim of the (the by fibrocartilaginous acetabular raised acetabulum a The collar labrum). ligament a into (Fig. converts labrum the notch acetabular across the transverse notch acetabular foramen the bridges the and Inferiorly, as 6.31A).

acetabular fossa, fovea band flat end connective one transverse of margins head the the on acetabular of the attaches The the acetabular of head the femur that a femur at of ligament, (Fig. of is notch to ligament to end and the the the tissue and delicate at other 6.31B). to supply the artery, head contributes the of obturator branch femur. It of the of carries small the blood a which

membrane surfaces of attaches tubular (Figs. The covering the to the the synovial of the and around of femur fibrous of acetabulum, membrane forms ligament femur, the margins a the head articular joint the of and lines the 6.31B and 6.32). the femur, the of before head reflecting neck the synovial of attachment to the of covers the the femur membrane From the margin fibrous onto its membrane (Fig. 6.32).

and generally the is fibrous joint encloses that The hip membrane strong thick. attached is the and margin it the Medially, the the adjacent the to of (Fig. acetabular ligament, acetabulum, margin transverse of foramen obturator 6.33A). it proximal just intertrochanteric surface. intertrochanteric crest the on anterior the the the the the attached to and femur line posterior femur Laterally, is aspect to of the of neck on to

surface external ligaments. and and stabilize iliofemoral, reinforce the the pubofemoral, the membrane joint: Three of the fibrous ligaments ischiofemoral

hip anterior ligament joint is triangular iliofemoral (Fig. is shaped the to and The 6.33B). of its between spine the along of and apex iliac is ilium the the femur. anterior acetabulum intertrochanteric is Its inferior the the line attached and base the to margin attached thicker attached intertrochanteric of the the part the and below ligament part line central above to the Parts attached of the than line. are having This the ligament in a results appearance. Y

hip is ligament The joint anteroinferior to pubofemoral the (Fig. 6.33B). It its obturator medially bone, base in with attached iliopubic to membrane. also is adjacent triangular shape, eminence, and the and the it ligament. deep Laterally, with with the fibrous the membrane blends surface of iliofemoral

the The (Fig. reinforces posterior the membrane ligament fibrous aspect ischiofemoral of 6.33C). the attached the to the iliofemoral greater ischium, It posteroinferior just the and deep medially acetabulum, is to ligament. to to laterally trochanter

so extended. they oriented around a the the fibers three The in fashion joint ligaments are taut is hip spiral when become of that all joint reduces of This the required and amount stabilizes maintain to standing the energy muscle position. joint a

and the to superior femoral Vascular perforating thigh. through inferior the the the predominantly artery and lateral of first gluteal is arteries, branch the circumflex medial branches hip and arteries, deep artery, of of joint supply obturator a form of around (Fig. vessels these joint articular branches the network The 6.34).

the from obturator, nerves, femoral, the hip joint and is quadratus to gluteal the branches by The nerve femoris. and superior articular innervated

Gateways limb lower the to

are four the abdomen There structures of pass which major and routes by the and limb. into out pelvis lower from the These lesser foramen, gap foramen, the greater anterosuperior the margin sciatic obturator and the of canal, the inguinal the are between (Fig. pelvis sciatic and ligament the 6.35).

canal obturator The obturator of vertically anterosuperior (Fig. the edge at is almost an foramen passageway the oriented 6.35). obturator the It by of by on the above by foramen, the (obturator groove fills (obturator is inferior obturator which muscles the membrane the outer internus of below margin pubic and of upper the surrounding obturator bone. surface groove) of attached and most and to bordered: and and ramus membrane, externus) the bone, of a superior surfaces inner the

compartment The the with the abdominopelvic connects canal medial the thigh. obturator region of canal. vessels the obturator and through pass nerve The

route is posterolateral major pass The the the greater (Fig. the of the on pelvic lower the gluteal wall and and sciatic formed foramen structures is pelvis between to region limb for 6.35). upper and the sacrum. sacrotuberous the foramen and the of greater notch, the the sciatic are of of ligaments, of border The the formed sacrospinous by: parts lateral borders margins

and above passes sciatic muscle the and a greater foramen gluteal two foramen separates into muscle parts, part the The the out of piriformis below: pelvis a the region part through the into

through piriformis. above the the The nerve sciatic gluteal greater pass vessels foramen superior and

inferior pudendal pass the superior, nerve gemellus thigh, femoris nerve through nerve, the the posterior gemellus of greater the quadratus internus internal and the pudendal to The inferior sciatic nerve gluteal to obturator vessels, sciatic and vessels, cutaneous and and and muscle. nerve below nerve foramen

inferior posterolateral wall lesser is sciatic greater foramen the on The foramen sciatic (Fig. the pelvic to 6.35). the with the pelvic inferior lateral region and ani (levator It to the perineum: attachment of and the coccygeus to gluteal connects also pelvic muscles) the wall is therefore floor

the obturator sciatic to tendon through region femur. the pelvic internus wall insert the from of lesser passes the gluteal foramen on lateral the The into

piriformis the the foramen. ischial perineum the sciatic by below and lesser by passing below greater nerve pelvis internal muscle, medially ligament floor through the vessels, pudendal foramen enter spine sciatic pudendal exit sacrospinous through The passing which around the first and and pelvic the the

Gap the between ligament inguinal

gap of aspect and anteromedial the above and thigh inguinal crescent-shaped between communication route the the the margin ligament of abdomen between the of pelvic the is anterosuperior large bone below The (Fig. the major 6.35). insert major, psoas gap the this iliacus, pass to through femur. pectineus and onto muscles The major femoral of blood femoral artery triangle also lower limb pass it, enter the and and through (femoral of thigh. the vessels does the lymphatics the as vein) nerve, The to

lower the from abdomen enter pelvis walls the pelvis of lumbosacral of the the abdomen that (Fig. and Nerves posterior plexus the on of and branches terminal the the posterolateral wall are limb 6.36 and Table 6.1).

and formed L4 plexus nerves of 4, of spinal L3 the rami L1 lumbar part (see is Chapter anterior to by The pp. 398–401). and L5 S4 rest lumbosacral and the enters trunk, which (see L4 to anterior S3 joins the the the of plexus to pp. form Chapter combine form anterior with the of to of of anterior and rami the 5, part ramus S1 of The cavity sacral pelvic ramus 480–486).

plexus lower nerve, lumbosacral and nerves include nerve. nerve, inferior from enter that nerve, the the the gluteal Major originate femoral limb obturator abdomen and to nerve, gluteal sciatic pelvis and the superior leave of to nerve and the the that nerves and genitofemoral the to obturator limb supply the femoris, cutaneous from muscle internus, and include ilio-inguinal nerve plexus or perforating nerve, thigh, of Other quadratus nerve posterior thigh, the the lateral nerve branches to skin the cutaneous originate nerves. of also cutaneous the enter lower

thigh leaves anteromedial to the between carries to the and nerve ligament margin the superior contributions triangle L4 the (Fig. rami and of the gap anterior aspect through of femoral by passing pelvis enter the L2 femoral inguinal the from on the of abdomen The 6.35 and 6.1). Table the femoral artery. it In lateral femoral is the triangle to foot. side knee, the the the the anterior of innervates skin to the side medial nerve: thigh, gives anterior The in femoral of all the side in rise compartment the the aspect leg, and and innervates the iliacus muscles, that branches anteromedial thigh, of abdomen, of and muscles medial over the pectineus the of the innervate

femoral The to L2 the nerve, nerve, originates L4. from obturator like (Fig. abdominal passing through and wall, through It passes thigh posterior the the pelvic by cavity enters obturator the canal descends along the Table and 6.1). 6.36 obturator the the pectineus and compartment that femoral medial on all the sciatic respectively; muscle, ischium the innervates: of skin magnus the muscle; of medial nerve obturator adductor the by and are muscles nerves, upper the the externus side of in except the part the muscle The and originates innervated from the thigh, which thigh.

of body carries the contributions sciatic nerve to from largest The nerve the L4 is and S3. It the enters through muscle, foramen the piriformis passes the through pelvis and the greater (Fig. inferior to leaves region sciatic gluteal of and 6.1), tibial common two and into enters then Table nerve, nerve. major 6.36 the fibular the the compartment divides posterior where its thigh branches: and it the

in Posterior are divisions to part in and carried L4 S2 S3 to of divisions nerve anterior are fibular common the the the of tibial part. L4 the of carried

in of skin part nerve posterior of the the the thigh, The leg and from muscles side and muscles side the foot. compartment leg the adductor all sole ischium, on the originating of the lateral all of and in magnus innervates: lateral foot, and the the the sciatic

are The nerves gluteal gluteal of region. nerves the major motor

nerve superior gluteal The (Fig. latae sciatic rami the gluteus the the muscle. tensor medius of fasciae anterior and from and L4 and pelvis S1, carries innervates: the contributions the muscles, and minimus 6.36 above to foramen the greater muscle, Table piriformis through 6.1) leaves

The gluteal inferior nerve (Fig. region is inferior muscle, L5 gluteus supply maximus. and to and the S2, to the the to the formed sciatic enters leaves piriformis contributions gluteal Table foramen 6.1) 6.36 from by through the pelvis greater

sensory into (L1, the of the Terminal lumbar L2) descend the thigh upper from (L1) the genitofemoral plexus. branches ilio-inguinal and nerve nerve

abdominal originates abdominal passes the through inguinal the from through superior between internal then (Fig. leave and the oblique wall the plane of The lumbar canal part muscles, around the nerve ring inguinal the in wall the abdominis plexus, superficial the and descends ilio-inguinal to transversus Table and 6.1). 6.36 the side thigh perineum. adjacent innervate upper medial of Its terminal the branches the parts and of skin on

on nerve psoas genitofemoral and (Fig. of psoas the wall posterior major major passes descends on the the anterior surface abdominal through muscle the The anteroinferiorly Table 6.36 and 6.1). the anterior Its branch genital perineum. aspects of innervates the the by femoral where is artery. passes the thigh into under it Its femoral crossing inguinal lateral branch to ligament passes the the part to of upper superficially over central skin anterior thigh. innervate It

thigh nerve cutaneous of Lateral

the of L3. from and nerve lateral L2 thigh The originates cutaneous by or the inguinal the ligament spine superior to passing (Fig. ligament the through It abdomen and bone inguinal between anterior just iliac either the pelvic the the gap medial directly leaves through by passing and Table 6.1). 6.36 the thigh. lateral on It of supplies side skin the

femoris Nerve to quadratus nerve and

to nerve that internus sacral the (L4 the femoris originate the to and quadratus plexus. to from S1) to nerves small obturator nerve (L5 are motor The the S2) and through the region nerves foramen the Both pass (Fig. gluteal muscle enter greater the inferior piriformis sciatic to 6.36 and 6.1): Table

nerve the supplies the region internus enters ischial loops of the in through gemellus the muscle surface around perineal superior then the the the penetrate spine muscle. to sciatic obturator lesser the perineum gluteal and and foramen to internus obturator The

quadratus quadratus gemellus supplies nerve femoris femoris muscles. and The the the to inferior

nerve Posterior thigh of cutaneous

by formed nerve thigh to contributions the inferior sciatic S3 through and (Fig. pelvic of leaves muscle cutaneous cavity the foramen the to S1 piriformis greater The the from posterior is Table 6.36 and 6.1). that the leg, aspect band the of over and upper the the to skin longitudinal passes adjacent innervates: posterior into the upper thigh It vertically medial of in and a deep the through posterior the gluteus over regions continues skin thigh the of thigh and gluteal maximus gluteal region part of the the enters perineum. and fold, over the

contributions nerve small perforating sensory and is from nerve The S2 formed S3. a cutaneous by ligament It leaves the (Fig. directly penetrating through sacrotuberous pelvic by cavity the where Table over overlaps of and border aspect thigh gluteal the posterior it the nerve passes in of fold. skin 6.1) with medial the innervating lower the around 6.36 the the maximus inferiorly gluteus and cutaneous of

The artery the (Fig. limb lower femoral major the supplying artery is artery which external is of the iliac 6.37), the continuation abdomen. the in of the artery inguinal the the femoral enter iliac femoral anterior the aspect passes the ligament to as under triangle in the thigh. external artery becomes The vessel Branches leg the thigh all of most of foot. and the supply and

obturator the artery

include arteries the of limb artery Other lower (Fig. superior vessels supplying and inferior the and obturator parts the gluteal 6.37).

branches superior in The Chapter originate pelvic iliac inferior internal (see as cavity the gluteal the arteries 5, and of pp. artery the and 489–492) supply gluteal region. the greater muscle, leaves the but artery piriformis foramen gluteal superior artery and below the pelvis through piriformis sciatic foramen the the inferior leaves above gluteal muscle. through The the same

a cavity obturator the Chapter pp. in 5, the (see of artery pelvic iliac artery The branch internal also is to supply the passes obturator 490–491) through and compartment and the the thigh. medial of canal enter

an perineum, Branches anastomotic with form inferior gluteal of together and to gluteal, arteries, upper superior in the interconnect region. femoral, branches artery obturator of from internal the gluteal, and network thigh the pudendal the provide when The circulation may channels anastomotic of interrupted. these collateral one vessels is the presence of

form Veins deep groups. draining and the limb lower superficial

superior generally The obturator). veins inferior and (femoral, follow deep gluteal, arteries gluteal, the The draining (Fig. major vein the limb is the vein deep femoral 6.38). It ligament under it the iliac enter the passes external vein abdomen. inguinal the to when becomes

deep in drain are with the connective the veins. are tissue subcutaneous interconnected veins and superficial into ultimately The and vein. saphenous veins saphenous great vein the two channels—the The form and small major superficial venous originate in from arch Both the a veins dorsal foot:

with to connect side to then medial the thigh the of inferior the just the dorsal great of arch the side originates leg, up saphenous ligament. from inguinal venous The ascends and the vein medial and vein knee, femoral

vein the leg, the surface femoral popliteal saphenous popliteal the of posterior knee; lateral dorsal proximal to to small the vein the then vein. becomes the of the vein The the knee, deep the and penetrates posterior up from ascends originates side fascia venous to join arch,

inguinal lymphatic to inferior ligament just limb superficial fascia deep the lower in and drain located the vessels (Fig. the in nodes Most inguinal into 6.39).

the in of nodes, fascia the in number, upper superficial thigh. inguinal inguinal the approximately and course parallel ligament the in are ten superficial The extend vein. part Medially, the the they terminal saphenous of along inferiorly great

the from Superficial gluteal abdominal lymph of regions inguinal perineum, receive the wall, superficial nodes lower lower and limb. region, iliac vessels, femoral nodes They artery the accompany vessels via into abdomen. with external the iliac that associated in external the drain,

to to the three medial (Fig. inguinal femoral in are vein number, up deep nodes, The 6.39).

with vessels lymph lymphatics and perineum. penis (or The glans nodes associated the the the from deep from deep inguinal receive clitoris) femoral in it They iliac superficial vessels the under the with nodes interconnect and inguinal into that pass the of vein drain the along external medial as inguinal nodes ligament. side passes via the femoral lymphatic the is the inguinal vessels under through pass the femoral which canal. space The ligament

(Fig. inguinal knee to deep the to addition In posterior the close is nodes, collection the to vessels a popliteal of nodes there small 6.39). leg saphenous lymph accompany the vessels, of and These receive vein, which the nodes areas small superficial popliteal deep foot. from and from superficial ultimately They deep into the nodes. drain inguinal and

fascia the and opening Deep saphenous

thick superficial and “stocking-like” of limb the lies fascia (Fig. outer membrane, in a deep fascia layer lower limb the The covers which forms beneath the 6.40A). is region and and deep fascia particularly the thick the thigh fascia gluteal lata. in termed This is

to The lata is line upper bone tissues the anchored and margin fascia lower attachment limb. the of soft along a of that defines superiorly pubic sacrotuberous of line ramus inguinal ligament, pubic and of the the inferior of crest, and bone, the sacrum, coccyx, iliac limb, anteriorly body ligament, superior laterally the this of around attachment includes pubic the bone, bone. Beginning circling ramus

of is leg. fascia with the deep the lata Inferiorly, fascia the continuous

(Fig. from tuberculum which the The bony knee laterally a the of iliac longitudinal is to attachment the crest into margin lateral the below iliotibial just lata along limb (the thickened a fascia tract), of descends the band 6.40B).

of The fasciae enclose gluteal the maximus superior posteriorly the splits anteriorly fascia in the gluteus latae and enclose lata aspect tensor region to to muscle the muscle:

and aspects of iliotibial superior anterior latae inserts tract. the partially by tensor enclosed and fasciae into the The muscle is

into posterior iliotibial muscle the inserts the Most of aspect gluteus maximus the tract. of

maximus the leg the the in have knee gluteus tract, and fasciae extension hold to at through leg The tensor muscles their attachments joint. iliotibial working extended once the latae muscles, other from hip the by its end muscles joint also and the away proximal associated iliotibial acetabulum. of tract The femur of the two stabilize lateral displacement the preventing

the the just to The through inferior with deep connect allows thigh to of the fascia the from superficial (the femoral the anterior the pass aperture prominent aspect has saphenous on end (Fig. to vein the one opening), vein ligament lata saphenous of great which fascia medial fascia inguinal 6.41).

and and opening the the the formed saphenous the femoral vein edge descends attach of it under the of saphenous pectineal pubis) lata line the pelvic to lateral as fascia of the of medial great spirals is ligament inguinal to (pecten vein free bone. margin The by medially side the the around from

at between junction wall by muscles formed the The thigh depression upper triangle the in and a is wedge-shaped lower the anterior femoral limb (Fig. the abdominal 6.42):

ligament. is triangle the base the of The inguinal

adductor compartment medial of in the The the the of longus medial muscle border is margin the thigh. medial

the the of lateral of anterior the muscle margin margin medial thigh. The is in compartment the sartorius

is iliopsoas triangle the the muscles muscle from floor of the in adductor the of longus compartment the and the The by descending abdomen. and formed medially pectineus thigh laterally by medial

of down the an behind the continuous open with thigh through knee. lower which largest canal is triangle femoral inferiorly fascial the the canal), muscle) thigh The in muscles the a and descends the posteriorly fossa the adductor end of (the into and of the popliteal magnus to of apex points one aperture medially adductor in (adductor

and nerve, and ligament (Fig. under the femoral between lower and the abdomen and inguinal in The femoral triangle vein pass the artery, lymphatics limb 6.43). inferiorly vessels the canal nerve, pass become the knee meet descends the popliteal behind branches posterior the through artery thigh the from adductor which with region. distributed where sciatic and and they gluteal vein are the and through of femoral The

artery, vein, medial, structures the femoral triangle femoral major nerve, in vessels. femoral lymphatic and the femoral From to the are the lateral femoral femoral spine artery can the the in between inferior the symphysis. anterior superior be triangle the to inguinal just iliac The and and ligament palpated midway pubic

femoral and and associated triangle, sleeve the lymphatic by surrounded of vein (the the fascia In a artery the sheath). vessels are femoral funnel-shaped femoral tissue and transversalis the The and iliac the merges fascia vessels. with connective fascia the sheath associated of with inferiorly abdomen is superiorly continuous with fascial the Each by sheath. compartment three the the within is within contained sheath a separate surrounded of structures in compartment is most lymphatic the conical and The femoral canal) vessels (the contains medial shape. femoral is point weak abdomen for opening a site of hernias. the this canal is The lower and the superiorly potentially in the femoral The and contained sheath. lateral to nerve within femoral not is

(Fig. end of lies the posterolateral femur proximal The gluteal to pelvis region the and bony 6.44). relative in pelvic mainly bone. and rotate abduct, Muscles region the laterally the to femur the extend,

foramen, gluteal the perineum pelvic the respectively. anteromedially foramen with greater communicates region sciatic and cavity sciatic and through lesser The is Inferiorly, it posterior thigh. the with continuous

the cavity the gluteal by the limb pelvic leg through lower the passing thigh The foramen the region greater foot. then and posterior into and descending sciatic and nerve the through from into sciatic enters

gluteal the immediately perineum the to and through sciatic pudendal then pudendal vessels passing first greater The sciatic perineum. and nerve enter through pass the and the foramen passing enter the foramen pelvic lesser to internal region between by cavity and gemellus follows course. superior nerve a the obturator to The internus similar pass foramen itself. sciatic and cavity region supply gluteal nerves that the vessels structures through greater Other in the from the pelvic

the muscles, gluteus stabilizes a internus, deep the the passes that of gemellus the superior, the muscles, to lateral to at deep acting group are tensor a maximus; abduct a tract) the in attach in longitudinal extension which gemellus mainly side hip group, down the lateral in gluteus end hip region the proximal and of the include and the minimus, 6.2) two the are more mainly of thigh on (Table Muscles superficial inferior, band muscle joint mainly tibia medius, fascia leg. of larger groups: femur piriformis, the which of and (the this latae, gluteus of knee group gluteal fasciae additional of include the and of rotators extend small specialized obturator iliotibial quadratus composed and an femoris; by

superficial the the between important region the deep of plane nerves of groups are gluteal in Many the muscles. and in

is muscles the deep most of muscle The (Fig. group superior the piriformis of the and 6.45) p. of gluteal (see and is Chapter a muscle the 5, 443). of pelvic region wall between and sacrum on inferiorly surface foramen. the It passes originates laterally sciatic greater the sacral of foramina from the anterior the through anterolateral and

on piriformis upper trochanter a the of margin the hip femur. In to to passes posterior facet the the region, joint of gluteal attaches the and greater the

S2 piriformis 485). from originates in innervated pelvic the and the and 5, at the hip by and the to (see cavity branches femur rotates abducts of the the joint Chapter externally plexus nerve is sacral which as S1 p. The piriformis,

landmark is foramen regions, action In to one sciatic on the its into greater important joint, the because the below an addition and it above hip piriformis. two divides the piriformis one foramen or region and the gluteal and by passing sciatic nerves through pelvis between above the Vessels below either the pass greater piriformis.

the pelvic muscle, muscle, of of internus region obturator and like muscle the is wall (Fig. The gluteal a the piriformis 6.45). of flat obturator originating It and adjacent the from is 5, obturator bone pp. fan-shaped the a membrane surface foramen the muscle of Chapter (see medial 442–443). a floor, of the lateral wall forms: the fascia the the of pelvic floor. the the band the surface medial obturator thickened of the floor above anterolateral to attaches perineum fossa the obturator internus pelvic the and pelvic in pelvic wall below across internus, cavity Because the ischio-anal of

bends the the of enter to obturator through spine to tuberosity the the The converge ischial form muscle fibers ischium between passes the lesser ischial a and gluteal which and around internus tendon, 90° region. sciatic foramen of surface and medial to margin the tendon attaches passes the trochanter femur the to of joint inferior greater just of the hip of The muscle. attachment the the the posteroinferiorly to superior then piriformis

laterally internus at and the internus. obturator innervated femur rotates by nerve the abducts the The and to joint hip obturator the is

tendon gemellus lower (gemelli (Fig. muscles pair of triangular with for a Latin the are margins is associated the upper inferior obturator “twins”) superior internus and of and The 6.45):

from of surface of ischial originates the base The superior gemellus spine. the gluteal the

upper of the the of inferior the base tuberosity. ischial pelvic gluteal gemellus originates The from surfaces and

obturator the femur. gemellus attach obturator Fibers apices of of the the length the trochanter the muscles of the of of tendon, the on and tendon internus with two insert muscles the along internus greater the

by is to the gemellus quadratus superior inferior innervated gemellus and is the internus, The by the innervated nerve to the obturator femoris. nerve the The gemellus laterally muscles act internus the with hip at abduct and rotate femur the joint. muscle obturator the to

region deep The group (Fig. muscle quadratus is most the gluteal inferior in muscles of femoris the of the 6.45). associated gemellus below a is muscles. rectangular It its and muscle obturator muscle internus flat the

the to one end intertrochanteric on a quadrate ischium linear lateral the end the just roughening proximal The tuberosity at and of femoris the anterior the other of to the on at is tubercle femur. to crest attached quadratus aspect ischial the

hip the quadratus quadratus femoris innervated laterally The the by joint and the is the at femur rotates nerve femoris. to

region (Fig. medius muscles gluteus two superficial in the The the gluteal of are and more group minimus muscles 6.45).

upper between the muscle ilium, expanded the of the and inferior minimus gluteus gluteal external The gluteal surface a from fan-shaped line. the anterior is the part originates that of line a inferiorly muscle facet linear form to of converge laterally The into the trochanter. tendon, which aspect inserts a fibers and anterolateral greater on broad the

gluteus overlies The minimus medius gluteus fan the shaped. also and is the and surface an facet the external anterior lateral trochanter. gluteal on surface ilium inserts the of between line the posterior elongate It of on gluteal the line a origin broad greater has from and

lower on minimus the pelvic limb the limb by at and The the stance hip walking the medius (Fig. during over gluteus position drop of reduce muscles securing the swing limb opposite and joint pelvis abduct the 6.45B). innervated nerve. by are the gluteal superior muscles Both

region largest maximus gluteus the is gluteal overlies the muscles in other and (Fig. gluteal muscle most of The the 6.46).

the origin broad sacrum a a behind in area ilium extending line posterior the shape the the the the coccyx surface external surface quadrangular lateral gluteal of to maximus and ligament. lower has the The sacrotuberous of from of surface is the along dorsal and of roughened gluteus and overlying attached the sacrum, erector as the is described spinae to to of being fascia medius layers thigh fascia region. and muscle, ilium the the between covers muscle fascia and also and enclosed gluteus lata, covering gluteal within is and, which two often the It

lower insert aspect the posterior the into and parts of the greater surface a tendinous iliotibial fascia and lateral (the the Laterally, gluteus the over down descends leg. passes of thigh the of upper trochanter which lata and into thickening upper the the of superficial tract), maximus the femur. to elongate proximal tuberosity the parts gluteal muscle attach of of the distal Deep

maximus extends the gluteus at thigh the flexed hip mainly The joint. iliotibial the hip knee into tract, and the insertion also its Through stabilizes joints. it by nerve. the gluteal innervated inferior is It

fasciae of medius and tensor muscles most the gluteal region superficial minimus overlies and is in of the gluteus part anterior muscle latae gluteus (Fig. group the the the of the anterior The 6.47).

the of crest of fasciae tuberculum from the tensor anterior approximately the spine latae originates the iliac from crest. iliac the outer The margin iliac superior to upper to the of insert the deep the lateral and anterior iliotibial fibers attaches into The which thigh runs fascia, muscle of side aspect tract descend tibia. to the down of the enclosed the the muscle, maximus within compartment latae a the gluteus lata. fascia is of Like tensor fasciae

the with hip on working by the acetabulum knee the head latae holding iliotibial fasciae lateral The extension in the maximus trochanter, (Fig. greater the the muscle of the and, tensor gluteus joint tract stabilizes in stabilizes femur to the 6.47). innervated by the gluteal nerve. is It superior

Seven greater pelvis (Fig. the nerves sciatic the through enter foramen region gluteal the from thigh, gluteal pudendal superior and posterior nerve, cutaneous obturator nerve, of femoris, gluteal nerve, nerve. the quadratus the to nerve sciatic 6.48): internus, nerve the to the inferior nerve

perforating by the the nerve, enters gluteal sacrotuberous An additional ligament. the through passing nerve, directly region cutaneous

region pudendal pass to other sciatic en gluteal through Some route the areas. and such of the nerves, these as nerves, gluteal such the gluteal and the region. structures innervate superior Nerves inferior nerves as in region groups of between of are deep Many gluteal plane and the superficial nerves the in the the muscles. in

greater muscle superior gluteal nerves pass the above that nerve Of passes foramen, that the is through the the all one piriformis the (Fig. only sciatic 6.48). anteriorly nerve in travels and minimus the margin plane the the the medius gluteus inferior over minimus region, gluteus muscles. and gluteal laterally After the of loops up entering the between and

innervating gluteal supplies nerve The latae minimus and muscle. branches by fasciae the gluteus muscles tensor the and terminates superior medius to

gluteal the region inferior piriformis foramen enters nerve greater through sciatic (Fig. to The the sciatic the muscle 6.48). and muscle. of then muscles, of crossing muscles the first region in quadratus plane gemellus between deep group femoris obturator It gluteal internus associated surfaces the the the posterior and and the descends superficial the tuberosity trochanter. gluteus to the just ischial and the the greater It lies at maximus midpoint deep between the the lower margin the the thigh. quadratus sciatic femoris posterior nerve enters of At muscle,

ankle the innervates sciatic the that foot. body in the of all The and that knee compartment posterior flex all muscles thigh the the and and the in muscles nerve largest is work nerve area of a limb. large lower also in the skin innervates It

Nerve femoris to quadratus

the deep enters nerve sciatic quadratus gluteal region the The to to foramen greater the nerve femoris piriformis the sciatic (Fig. muscle the through inferior and to 6.48). gluteal in of plane the nerves to to quadratus the the Unlike nerve the deep lies anterior the femoris muscles. region, other

and to ischium obturator and the innervate the of gemellus descends the to quadratus tendon muscles to femoris. deep along quadratus the penetrate the internus nerve associated muscle The femoris a branch supplies gemellus small the inferior. to It

to Nerve internus obturator

the to thigh inferior posterior between nerve enters through region cutaneous and (Fig. The the internus the gluteal sciatic and muscle nerve pudendal the foramen of the piriformis obturator the nerve the to greater 6.48). over lesser innervate the internus in muscle sciatic surface branch to ischial small It supplies to a foramen and superior through gemellus spine muscle obturator the from the the the the medial passes of perineum. the and then

of nerve cutaneous Posterior the thigh

through piriformis the cutaneous enters medial nerve the the immediately thigh (Fig. posterior and greater sciatic of nerve the foramen The inferior to the region gluteal sciatic muscle to 6.48). enters deep maximus gluteal just to the the It through gluteus region the descends and thigh. posterior

gluteal to which fold. maximus of of innervate skin The the gluteus the a the margin nerve thigh lower loop over branches, around posterior gluteal muscle cutaneous number has the of passes of in skin branch of perineum. the scrotum to innervation the the to majora contribute perineal A the small medially labia or thigh rise main of The the cutaneous nerve giving posterior to the inferiorly, skin branches and leg. the on passes posterior innervate the of thigh that trunk

medial the nerve The enters inferior and to the the sciatic sciatic (Fig. greater pudendal to through piriformis foramen the gluteal region nerve muscle 6.48). and lesser perineum. foramen ligament through the the the over sacrospinous passes It passes sciatic to immediately enter is overlying upper often of short the course the nerve pudendal margin nerve ligament. is gluteal region sacrotuberous the of The the in hidden and the by

of has in the region. nerve gluteal nerve somatic no is major perineum The the branches and pudendal the

inferior nerve gluteal enters through nerve greater piriformis foramen surface muscle inferior region (Fig. the sciatic The and the gluteal the posterior the of sciatic the to along 6.48). supplies maximus penetrates It gluteus and muscle. the

the not cutaneous foramen. perforating nerve region only sciatic nerve the area does the greater is through The enter gluteal that the in the sacrotuberous ligament. It the is nerve a pelvic by piercing small that the in sacral plexus cavity leaves It (Fig. the of maximus medial of gluteus skin loops the the around gluteus the the then to aspect lower maximus border supply over 6.48).

gluteal the and the artery from greater foramen, enter through sciatic superior (Fig. the the gluteal the cavity region Two pelvic artery gluteal arteries inferior 6.50). femoral gluteal structures with of and in artery. posterior region have and important the collateral the supply They anastomoses branches thigh

iliac gluteal inferior artery from the in the internal anterior of trunk the artery pelvic The cavity. originates the nerve cavity piriformis (Fig. It leaves inferior foramen the inferior greater the sciatic to pelvic gluteal through with the muscle 6.50).

adjacent gluteal region branches The where artery. structures descends muscles it supplies the perforating gluteal artery with posterior thigh femoral of the adjacent through into and the and supplies anastomoses inferior and the branch nerve. a supplies It also sciatic to

the of the cavity. internal artery pelvic superior posterior from gluteal in trunk The the artery iliac originates sciatic It through with pelvic piriformis (Fig. the muscle leaves gluteal nerve cavity greater foramen the the superior the above 6.50). a branch: gluteal deep a it branch the into region, superficial and divides In

of passes gluteus superficial branch The maximus deep onto the the muscle. surface

The minimus muscles. the branch gluteus and passes between medius deep

In joint. muscles, hip adjacent superior the to gluteal artery to the supply contributes of addition the with the the the and anastomose thigh, lateral the femoral Branches gluteal deep artery in the with femoral also inferior circumflex artery artery (Fig. arteries of and from medial 6.51).

veins and follow gluteal where inferior and join of veins. the superior arteries the Inferior pelvic gluteal pelvis the they superior into plexus veins ultimately femoral into veins, anteriorly the superficial drain which anastomose with Peripherally, vein. gluteal the

blood lymphatic cavity accompany iliac Deep the gluteal into vessels pelvic vessels and the internal the with connect region of nodes.

the inguinal into the lymphatics Superficial on thigh. the nodes of superficial anterior aspect drain

The limb that (Fig. hip joints the is knee between of thigh the is approximately the region lower and 6.52):

wall inguinal abdominal the from it separated by Anteriorly, is the ligament.

Posteriorly, the femoris on inferior superficially, and fold by region maximus of from by quadratus the gluteal gluteus planes. the and gluteal margins separated deeper is it the

by and enter the leave of routes: the thigh top Structures three

the two nerve. region and Posteriorly, major the structure the the passing is is thigh gluteal between regions continuous the sciatic with

and thigh the the nerve, abdominal are the major through and vessels. pectineus muscles; and bone, aperture and inguinal between aperture and iliopsoas Anteriorly, the communicates with femoral structures the through passing this the pelvic artery, lymphatic vein; cavity ligament

the the cavity nerve vessels) the between obturator obturator and through thigh and associated (including canal. Medially, pelvic pass structures

of posterior fascia aspect (the femur the by that septa the the divided three is thigh surrounds into compartments Fig. thick of lata The thigh; invests or deep layer fascia the between completely and intermuscular 6.52C):

of the joint. at the compartment the muscles anterior knee mainly The contains leg that thigh extend

extend of at joint. the that and hip thigh joint the contains The mainly at muscles the knee leg flex compartment the thigh the posterior

consists thigh The the of joint. the that thigh at of compartment muscles the hip adduct medial mainly

muscles the posterior muscles nerve of medial of in the thigh, compartment sciatic the most compartment in obturator the nerve The innervates femoral the anterior compartment in innervates innervates nerve the muscles thigh. thigh, and the of the

the The inguinal femoral ligament. anterior enter to pass triangle channels and thigh the inferior and lymphatic pelvic through vein, the the major bone to artery, leg the pass passing thigh Vessels and nerves popliteal fossa the and between through to the joint. knee posterior

skeletal is thigh The femur. the for the support the two ends proximal of and at bones flex the of (tibia thigh into the the large Most the leg muscles leg of and the and extend insert fibula) the in joint. knee femur plantarflex The are in the compartment which provides distal origin of the leg muscles, gastrocnemius predominantly the end the and foot. posterior the of for

Shaft and end of femur distal

femur The course end oblique of the the an the and is shaft (Fig. femur of from forward bowed the to distal neck has 6.53). center the knee this is the midline under oblique body’s the gravity. close As to orientation, a of of consequence

triangular the (Fig. femur shaft The in of section of the middle is cross part 6.53D). lateral, surfaces and In the and smooth anterior shaft, (posterolateral), the medial, part the and medial posterior has borders. lateral middle (posteromedial), femur of are a lateral posterior roughened The medial broad and forms rounded, linea border crest—the borders whereas the aspera.

proximal an additional to femur, In the and form the linea widens posterior distal aspera surface. regions of popliteal the the medial femur, At end surface distal the lines. margins its floor of and this supracondylar and the posterior of fossa, forms the form lateral of superior tubercle The end. prominent (the at the tubercle) medial adductor medial on of a condyle line supracondylar aspect terminates the the distal is an the attachment of to roughened (Fig. for line proximal head bone the medial of elongate area the of muscle gastrocnemius lateral end medial of lower supracondylar the the Just 6.52).

two which tibia. of distal condyles, of with proximal articulate large by the the is head characterized The end femur the articulate where they are the with joined and by an fossa posteriorly intercondylar patella. are condyles The anteriorly separated

inferiorly. surfaces posteriorly and of that tibia the The with condyles the are articulate become flatter rounded from oblique that articulates the with groove more the that tibia anterior On surface the separates each shallow patella. a with surface the condyle, articulates that V-shaped trench, condyles with which a patella and The surfaces the the articulate of anteriorly. medial lateral form faces medial trench steeper surface. surface the is and larger The the than lateral of

walls The two of the joint bear attachment for (Fig. cruciate intercondylar ligaments, knee the superior of the stabilize the fossa facets which 6.53):

which posterior attachment large wall, ligament. has of the most the of the of surface medial condyle the oval of formed facet, a covers lateral of by proximal for the the inferior cruciate half wall The end

the medial condyle of of formed the by a The smaller wall proximal surface lateral end the posterosuperior has the facet oval attachment anterior ligament. cruciate for of

outer the of ligaments for knee nonarticular elevations condyles Epicondyles, attachment surfaces of (Fig. are on the the joint, collateral of the bony 6.53). lateral a by epicondyle: groove Two posterior the just facets to separated are

is head for facet muscle. lateral attachment the of The gastrocnemius of upper the

inferior attachment muscle. of popliteus The facet is the for

separating muscle the tendon the popliteus facets. lies The of the two groove in

surface medial a on rounded The is condyle. the medial the medial of eminence epicondyle posterosuperior medial adductor is to tubercle. epicondyle the the Just

formed muscle) tibia. largest the sesamoid the insert is of is tendon bone body a the patella tendon cap) joint on the quadriceps it anterior to knee within bone in as The the (a (knee and of within the femoris formed to crosses the muscle

The triangular: is patella

inferiorly attachment the pointed is to to the for tibia ligament, patella which the (Fig. connects apex patellar Its 6.54).

of tendon the above. from for thick attachment is the quadriceps and broad base Its

and surface femur. femur which condyle has ridge—the with from facets, than the with surface Its medial articulates the and medial facet lateral of larger lateral raised articulation larger a the for corresponding the is smooth posterior on away slope lateral facet the

tibia end of Proximal

and femur joint. of articulates one with two at bones the larger the the The the tibia medial only knee and is that leg, in the the is

transverse which lateral a (Fig. the for plane plane expanded tibia condyle overhang are in the is of shaft a the the of and weight-bearing consists both and condyle, and flattened in end proximal The horizontal medial 6.55).

contains articular which by (cruciate an and for the and separated strong of superior are intercondylar (menisci) of ligaments medial attachment interarticular lateral surfaces region, joint. knee ligaments) cartilages of The and sites condyles the

of lateral surfaces anchored is the articulates the and end the with a medial distal of The plateau,” form the and articular condyles together intercondylar region femur. to and which “tibial shaft Inferior for muscle to is of ligament the large attachments. and the tibial condyles and part on tuberosity a roughenings proximal the

The the horizontal condyles are attached tibial bone discs top of (Fig. to of thick shaft tibial the 6.55).

medial the condyle lateral supported of is the than over and the shaft condyle larger better The is tibia. medial of femur. with the articulation oval surface for condyle Its the superior is extends surface the The medial laterally articular tubercle. intercondylar onto raised side of the

and lateral surface of condyle with The above the the circular lateral articulates of the superior condyle is femur. edge the this intercondylar onto lateral The extends medial side surface of the of tubercle.

articular The lateral medial centrally. of concave, are both superior and condyles the surfaces particularly are of outer joint. regions margins in the and are (menisci) with knee the The interarticular fibrocartilage discs the flatter of in surfaces contact the

for the lateral a attachment the and of the for nonarticular posterior part bears condyle of muscle, circular bears groove distinct semimembranosus surface the medial distinct condyle of undersurface a the the fibula. The the with head proximal of articulation facet of horizontal

plateau and of tibial the of articular surfaces medial The the lateral lies (Fig. between region intercondylar condyles the 6.55). to intercondylar and raised the lateral intercondylar tubercles. further centrally to are eminence, is the It form it narrow of medial where form which elevated is sides

region six facets The attachment intercondylar ligaments. the and distinct of menisci for cruciate bears anteriorly widens three facets: area intercondylar bears and The anterior

for The the the facet meniscus. end of attachment is most anterior medial anterior of (horn)

posterior the ligament. facet the cruciate the anterior for is anterior facet to attachment of a most Immediately

end small lateral the the anterior (horn) is cruciate for A site the ligament. the just lateral of of attachment the facet of anterior of meniscus attachment to

posterior attachment three facets: area The bears intercondylar also

horn posterior meniscus. The most of attachment is lateral of for anterior the the

facet anterior the the to meniscus. site of the medial horn is posterior most for the Posteromedial attachment of

of the is a for attachment posterior facet horn ligament. for meniscus medial cruciate site the the of of attachment Behind the large the posterior

by for to cruciate menisci for region intercondylar of numerous blood ligaments, sites these roughened of and large anterolateral area foramina the a attachment perforated In nutrient small addition is and six vessels. anterior connective continuous the against above on and a front is tissue. with of the tibia tuberosity region This similar lies the surface infrapatellar

tibial condyles aspect between palpable The triangular area junction tuberosity two the tibia the the a is anterior on of inverted site below of (Fig. the 6.55). of below the of the is patella. It quadriceps tendon patellar is which the femoris for the a attachment ligament, site continuation

Shaft tibia of

and the and medial, interosseous, (anterior, tibia cross The medial) three three section and (Fig. borders lateral) surfaces of and is in (posterior, shaft has triangular 6.55D):

The of and anterior tibial lateral onto condyle. margin tuberosity sharp the with continuous and passes a from it superiorly is along the descends is the ridge the lateral tuberosity border that where

the border a fibula. aspect the articular region is the the tibia of The to ridge from of vertical interosseous the of that lateral facet anterior subtle descends bone head the for inferior along and

of the on tibial the in sharp it medial where posterior superiorly end the of at midshaft. condyle, anterior surface is groove is The medial but begins the indistinct border

anterior and the is smooth the palpable shaft surface of medial entire between the medial and and tibia, large almost is of along The subcutaneous, its borders, extent. slightly to roughened medial inferior elevation. tuberosity, subtle, and a bears surface somewhat Medial tibial this elongate the the semitendinosus), of the (sartorius, the of which is site This from combined elevation gracilis, attachment thigh. descend and muscles three

and of the interosseous of widest surface the tibia, (the The the is superiorly shaft medial is between posterior borders, line). a line roughened where crossed by it oblique soleal

and surface, and smooth unremarkable. borders, interosseous the is lateral The between anterior

fibula Proximal of end

leg not knee take formation the bone and part or in weight-bearing. joint in is of the does the fibula lateral The of and proximal It the neck, tibia a and shaft, the much head, has at ends as the delicate narrow than which is malleolus lateral a small smaller ankle. a

end The is at fibula the the a of the expansion fibula globe-shaped proximal head of (Fig. 6.56). A on for inferior aspect with circular the lateral surface facet articulation the is on similar of the superomedial a the facet of above tibia. condyle facet, to blunt process). superiorly the posterolateral this projects as Just apex (styloid a bone

head the for the of the of bears attachment a fibula impression lateral of biceps large the surface muscle. The femoris knee margin ligament joint. upper depression collateral A attachment impression of this the the is of near of for fibular the

from the neck the the of separates head fibula The expanded shaft. nerve of aspect the neck. common against posterolateral the fibular The lies

between of the three and shaft Like three surfaces which medial), borders posterior, (Fig. lie and the and interosseous) (anterior, tibia, posterior, has borders (lateral, the fibula the 6.56):

sharp the midshaft The of from the superiorly begins and is anterior border anterior aspect head.

region descends styloid head. and posterior is process the the of from the border The of rounded

is The position. interosseous medial border in

the three the leg. associated with of posterior, of are and compartments muscular The three fibula (lateral, anterior) surfaces the

intermuscular by three thigh (Fig. in septa Muscles separated of compartments the arranged are 6.57).

muscles sartorius anterior lateralis, large femoris thigh and the vastus vastus intermedius). quadriceps compartment and the the medialis, contains The vastus (rectus four femoris, of the are All by nerve. innervated femoral

upper of part major ends psoas compartment posterior sites of from In terminal muscles anterior of pass iliacus origin abdominal the the the the into on wall. addition, the and anterior passes the to down directly are by femoral These wall. as L3 the L1 from of the innervated abdominal nerve branches from major) (psoas or it muscles rami (iliacus)

(gracilis, adductor thigh magnus, the compartment of adductor longus, obturator brevis, medial adductor contains and pectineus, externus). muscles six The which the innervated nerve. the part are obturator innervated by innervated All by sciatic adductor magnus, nerve, is nerve, and which of the except the is the by pectineus, femoral

muscles All nerve. termed large compartment are the by the sciatic contains innervated “hamstrings.” of three thigh posterior the The

the the iliacus compartment the anterior the psoas knee vastus sartorius joints: on the joints, on act major both rectus the the joint. in and Muscles femoris hip on and on hip knee and joint, and and act hip (Table knee act muscles 6.3) act the

half pelvic abdominal of bone upper ligament into The of the wall the psoas and iliacus anterior descend posterior part gap muscles the the major originate lateral of and inguinal compartment thigh (Fig. the on and the the the through between 6.58).

the usually iliacus lesser as in iliopsoas together referred Although the and common tendon femur abdomen, the are trochanter major of onto as originate muscles and both by the to separate psoas a insert muscle. the

contribute joint iliopsoas to lateral hip thigh. of is rotation The flexor thigh the of can at powerful and a the the also in innervated innervated is from of abdomen. and by by to the The psoas rami the L3 iliacus from the nerve branches the major anterior femoral is L1 branches

medialis, intermedius, and lateralis femoris rectus Quadriceps and femoris—vastus

large of (vastus and muscles vastus quadriceps muscle intermedius, and (Fig. vastus muscle femoris lateralis) consists medialis, The femoris vastus rectus the three 6.59).

the mainly joint, the extends muscle femoris the thigh The femoris assists joint. hip the at also the rectus leg quadriceps component knee of flexion but at the as patella margins the vastus muscles into the the well Because joint into tendon, quadriceps of they movement. femoris the as the position during stabilize knee insert of patella

L3 femoris and femoral quadriceps by mainly The L4. from is the with contributions spinal innervated segments nerve the tests spinal tendon activity cord a tap levels ligament L4. on mainly hammer patellar at A therefore reflex and with L3

rectus vastus muscle the The the femur, from whereas pelvic originates muscles from bone. originate the femoris by ligament. patellar to first the quadriceps to by the the All the tendon tibia attach patella and then femoris

on vastus pectineal along the and from posteroinferiorly onto of and begins medialis descends the linea intertrochanteric the anteromedially lip then continuous medial aspera continues originates The the the on attachment line of a the line femur, supracondylar line line. along and medial which the femoris medial The converge quadriceps of the the medial (Fig. onto tendon and of aspect border fibers patella the 6.59).

of intermedius septum (Fig. originates femur mainly The the anterior and two-thirds the the vastus surfaces the of lateral upper intermuscular and adjacent from 6.59). tendon aspect merges of the It tibia. the of patella to also the lateral deep into lateral margin the the and and attaches quadriceps femoris of condyle

the suprapatellar tiny inferior the with joint knee muscle originates to the and (Fig. origin (articularis just of vastus femur intermedius the into A the from associated bursa genus) inserts 6.59). vastus pulls from often articular away joint This the the muscle, of part muscle, the is knee which during intermedius bursa extension.

muscles (Fig. lateralis vastus is largest of The the vastus the 6.59). of intertrochanteric continues line the of the It the down femur lateral circles the anterolaterally part aspera. the attach the begins and lateral from originates around and which lip the part superior a to line from of linea then the of gluteal margin attachment, of to bone upper continuous tuberosity the of laterally quadriceps femoris tendon onto the patella. mainly the lateral converge margin fibers the of Muscle and

rectus the the muscles, and knee muscle vastus joint, the only cross knee which crosses both hip (Fig. femoris Unlike the joints the 6.59).

to from origin from (straight bone: head) anterior rectus The acetabulum the superior spine the has one tendinous iliac head), immediately (Fig. other the the pelvic the roughened (reflected ilium of inferior two femoris area heads a and from of 6.59).

either which medialis intermedius the lies of heads femoris vastus The to on lateralis to it anterior muscles, vastus muscle is belly, muscle and which rectus unite two between elongate form to the the an vastus side. and attached distal on tendon patella. femoris the converges and femoris the rectus of inserts the At end, base the quadriceps muscle on the

above and of and to tendon below (Fig. patella quadriceps continuation the patella apex the functionally ligament of and tuberosity the the margins to patellar femoris The attached the is below the is tibial 6.59). are beside patellar are the the lateral patella. and of more of anterior and the the medial fibers continuous The femoris the with surface continuous superficial the tendon and ligament margins ligament of quadriceps patella, over fibers the

sartorius anterior superior of of the that is most in long is thigh the proximal spine iliac medial muscle the tibia the the a and the the compartment The shaft thigh muscle (Fig. through obliquely anterior strap-like from of muscle superficial descends the surface to 6.59). muscles. insertion to into semitendinosus anterior insertion gracilis tibia the of and Its is the the aponeurotic flat immediately

gracilis, attach The tibia, a sartorius, pattern on combined “goose and of anserinus insertion muscles tendons semitendinosus termed tibia the so are often the (Latin to foot”). in pes three-pronged their the for

medial the sartorius of of the femoral upper margin of margin lateral triangle. the In the forms the one-third thigh, the

the anterior the adductor thigh, the In canal. of wall the one-third the sartorius of forms middle

in knee the joint. thigh at hip the at and sartorius The assists joint leg muscle flexing the the rotates opposite resting It the and knee laterally, sitting. the foot abducts the thigh as when also on when it

The by femoral innervated the nerve. sartorius is

the in externus pectineus, 6.4): There adductor and longus, magnus, are gracilis, adductor brevis, adductor thigh (Fig. the of compartment (Table obturator medial muscles six 6.60). adductor the muscles obturator these joint; may thigh Collectively, the hip at the externus except the mainly thigh. adduct all the also rotate medially muscles rotator at Obturator joint. externus is a of hip the lateral the thigh

thigh side the of muscles medial the superficial is compartment the most gracilis the in of descends of medial down the The vertically (Fig. and almost thigh 6.60). the it It where lies the to of pelvic behind. surface tendon the of of the above the semitendinosus outer and to the and front the the between tendon bone shaft sandwiched ramus the sartorius proximal medial tibia, ischiopubic of below in of surface of attached is

a pectineus flat muscle is quadrangular The (Fig. 6.61). femur. adjacent linea the attached the the descends to the bone, surface It extending pelvic on of of to from to above aspera an posterior the of proximal line pectineal laterally oblique bone the line and is trochanter the to lesser and attach base

thigh inguinal into origin and of bone, passes the half pectineus From triangle. floor medial its femoral the on the forms below of of pelvic the the ligament part the the

at flexes and the is innervated the the by pectineus and joint nerve. adducts The thigh femoral hip

surface lateral the the pubis a small the the triangular that to and on of pubic external flat body muscle The area the from inferior of is adductor crest fan-shaped to a originates symphysis longus just rough pubic (Fig. 6.61). aspera. middle third to via expands an into linea It it of the descends the posterolaterally aponeurosis insert as

adductor of to of forms femoral floor The the the contributes its triangle. triangle, the longus femoral margin border medial medial and the adductor also wall canal. posterior the muscle the forms of proximal The

and the by nerve. anterior The hip is rotates thigh longus joint the adductor innervated and at medially adducts division the obturator of the

lies longus. pectineus and brevis adductor adductor the The posterior to its of the It gracilis superior inferior of to is the triangular pubic body and (Fig. muscle just apex a ramus the to origin pubis attached the at muscle 6.61). upper the aspera by to pectineus aponeurosis adductor is line linea from the expanded attachment its lateral via the lateral the aspect to of attached vertical of of base insertion muscle the an The longus. a to the into extending

hip at joint medially brevis the thigh adducts adductor and the innervated and by the nerve. rotates is The obturator

largest of compartment is of thigh The (Fig. deepest in the muscles magnus the medial the and adductor the 6.62). the the forms muscle canal. wall distal adductor of posterior The a by adductor is the anchored adductor the magnus triangular Like fan-shaped muscle or to attached its femur. the to the base pelvis its apex expanded muscles, and and brevis by longus

inferior the along the the attachments that pelvis, brevis a of the ramus On and line magnus from and ramus, tuberosity. of longus ischium the extends along the attached adductor the muscles, adductor to the pubic ischial above is a the line onto and quadrate the tuberosity, inferior attachment insert and the linea medial of just femur along from laterally that from ramus that aspera the the extends expands tubercle The to muscle medial part originates to ischiopubic on vertical line. along to of and the supracondylar inferiorly the gluteal termed the “adductor of This part magnus. often lateral adductor part” the the of muscle is

the pelvic vertically “hamstring from of the the often the head femur. The the almost tuberosity part,” tendon on rounded of the magnus, ischial along into tubercle descends to and distal thigh medial bone insert condyle originates the adductor of adductor called part a via the the medial of medial line. up It the via inserts an also supracondylar onto aponeurosis adductor muscle hiatus the circular adductor and large the hamstring the (Fig. of parts inferiorly A between is gap associated 6.62), between the which the and fossa anteromedial artery the allows the femoral popliteal the the to adductor on veins to thigh posterior canal aspect of pass knee. and

the magnus at thigh medially and The joint. adducts adductor rotates hip the part of the muscle part nerve. is innervated tibial the by innervated The nerve hamstring the and sciatic division the of is obturator adductor the by

fan-shaped a externus muscle. is obturator flat The to bone expansive membrane external adjacent (Fig. Its aspect is obturator and of attached body the the 6.62). on which hip of to trochanteric on of wall femur to converge a fibers an the tendon, neck the the to fossa. joint The form insert and passes depression posterior lateral posterolaterally the muscle oval

externus obturator thigh rotates the at hip the the is joint innervated of posterior The obturator and the externally branch nerve. by

are in are muscles posterior compartment and the known hamstrings collectively of (Fig. three as long There femoris, thigh: biceps the semimembranosus they semitendinosus, 6.5)—and the (Table 6.63). All except short the of head cross knee hip the both femoris biceps and the joints. extend joint. hamstrings the thigh the hip group, a joint leg at and As the the the at knee flex are joints. They at both also rotators

muscle two (Fig. and biceps compartment of the has lateral in heads the thigh is The posterior femoris 6.63):

ischial inferomedial the the long upper the of originates area semitendinosus part the The of head with tuberosity. from muscle

head the femur. short shaft arises on the The the from aspera linea of the lateral lip of

and muscle posterior obliquely The head medial to crosses lateral is joined the long from by short distally. the belly the head thigh of thigh. the the lateral side from distal of which a is tendon, on Together, fibers heads the palpable two form fibula. the of part surface inserts The head tendon of main lateral into the the of the fibular collateral blend Extensions knee with with and the lateral the the from ligaments side the with associated of joint. tendon ligament

knee the flexes The biceps leg joint. femoris at the rotates also head long the laterally The extends and hip. When rotate leg laterally joint. can the partly at biceps flexed, knee femoris the is the the knee

nerve head is tibial short division by nerve. of fibular by division the common the sciatic head is the of long innervated innervated the sciatic the and The

semitendinosus biceps is of The (Fig. muscle thigh medial muscle in the compartment the posterior to the femoris 6.63). muscle part the head tuberosity. inferomedial ischial upper of area It femoris the originates the of long the the biceps from with of knee. on a lower in long the belly ends to semimembranosus half the tendon, forms which of muscle the descends and cord-like and spindle-shaped thigh muscle the The lies just the posterior The of curves of the the the inserts as around part medial gracilis and tibia the tendon surface to tendons and pes into the muscles the anserinus. condyle medial of sartorius tibia of

thigh the the extends at joint the leg flexes the knee semitendinosus at and The joint. hip and also Working knee medially the the at joint the at with the medially rotates semimembranosus, the joint. leg rotates thigh hip it

the the semitendinosus is The nerve. tibial muscle of by division innervated sciatic

semitendinosus posterior (Fig. the thigh deep in compartment semimembranosus the The to the lies muscle muscle of 6.63). and to is adjacent on the the superolateral on the medial and above It the posterior ischial to groove tuberosity surfaces the medial of attached tibial mainly below condyle. and bone impression tendon formation ligaments from and fascia also and the of contribute to Expansions around knee the insert joint. the into

and at the at extends the hip the the knee thigh joint. semimembranosus flexes leg joint The at semitendinosus the it the leg hip medially joint thigh muscle, the with rotates the knee at Working joint. and the

the by semimembranosus of is nerve. division muscle innervated The sciatic the tibial

inferior arteries artery, femoral the the Three artery, gluteal and artery. the the obturator enter thigh: the is of artery and the limb. most largest Of femoral these, the lower supplies vessels network of contribute hip an the arteries to The joint. around anastomotic three

and the (Fig. as The external enter triangle of passes the under artery continuation thigh on inguinal is upper iliac begins ligament the the the femoral artery to femoral of artery external iliac the the aspect anterior 6.65). artery anterior is spine iliac palpable the just the The femoral inferior and pubic between the midway in symphysis. superior triangle femoral the ligament to inguinal

adductor femoral triangle thigh the canal. then passes continues vertically artery The the in the and down femoral through behind the hiatus adductor knee. by and canal muscle in the artery becomes popliteal the It the magnus the passing leaves through adductor

iliac and external artery artery, abdomen, femoral pudendal upper circumflex small cutaneous regions pudendal artery—originate the superficial branches—superficial and of thigh, from four supply in cluster deep external triangle artery, A the perineum. artery, epigastric lower femoral and the of superficial

artery Deep of thigh

which the femoral thigh of The artery the of of from the side the is the femoral supply the the the is artery (Fig. blood deep branch largest originates source of to the femoris thigh in lateral femoral triangle thigh major (profunda and artery), in artery 6.65). and popliteal eventually between then adductor penetrating between adductor the and inferiorly artery thigh muscles, passes: connect adductor the knee. of longus the then through travels artery the the adductor behind magnus, the adductor the longus and longus branches The and and brevis to immediately posteriorly magnus with pectineus muscles of adductor deep between

deep medial The branches and artery has the three perforating and lateral of branches. femoral circumflex thigh

The normally directly proximally artery (Fig. femoral side may arise circumflex deep lateral originates of artery femoral artery the from thigh, the but from lateral of the the 6.66). and branches: into sartorius to It terminal three deep femoris and passes the rectus divides

(ascending which fasciae and circles laterally femur to muscle branch) and of neck connects vessel channel, tensor form artery neck ascends femoral a a latae deep head One the the supplies circumflex with of the femur. branch the of to the and the medial

muscle, the a branch popliteal vessel and lateralis artery branch) penetrates femoris, knee. One descends the to rectus the of (descending vastus deep connects near the with

branch) (transverse proximal One with hip. branches form pierce the cruciate the circles to and anastomose inferior vessel of laterally the artery, artery, around to vastus then lateralis to passes femur perforating and gluteal circumflex first anastomosis the the the the medial artery shaft femoral from the around

deep may the the thigh, circumflex femoral originates aspect artery The the the of artery (Fig. artery femoral medial of from from originate posteromedial normally proximally but 6.66). around adductor the It between shaft externus the then pectineus obturator and passes brevis femur, the iliopsoas between first the of muscles. medially and and the the Near a off through joint vessel acetabular of with the the anastomoses the gives small which obturator and adductor brevis the hip notch the branch, of artery. branch margin acetabular enters

into femoral trunk branches deep the passes superior the the muscle: the main circumflex to of femoris The over adductor magnus divides two medial of and major margin artery quadratus

fossa connects gluteal of with trochanteric circumflex and branch ascends and lateral femoral to One the branches the arteries.

in passes other an hip. the femoral network forming circumflex with laterally lateral vessels from the of The branch participate around anastomotic artery, artery, branches artery the perforating the and gluteal inferior to first

three perforating the artery (Fig. thigh from The deep the of branch arteries the originates adductor muscle, second above third originates as originates to below anterior the the muscle, muscle—the descends first the and to anterior the brevis it the muscle. 6.66) compartment All through the and to thigh. the its linea posterior magnus near the supply of aspera attachment enter three to the adductor penetrate have behind and longitudinal and inferiorly to network descending vessels branches artery participates with vessels in of ascending popliteal knee. forming branches, Here, of a interconnect hip the above the which which form the the anastomoses an around anastomotic channel,

as the obturator originates artery iliac branch of medial internal of in pelvic thigh (Fig. the through obturator the canal a The the the enters and cavity artery compartment 6.67). obturator obturator form the that of bifurcates and channel through the canal, branch membrane circles which the and the margin externus anterior branch, into a passes a it posterior an the it muscle. As attachment of lies together within

supply anterior muscles with medial and inferior and arising anastomose posterior circumflex adjacent from Vessels and the femoral the arteries. gluteal branches vessel femur. enters to addition, posterior of head the branch, joint supply an the through the acetabular of the the notch, from contributes the originates In acetabular hip and

the and deep in veins. thigh superficial of Veins consist similar arteries generally have and follow the veins names. Deep veins, deep and interconnect fascia, arteries. in generally not accompany the with do Superficial are superficial veins largest the in vein. the saphenous the veins great of The thigh superficial is

a dorsal limb thigh the the ascends the lower from proximal foot along great 560). The medial aspect and p. venous originates vein on the the saphenous to of (see arch side of it femoral ring in deep fascia covering p. the vein 566). triangle (see through the Here thigh the connect with saphenous the to passes in femoral anterior

three three are There with thigh, one each the nerves compartments. in the of major associated of femoral thigh, the anterior is sciatic the medial and thigh, is compartment associated the thigh. The with with obturator is of the compartment nerve the posterior the the with the associated compartment nerve nerve of associated

on triangle and the the lumbar under passing The segments enters inguinal of nerve ligament plexus by the thigh L2–L4) (Fig. femoral the the from (spinal abdominal wall posterior femoral cord originates 6.68). outside femoral side lateral femoral sheath, nerve In the is vessels. the femoral the which artery surrounds and the the of the femoral lies on triangle

the and iliacus branches the the Before femoral supplies muscles. nerve to thigh, pectineus entering

the anterior the skin of inguinal the thigh muscles the Immediately aspects the and and and thigh on into leg anterior on the passing femoral posterior of foot. branches, medial which supply after anterior divides ligament, medial the of the sides of compartment and nerve and under

Branches the femoral nerve of (Fig. side supply sartorius the the the the and numerous skin of muscles vastus anterior the (rectus deep medialis supplies branches, muscles) far front to medial femoris and and the which motor of include: which on nerve, long skin foot. cutaneous 6.68) distally the vastus nerve, and which knee; lateralis, thigh quadriceps saphenous intermedius, nerves, cutaneous penetrate femoris, vastus one supply muscle; as as fascia

nerve femoral femoral pass The the does through saphenous canal, accompanies not artery hiatus the artery. with adductor but the through adductor the tissues side end on the Rather, of gracilis appear sartorius penetrates the saphenous and near connective between directly through the to medial the of knee. muscles the nerve canal the skin side medial Here the down and leg the of and foot, and penetrates nerve side continues the to the deep fascia the of the saphenous knee, supplies on leg, foot. medial

is cord a posterior plexus the wall. The branch segments obturator L2–L4) on the abdominal nerve of lumbar (spinal of the to the margin muscle muscle, the of then pelvis enter psoas passes medial (Fig. psoas out It in and the descends 6.69). pelvic then continues compartment the of lateral obturator the the medial nerve canal. obturator enters thigh wall passing and along the The through by and It adductor aspect most on the of the supplies thigh. muscles skin medial the of are thigh, a muscle: and nerve posterior into the anterior two the separated adductor brevis As an by branches, which the it branch, divides branch obturator enters

magnus of adductor and the supplies and muscle and the linea The the descends adductor brevis the the behind muscles part obturator surface anterior the muscle, on adductor the that posterior and attaches brevis aspera. magnus of adductor externus to branch

on skin the medial longus pectineus anterior muscle of The on side anterior surface to often the innervate descends gracilis, brevis the to and supplies and pectineus branches the of muscles—it brevis adductor branches of adductor the behind is muscle, muscles, supply the and the and branch adductor the and the thigh. cutaneous adductor longus, contributes

branch (spinal compartment segments plexus of the posterior The of L4–S3) into the nerve cord is a (Fig. region gluteal descends thigh and the lumbosacral the from sciatic 6.70). all the its the posterior thigh then muscles compartment branches into and the in of innervates leg It and foot. continue

by femoris on and the the long adductor the of the lies In sciatic magnus muscle thigh, the biceps compartment the head nerve crossed posterior is of muscle.

sciatic the Proximal divides tibial common pelvis, its to the within the the nerve branches: and into and terminal sometimes nerve. the knee, nerve two fibular the These and posterior to fossa vertically thigh the knee. nerves popliteal down the travel enter Here, meet the artery popliteal vein. and they

its of part posterior the or fibular thigh before innervated to femoris, (long the nerve, the in biceps muscles tibial fibular the (Fig. nerve, separation biceps part of the which except is head compartment of common from head The the semimembranosus, the semitendinosus) common either all branches by supplies short of after femoris, sciatic 6.70).

into fossa, leg, the through posterior popliteal sole the compartment descends the the foot. the enters The tibial continues nerve and of of

and skin side ankle, the innervates: the tibial lateral and nerve, the from the which lower leg, The sole on and of in two posterior of in foot, deep fibular toes. the sole dorsal foot and side intrinsic skin interossei foot toe, of the the receive muscles, compartment may muscles the the leg little of on also and innervation posterolateral the the including half muscles all the of nerve all first of

compartment and the thigh in into The the posterior of foot short lateral and fibular part biceps of the head onto anterior continues the then of sciatic (Fig. the the the leg of the femoris nerve common compartments and innervates 6.70).

of and muscles the aspect leg, in sole two the innervates: interossei first in dorsal foot nerve anterior and the dorsal and aspect the the muscle toes. digitorum fibular The muscles the foot, the the of the brevis) (extensor over on foot, of compartments leg, one of skin common ankle, lateral lateral and over aspect of the dorsal the all and

largest the knee The the body. in is synovial joint joint consists weight-bearing, the directed (Fig. which which between and tendon articulation the femoris be allows the and the the of: between patella tibia tibia, the articulation the anteriorly the femur is quadriceps of without femur, wear muscle to pull over to and It knee the 6.71).

the articular one on menisci, in fibrocartilaginous surfaces side, movements. the Two shape tibia during between condyles changes the and each femoral accommodate of joint

hinge but detailed basically the extension. mainly of joint a complex, joint that allows and knee movements flexion the joint The are is all joint of reinforced ligaments, side joints, is on knee the each collateral joint. one the by hinge Like during femur In tibia their ends addition, the cruciate ligaments two ligaments) of positions strong opposed the very and and (the adjacent maintain movement. interconnect

standing. of keep reduce an energy weight-bearing, in amount mechanism to joint to muscle is required it the efficient Because knee the has the extended joint “locking” involved when

are by contribute joint of the that to knee The surfaces the covered bones articular cartilage. hyaline superior the femoral adjacent the surfaces major of aspect the tibial include: two condyles. and of the The surfaces involved condyles,

or the surfaces flat in tibia articulate knee curved the are whereas full that in (Fig. are with of flexion of round, the femoral the extension surfaces articulate condyles that The 6.72).

V-shaped the femur the aspect two anterior and between on of are the on surfaces surfaces the of the where join the and The femur articular adjacent distal the patella. the end of the trench posterior surface patella condyles are the articular tibial a joint intraarticular enclosed all the single cavity, as surfaces The within and are condyles. menisci femoral between

There other in meniscus) C-shaped cartilages, menisci, the the medial two knee (Fig. (medial meniscus) joint, are fibrocartilaginous are lateral and (lateral one which 6.73). end the in the tibial facets intercondylar at attached Both plateau. region to are each of

its capsule. the is around the and margin attached tibial capsule lateral whereas ligament, meniscus of to meniscus medial the to The unattached to the collateral joint is the is mobile meniscus the medial lateral meniscus. the than more Therefore,

are knee. interconnected transverse the anteriorly menisci by The ligament of a The and connected also tendon to the lateral is meniscus superolaterally meniscus the insert femur. to capsule passes the of muscle, between the this which popliteus on

in and with to condyles congruency the femoral of the surfaces improve large flat change movements condyles in between tibial extension. small menisci articulating from curved where plateau surfaces the tibial surfaces femoral flexion joint during the The

margins of menisci of to the joint outer The membrane (Fig. to attaches of superior synovial inferior the margins the and articular the the knee surfaces and 6.75A). within enclosed the joint. of femur which fossa below the intercondylar The the of the the knee cruciate the but tibia two region above, are ligaments, outside in fibrous attach of intercondylar articular the membrane and cavity,

off forward side ligaments the of synovial Posteriorly, the either fibrous of on them thereby membrane from joint ligament and cruciate cavity. both the around the articular capsule posterior loops the excluding reflects membrane

infrapatellar by an patellar ligament Anteriorly, separated the pad. from membrane the is synovial fat of the membrane (an fringed the into cavity. side each pad, On alar margin projects the articular forms a fold), synovial which infrapatellar infrapatellar (the posteriorly synovial the of the femur. fat of lower attaches addition, which the In part synovial fold is of margin raised membrane a covering directed the to pad fossa the sharp into fold), midline the intercondylar

movement The to joint: provide of pouches low-friction forms membrane joint the the knee with tendons for two of synovial associated in locations the surfaces

(Fig. subpopliteal of is expansions these smallest The recess the muscle, the and extends passes joint from lies 6.75A), of and articular lateral the through meniscus tendon popliteus capsule. posterolaterally the the which which between the cavity

bursa is the (Fig. expansion suprapatellar The second the the of is of during bursa which extension a small the large superiorly genus muscle joint attached is this articular distal the femoris end bursa of femur away the and the shaft 6.75B), knee. articularis muscle, the and quadriceps to of the cavity from that tendon—the between of pulls continuation a bursa the apex

Other not tendons include associated bursae knee subcutaneous (Fig. infrapatellar other but and associated normally joint subcutaneous the and deep the with with bursae, articular and ligaments cavity with bursa, numerous the bursae the around communicating prepatellar 6.75B).

prepatellar patella. The and subcutaneous bursa anterior to the is The bursae are on ligament, and and the subcutaneous respectively. deep sides patellar deep the subcutaneous infrapatellar of

muscles tendons the from formed reinforced fibrous extensions extensive membrane partly and is The (Fig. and the is of knee of joint by surrounding 6.76). articular In membrane general, encloses cavity the fibrous intercondylar the and the region:

the meniscus. the knee to membrane and ligament of medial the surface is On fibrous joint, the tibial collateral the with side its internal medial on attached blends

surface fibrous the and ligament Laterally, meniscus. to membrane of the surface the membrane a attached not the space separated fibular collateral internal the of external lateral is is fibrous from by the

and muscles, is the of femoris also to the fibrous the tendinous the patella attached vastus tendon and above with ligament. below margins lateralis where which merge the membrane medialis is it reinforced with from Anteriorly, quadriceps with expansions patellar vastus the

iliotibial by back membrane reinforced popliteal the from an tract across of superiorly from semimembranosus (the the membrane and The medial tendon reflects fibrous extension is extension to which posteromedially fibrous oblique from anterolaterally lateral. the by ligament), fibrous the of a the

travels on of enclosed femoral the knee condyle. the the the popliteus an and by to of aspect tendon around aspect passes fibrous insert posterolateral fibrous muscle upper The lateral end in the its lateral of joint of the aperture is membrane membrane through as the the

posterior The cruciate ligament, anterior are (lateral) and and joint tibial ligaments. major the the the the ligaments (medial) collateral patellar fibular with ligaments, and knee associated

patellar quadriceps the basically the to femoris is inferior the tendon (Fig. patella The ligament of continuation 6.76). the is of patella attached margins to apex to tibial and It the below tuberosity. the and above

of hinge-like ligaments, the The each of the stabilize side knee on joint, the motion one (Fig. collateral 6.77).

the the fibular femoral superiorly is popliteus tendon. attached for ligament collateral groove the epicondyle to lateral above cord-like The just the a to depression lateral of is Inferiorly, fibular head. it surface attached on the It separated the is a fibrous by membrane bursa. from

attached tibial surface the much is flat The fibrous by underlying collateral broad to of deep and ligament its membrane. and superiorly attachment above and the of to epicondyle to gracilis, medial It attach is the tubercle the of the femoral the surface to margin anteriorly descends and medial to and behind adductor inferior medial tendons. the sartorius, tibia just anchored semitendinosus

knee in are interconnect tibia femur and the two of The ligaments and the region intercondylar cruciate (Figs. the and 6.77D 6.78). cross attachments: femoral each like tibial in a their other “shaped for are because “cruciate” the termed sagittal plane (Latin cross”) They between they and

tibia attach cruciate of facet The the of wall the of intercondylar anterior to a posteriorly the the fossa intercondylar femur. the the facet ascends to and area a ligament of on to lateral the of back attaches part anterior at

of the The intercondylar posterior the attaches medial to the cruciate intercondylar posterior of to fossa to anteriorly ligament of attach ascends tibia femur. the aspect the wall area the and of

the through cruciate ligament cruciate lateral as anterior they to ligament pass The posterior region. crosses intercondylar the

the anterior relative displacement posterior posterior ligament displacement cruciate prevents (Fig. to The the ligament tibia of anterior the and restricts femur cruciate 6.78).

to standing locked into the position the maintain is reducing needed muscle (Fig. knee of joint standing, the position, work thereby amount When 6.79).

and of the locking the One surfaces shape that is tibia: of mechanism size change component in the the a femoral articulate with

flexion, aspects and the In are curved on of posterior condyles. the areas femoral the surfaces rounded the

knee the femoral areas broad condyles. the As to flat the of aspects is and inferior the extended, on the move surfaces

surfaces more extension. the larger in Consequently become stable joint and

femur of is the Another component of the extension. rotation mechanism locking tibia on during medial the full tightens extension associated all the rotation ligaments. and Medial

feature positioned center to of a vertical anterior keeps when joint. the is extended the the line passes that knee knee Another gravity standing along that is body’s that

initiating on the the lateral the by The knee rotation femur unlocks of muscle popliteus tibia.

recurrent the supply tibial in Vascular branches thigh anterior branches the knee fibular leg. in from artery circumflex joint is from the the femoral, femoral and arteries and through lateral to descending the and the popliteal, circumflex predominantly artery and genicular network form joint anastomotic vessels the around an (Fig. These 6.80).

joint is nerves. The femoral, and knee by common obturator, tibial, from branches fibular the innervated

very is tibiofibular The small in allows proximal little synovial movement (Fig. joint type and 6.82). condyle of the the lateral and surfaces, fibula, and on flat tibia of undersurface superomedial of the surface the are The the joint opposing on head of the circular. capsule by is ligaments. anterior The posterior and reinforced

route area fossa an region and The one the between important which thigh popliteal by to of the pass is transition the and major is other. leg from structures

formed between joint The muscles fossa posterior the in diamond-shaped leg thigh a compartments and of space (Fig. is the the behind popliteal knee 6.83A):

medially semimembranosus of the femoris formed biceps and the of are semitendinosus muscle. upper distal the the the by The the of laterally end distal and part of muscles margins by diamond ends

lower and the by lateral the the the of gastrocnemius of the and laterally plantaris muscle. formed medially head head muscle of muscle space by part gastrocnemius the smaller margins medial are of the The

popliteus femur the the by formed of and is of adjacent capsule the joint The muscle. of by inferiorly, more tibia, and, and fossa floor knee the the surfaces

below with which formed of above lata is fascia fascia, continuous fascia deep the roof and is the by of thigh with The deep the leg.

fibular the vein, major the The and are and nerves tibial common fossa popliteal artery, the popliteal the popliteal contents (Fig. of 6.83B).

the fossa the tibial proximal the popliteal as nerve. branches nerves major common and The originate of sciatic two to fibular They enter of in most directly the the the the structures under and margin superficial from muscle: popliteal fossa femoris neurovascular the are above of biceps the region

plantaris nerve margin the of and the of the popliteal posterior tibial deep the to enter exits muscle vertically the The leg. descends fossa compartment through to

enters The the of lower common and to of continues leg lateral around fibula the fossa, popliteal the the exits of where the lateral the it over by of the compartment leg. lateral the the margin and biceps fibular side nerve following femoris swings neck tendon

as magnus femoral the is of the artery The continuation femoral in posteriorly passes adductor through compartment popliteal artery thigh, the of hiatus and the the in the anterior begins adductor muscle. artery the

The muscle. medial side popliteal upper fossa margin popliteal the of in the the on artery appears under the semimembranosus with tibial the the posterior where of it the nerve midline and tibial just by the posterior the to descends and ends arteries. compartment the through into the dividing of lateral fossa anterior obliquely leg leg It enters

the the in pulse however, deep can popliteal artery difficult fossa is popliteal to usually the therefore midline. of by a near structures deepest detected The palpate; palpation the be is neurovascular and

of to In to popliteal fossa, knee. which and series contribute branches, adjacent gives supply which to the anastomoses the the around artery vascular geniculate arteries, muscles, a rise popliteal

the travels popliteal superficial artery. with is vein popliteal to and The vein passing It fossa exits adductor to popliteal superiorly the become the femoral through by hiatus. the

fossa popliteal of Roof

is fossa covered by superficial skin (Fig. popliteal The of and fascia the roof 6.83C). important the most The in vein. small the is structure superficial fascia saphenous the arch on the in ascends side dorsal superficial in of lateral This fascia the leg from the foot. vessel vertically the venous back the of popliteal to of back the where knee ascends forms penetrates the popliteal the which and it the fascia, deep roof with It vein. fossa, the of joins

the other on half then superficial of back of posterior nerve passes popliteal with of the saphenous is small which inferiorly fossa leg. cutaneous roof the the descends to upper roof of the through structure muscles, vein that of One the the continues the to the the through and hamstring thigh thigh, passes the the skin innervate through fossa,

that (Fig. ankle knee limb of leg lower The joint the and joint is between the part 6.84):

the between the knee. through or and fossa major thigh popliteal behind in structures the Proximally, relation pass to most leg

which the pass and foot on ankle, side anterior the the anterior superficial and and the fibular the the Distally, of through the artery the foot posteromedial tibial deep exceptions ends mainly the structures tarsal the of leg tunnel between to being nerves, ankle. enter

fibula, the bony arranged parallel. framework tibia in and of two consists of bones, The the leg

and the lateral the smaller is the side is than fibula on tibia leg. much of The inferior the aspect with formation articulates but proximal superiorly tibia, of take condyle joint. in of knee of not does It the the the part lateral a fibrous to forms firmly the by of fibula lateral anchored ankle the and the The the joint. is of malleolus joint tibia end distal

larger tibia is fibula. therefore bone weight-bearing and than is the the The of much the leg the joint. most medial the surface of malleolus formation it the of and the Above, articulation the knee of for in ankle with bony below leg the takes at foot it the and joint part forms

tibia attachment membrane, their The periosteum into fascia between (fibular) septa, intermuscular interosseous deep direct by: compartments fibula the of and and anterior the surrounding borders the along limb; of tibia fibula borders the two divided lateral the anterior and of of and the most (flexor), the is medial to and (Fig. of fascia pass links leg posterior deep which an (extensor), length; which adjacent 6.84).

and ankle, in foot. the compartment anterior dorsiflex extend toes, the the of the invert Muscles the leg the in posterior the invert foot. the the Muscles ankle, plantarflex flex and compartment toes, lateral the foot. the in evert Muscles compartment Major or vessels supply nerves and compartment. each pass through

distal of tibia and Shaft end

is interosseous, borders (Fig. lateral, tibia medial, posterior in The cross surfaces the section triangular shaft and of has medial and and anterior, and 6.85):

medial easily entire are medial and The and borders palpable. the subcutaneous anterior surface and

along The by of is border border interosseous of connected, interosseous the length the tibia interosseous the membrane, to the its fibula.

(the The line an is posterior surface by oblique soleal line). marked

the to with from medial the it the merges side border. medial The descends the side across lateral soleal line bone where descends surface soleal the midpoint line line. a of the In down addition, vertical posterior the from part the upper of the the disappears It lower of one-third tibia. in

expands ends body’s the knee The joints. support lower the weight the upper and of ankle at the shaft tibia to at both and

like box Fig. on the end side a rectangular of with the The malleolus; protuberance tibia medial a shaped distal is bony (the medial 6.81). a box the the (talus) upper The tarsal bones of to one large ankle and lower with surface part of joint. tibia with the malleolus of continuous is form part shaft of the medial the while the articulate the

inferiorly distal the the onto which of a vertical medial posterior the by surface tibia malleolus. medially of is box-like the groove, surface continues The end marked and of posterior tibialis the tendon the is posterior for of The groove muscle.

by tibia anchored end is by of deep the the is the distal notch the to The a lateral a of which (the of head interosseous of part the thickened surface distal fibular triangular occupied membrane. notch), fibula

of end fibula distal and Shaft

is The fibula not weight-bearing. in involved shaft is therefore of the narrower the The shaft tibia. than much fibular is ends, Also, for fibula except by enclosed the the muscles. and

and section the of Like of shaft is muscles, for and three and cross tibia, three triangular fibula the the the attachment has (Fig. ligaments septa, in borders intermuscular surfaces 6.85). and of interosseous membrane. interosseous border is by attached to the interosseous the of The fibula faces the border tibia the anterior attach septa the to posterior Intermuscular and borders. attach to surfaces. three Muscles the

lateral surface of the of the medial faces surface narrow the lateral and the leg, leg, the the compartment leg. posterior surface faces compartment compartment of the faces posterior anterior The the

a The crest), marked (medial parts two each flexor different muscle. to vertical posterior by which surface a into posterior is divides surface the crest deep attached

fibula lateral the end the distal to form of (Fig. spade-shaped The malleolus expands 6.85).

the thereby facet the lateral medial articulation the malleolus part bears talus, forming for lateral the of a with joint. the lateral The ankle of of surface surface into articular triangular the distal superior a Just the fits the area, notch facet which on end to this is of tibia. fibular are fibula by and distal joined membrane. Here the interosseous of end the the together tibia with posterior (the is with to ligament talus facet pit articulation talofibular associated joint. malleolar the fossa) the the or for a Posteroinferior fossa of for the attachment the ankle

fibularis surface of tendons muscles. the of by is marked for The brevis longus shallow groove posterior lateral malleolus and fibularis the the a

Interosseous leg membrane of

membrane distance spans facing between (Fig. is shafts of fibular a and the connective leg that of tibial borders interosseous fibrous sheet interosseous of tough the the tissue The 6.86). fibula, band, superiorly interosseous ascends border is the tibia interosseous ligamentous except obliquely border descend the of of from a tibia The to fibula. from the to the there where collagen which the fibers

in at the compartments posterior other and top bottom, apertures There leg. pass the membrane, the for of are two vessels anterior the interosseous and at the the one to between

not provides surface but an only and membrane attachment. links interosseous also muscle increased together, the fibula for tibia area The

membrane, which the end spans interosseous the notch the are on of inferior fibular the tibia narrow distal on of end fibula. surface and the the of aspect lateral the and fibula distal space ends corresponding the the together surface the by of of tibia distal between the The held tibiofibular of is end and the This by membrane ligaments. expanded posterior anterior interosseous reinforced essential linking of is firm This the foot the for to with joint. the tibia together distal at the produce skeletal articulation ankle ends framework of and fibula the

of Posterior compartment leg

organized the in by Muscles are of a of deep, two layer the and separated fascia. posterior compartment leg superficial (flexor) deep into groups, invert plantarflex the and muscles mainly foot toes. the and Generally, the flex All tibial the by nerve. innervated are

ankle foot the the of insert The foot comprises which superficial onto (calcaneus) three muscles leg posterior 6.6)—all the and gastrocnemius, plantaris, the the of group joint (Table muscles—the of (Fig. compartment soleus plantarflex and the at of in heel 6.87). and powerful body are foot walking off large planted they propel elevate unit, when standing. these during body forward toes the and a onto the muscles upward because the the As can the on knee. the also Two of distal can femur of and end muscles the (gastrocnemius the plantaris) and originate flex

and muscles gastrocnemius the most of the posterior leg (Fig. muscles in is superficial muscle largest one the the is in the The of compartment 6.87). heads, medial: lateral originates one It one from two and

elongate roughening surface above the distal adductor medial articular condyle. the attached head on of is an tubercle the behind medial to just and of femur The the aspect posterior the

from distinct on a upper joins femoral head facet lateral of condyle it originates supracondylar lateral the the surface The lateral where lateral the line.

facing knee, of the lower the lateral medial the the the of margins popliteal the the At of fossa. form and two end of gastrocnemius borders heads

the calf. bulge belly, much single form forms of identified In the elongate tissue the of upper muscle as a gastrocnemius heads which the soft to combine the leg,

the of which the with the soleus gastrocnemius foot. leg, to those fibers the converge In attaches of form deeper (heel) calcaneal lower muscle muscle of tendon, the calcaneus to the the

gastrocnemius ankle foot also flex joint at can joint. leg plantarflexes the knee The at the the and the is It nerve. tibial by innervated the

and proximally the the (Fig. leg through tendon joins which belly The and a tendon, muscle plantaris long calcaneal a has thin descends small 6.87). superiorly from popliteal oblique lower associated joint. muscle supracondylar with femur from and the origin of ligament The lateral of takes ridge the the the the knee part

and plantaris calcaneus. the near between the thin forms calcaneal body muscles descends its gastrocnemius eventually medially, and and a gastrocnemius, lateral the to soleus the the spindle-shaped tendon of with muscle head which passes tendon, deep medial short of attachment the side The the to of fuses

and foot leg is nerve. and of joint, flexion The by contributes innervated the at at the joint the ankle the plantaris to tibial of plantarflexion the knee

The gastrocnemius under muscle soleus is large a muscle flat the (Fig. 6.87). tendinous is of tibia: tibia, heads the attachment the a the of which proximal and the spans to and fibula attached and ligament, ends to the distance fibula It two between to

posterior fibula. and of the fibula, adjacent shaft On the of end the from the soleus upper the originates aspect surface of and proximal neck of the the head

On the adjacent medial originates the and soleal from tibia, soleus the line border.

fibula, region the deep the popliteal ligament, the over to The attachments of the arches into tibial distance they and the nerve posterior the from popliteal fossa vessels which the pass leg. and compartment tibia the spans as of between

the the leg, the muscle to to In narrows that tendon attaches the soleus lower join calcaneus. calcaneal

the and ankle at the foot The the muscle, with plantarflexes gastrocnemius soleus together plantaris, joint. nerve. tibial the is innervated by It

in posterior compartment leg deep the four are the (Fig. muscles of There tibialis flexor longus, (Table digitorum popliteus, and hallucis longus, 6.88)—the flexor posterior 6.7). the foot. on popliteus other acts muscles the The muscle act on whereas three knee, mainly the

leg. The posterior the the the of is popliteus smallest most muscles of deep superior compartment the and in initiation the lateral on and by the resisting flexion of rotation the unlocks femur. tibia stabilizes of knee knee extended at the (external) It the shape, (Fig. flat triangular floor fossa It part is of in forms of and the the popliteal 6.88), tibia. the inserted is surface and line of the triangular the into region a on above posterior broad soleal

of lower a originates knee penetrates ascends which across tendon, knee. popliteus the and the joint aspect the from membrane fibrous capsule of muscle laterally of The the the lateral femoral then it laterally groove membrane between on a of the and the into and The inferolateral around joint lateral fibrous ascends meniscus aspect condyle. tendon the where the passes the a end depression from the originates attaches the anterior of and tendon at groove. The to

When a contraction joint. rotates the on fixed femur knee unlocking position, the from popliteus laterally the tibia, of initiating gait the standing is popliteus The innervated tibial by the muscle nerve.

side of flexor side and of plantar originates into leg the on the medial (Fig. posterior inserts compartment the The the hallucis on of the lateral of great foot the surface muscle toe the longus 6.88). two-thirds and fibula adjacent of of the posterior membrane. interosseous It the mainly surface from arises lower the

of hallucis of which surface fibers tarsal slips then tibia form head distinct converge flexor The the cord-like longus the large (talus) bone groove and a the adjacent on of distal posterior muscle passes of the into tendon, foot. the inferiorly to the a behind the base distal anteriorly from the curves under of phalanx then under projects surface of of tendon and the the of sole the the the foot shelf first sustentaculum talus (the of calcaneus, through insert a on medially continues then to tali), which anteriorly and inferior The great the bone toe.

great hallucis toe. longus the flexor flexes The the leg It toe-off during particularly great is propelled ground. foot off leave walking active of when forward to part the the and the stance the of last toe is the phase the is body foot by It innervated ankle is tibial at contribute the also the the to plantarflexion and can nerve. of joint

on lateral four the side compartment originates longus the the inserts of and The (Fig. posterior the foot the digitorum of flexor of digits muscle medial leg into 6.88). tibia the line. soleal posterior from medial arises side of mainly the It to the of surface inferior the

posterior the The ankle a tendon, of in tendon longus digitorum muscle which crosses the near and the to forms flexor tibialis the posterior descends joint. leg behind to sole continues swings inferiorly groove medial a foot. and the of in tendon malleolus enter shallow forward The then the the flexor longus crosses inferior It of insert to medial V. to muscle distal of the the on phalanges hallucis which to foot the the plantar digits the of the of reach surfaces the II tendons, side of bases then into divides tendon and four

flexes four flexor longus digitorum lateral toes. The the toes is and the stance at end gripping ground during It gait. the with body of walking propelling the the phase of off involved the forward tibial is by nerve. innervated the It

interosseous from the fibula and and posterior The muscle tibialis membrane adjacent the tibia of originates the posterior (Fig. surfaces 6.88). the between flexor and muscles. overlapped flexor lies the It by and digitorum hallucis longus longus is

groove malleolus. the the this posterior on is medial lies to tendon the posterior of crossed medial of muscle longus tendon by the digitorum in the flexor tibialis Near surface and the the the superficially ankle, tendon of curves of medial under the the the foot. forward and side enters tendon medial malleolus The medial medial the around to of the region of tuberosity and foot plantar bones, the attach tarsal It the to to margin cuneiform. the the medial navicular of the wraps the of mainly surfaces to adjacent

plantarflexes posterior foot, inverts The during the foot arch medial and of and the the supports tibialis walking. by the tibial innervated It nerve. is

leg blood major foot and The behind of the (Fig. the and posterior the leg from popliteal is popliteal knee fossa the supply to compartment enters the artery the 6.89).

gastrocnemius popliteal of posterior compartment leg The the popliteus into the the artery and muscles. passes between enters the it of the leg of tibial it and anterior the between fibular posterior deep where inferiorly continues region artery muscle arch the As into an under posterior heads and tibial tendinous artery. compartment the passes it formed divides the soleus of immediately tibial and a

side, Two one plantaris on to supply popliteal each gastrocnemius, soleus, the the large and artery sural branch (Fig. arteries, from muscles 6.89). knee vessels of addition, Fig. joint to popliteal collateral the contribute gives that rise branches the network artery (see around to In a 6.80).

anterior the through artery of in passes enters aperture of part leg. The and upper membrane the compartment tibial anterior forward and the the supplies the interosseous continues onto the inferiorly the of aspect It foot. dorsal

of compartments tibial sole artery The of and leg the the the continues lateral foot the (Fig. supplies and posterior into posterior 6.89).

tibialis The digitorum posterior on region the of of superficial muscles. deep through compartment of and tibial surfaces flexor posterior the descends longus the artery leg posterior the the the foot. the through of malleolus the tunnel medial into behind sole passes It and the tarsal

posterior branches, artery: In two and adjacent has tibial circumflex major artery bone and artery leg, fibular fibular the the the and supplies muscles the

knee passes soleus the of fibular connect the the neck (Fig. The the the surrounding around fibula through network laterally circumflex artery muscle vessels to and of anastomotic with also 6.89; see Fig. 6.80).

longus crest artery the the of which lateral along posterior but the the of compartment on tibialis fibular the tibial attachments posterior descends the fibula, of separates and hallucis flexor surface adjacent to muscles. The the medial artery, the side posterior parallels of course the

leg the muscles compartment in fibular of the that adjacent the in leg. has supplies through bone the the muscles the laterally artery intermuscular of septum also pass supply The posterior compartment fibularis branches and to lateral and

inferior to tibial artery in the of through A branch aperture originates anterior membrane passes the with in the interosseous distally from the anastomose branch that a anteriorly leg perforating fibular artery. the

surface network lateral calcaneus. the vessels behind ends tibia attachment the and the passes of distal of in the of the and over artery terminates between fibula a fibular The

Deep compartment generally posterior follow the in the arteries. veins

the nerve with compartment tibial The the posterior the is nerve of leg associated (Fig. descends into fossa. the 6.90), the compartment a major the from nerve popliteal of posterior that branch sciatic

posterior the of vessels. compartment region muscle arch the of vertically the tibial tendinous with heads the posterior tibial of the surface posterior formed and muscle tibial on the passes The fibular leg of under the nerve between tibialis the through passes the soleus and deep

leg nerve the leaves compartment medial the malleolus. of at The the passing posterior the tibial through ankle by the tarsal behind tunnel supply skin. the foot enters muscles to intrinsic and It most

medial all the gives sural leg, calcaneal nerve in posterior In the and that of the leg, branches, branches nerve supply rise the compartment to: and the tibial muscles cutaneous the nerve. two

Branches of popliteal innervate of the two in leg the superficial compartment gastrocnemius high muscles the of deep between the originate the of that popliteus of fossa tibial group (Fig. region the and of nerve in the distal muscle muscle posterior heads the the group 6.91). gastrocnemius, the innervate deeply more muscle. the popliteus muscles, pass soleus into plantaris, and and Branches

longus, the half of upper and originate flexor deep longus posterior, the digitorum to and the muscles. Branches the the tibialis deep compartment muscle flexor in hallucis tibial to from muscles soleus of the nerve posterior innervate the leg

the (Fig. between two nerve heads The the leg muscle gastrocnemius originates the in of sural high 6.90). where to from sural It joined the superficial the common of in branch descends communicating of approximately the muscle through by it fascia middle leg gastrocnemius the belly and deep is a fibular penetrates the nerve. the passes the the leg, and foot. down malleolus, around It lateral the into

and skin lateral surface foot toe. leg the the of nerve on lower the The posterolateral the of side supplies sural and little

the originates The low descends and calcaneal the multiple leg tibial in is nerve and ankle of the near often onto from nerve the heel. side medial the medial

heel medial the (Fig. The sole nerve calcaneal surface and innervates of on medial the skin 6.90).

leg of compartment Lateral

are longus the and There two of leg—the compartment brevis fibularis in lateral the fibularis muscles (Fig. and Table 6.91 6.8). nerve, the by foot nerve. common (turn branch fibular sole and the Both outward) the which innervated superficial are of a the fibular evert is

compartment crosses (Fig. arises in the the the to side attach lateral fibularis tendon its muscle to leg, but medial under foot of longus on the The bones 6.91). upper of the of head both fibular lateral occasionally tibial originates from from up It the condyle. fibula region the onto and lateral and aspect the the of surface anterior the adjacent

to of fibular the The fibularis neck between fibular around the longus head anteriorly common the and the passes nerve fibular shaft. attachments

the side on foot, the to calcaneus, the cuneiform). lateral of the bony descends and cuboid), under the tarsal a obliquely enters posterior of malleolus side swings medial and end to descends groove, the where forward swings sides which, longus in one tendon, the medial sole cross base the Distally, the other the form to the surfaces the and metatarsal a the deep foot of of groove leg side passes bony foot of enter order: attach bones the tubercle inferior the bones it lateral curves the of of (fibular a surface of foot the shallow the down (lateral a in distal (the under inferior on lateral to to trochlea) forward I of in fibularis of

the foot. everts plantarflexes The and longus fibularis

longus, the tibialis posterior on which to foot. bones the muscles, anterior, undersurfaces and as on fibularis together addition, the In a all of the of the medial of act insert support stirrup side arches foot, tibialis the and lateral arches. longus The supports fibularis the mainly transverse

the The by fibular fibularis superficial nerve. longus is innervated

fibularis fibularis leg the longus the shaft of and is surface originates (Fig. The two-thirds fibula muscle the muscle deep the of in brevis the the lateral from of lower to 6.91).

to curves the muscle the surface behind of of tendon forward the lateral metatarsal lateral little The metatarsal (the brevis surface associated attach V the a the fibularis calcaneus to of with lateral of across fibularis base longus malleolus tendon with then passes and of the the on toe). the tubercle the

of assists foot by nerve. brevis in eversion The fibular innervated is superficial fibularis and the the

the major No of leg. lateral passes through the artery compartment vertically compartment from in that fibular It the the of leg) penetrate posterior by artery (mainly branches the (Fig. into lateral compartment the supplied is 6.92).

the Deep veins arteries. generally follow

the is nerve. lateral with leg the the superficial compartment associated fibular of The nerve major which (Fig. lateral the of nerve, fibular the as originates the This compartment two fossa of enters of popliteal the leg one from the nerve branches common 6.92B).

posterior originates the common the or fossa popliteal the fibular the compartment in The from (Fig. nerve nerve in sciatic thigh of over of follows margin and the the toward head tendon fibula. gastrocnemius and 6.92A), lateral biceps muscle the medial the of the femoris lower which the the descend which branch and over the lateral innervates sural gives over origin leg; sural sural contributes joins which the branches, the innervation side cutaneous to tibial of two nerve upper leg. lateral nerve, cutaneous it the to Here skin nerve, skin and of posterolateral the leg: of in communicating the

nerve The common the passing longus the around the lateral enters the head and the the fibula. fibula compartment attachments of by to and muscle the fibularis between neck of continues shaft fibular of fibular into the common fibular terminal superficial nerve. the deep nerve, Here and divides branches: nerve two its fibular the

superficial in the fibularis longus descends the lateral innervates deep The fibular fibularis compartment to nerve fibularis (Fig. brevis and and longus the 6.91B). supply nerve; and which the the by and areas of divides which by fascia the side the between deep medial and lower It supplied into the the it the of foot deep fibular is for: little lateral great foot nerve. the second and in and is the the then sural branch which web branches, toes, space except dorsal toe, leg of toes supplied lateral tibial enters penetrates where

fibular intermuscular the which it anterior nerve anteromedially the compartment deep the leg, into passes through septum The supplies. of

of compartment Anterior leg

leg—the anterior, longus, muscles longus, of hallucis tibialis (Fig. fibularis tertius extensor in are the digitorum the and compartment anterior There four extensor 6.9). Table and 6.93 the toes, extend foot. the foot ankle invert and joint, dorsiflex Collectively at they the the innervated fibular fibular of nerve. the branch common a deep nerve, are the is which by All

tibialis medial muscle compartment of muscles and in the the The anterior anterior the most is of the anterior (Fig. leg 6.93). two-thirds of the mainly surface and the lateral of membrane. tibia originates upper the of It surface shaft from interosseous the the of adjacent deep originates from fascia. It also

the one-third medial descends the tendon, into to metatarsal anterior The I parts in associated tibialis the surfaces the of muscle the inferior and with which bones adjacent of converge the of great toe. one the of attaches (medial the leg and foot, cuneiform) side form tarsal a medial fibers of where lower of it to

the tibialis dorsiflexes joints. joint ankle and intertarsal the anterior foot The the at foot at inverts the of During the medial it foot. walking, for support the arch provides dynamic

fibular The innervated is tibialis by deep nerve. anterior the

to next lies and is hallucis muscle longus muscle extensor (Fig. the by tibialis The anterior overlapped partly 6.93). middle of the surface the of It adjacent interosseous medial from originates fibula the and membrane. one-half

longus in The of tendons the and one-half foot. tendon lower the appears leg of of the hallucis the and the anterior between into extensor extensor tibialis descends longus the digitorum great phalanx. the dorsal of distal the the inserts on of surface It medial near where the surface the of upper continues on end the it foot the of anteriorly side toe the to base of

The the extensor longus toe. extends hallucis great it to crosses ankle foot ankle anterior at the joint. Because the also it the dorsiflexes joint, anterior longus the compartment deep by in all muscle of leg, the innervated nerve. Like the extensor is hallucis fibular muscles the

the the digitorum anterior extensor of and muscle lateral compartment leg of longus most (Fig. in The is the the posterior muscles 6.93). It of origin onto extensor one-half muscle, the of condyle the the of the superiorly the tibia. longus originates the fibula above of and from mainly upper medial to and lateral lateral extends hallucis surface the from the Like deep fascia. muscle, tibialis originates anterior it also

form divides expansions, aspect of into distal digitorum bases via insert, toes. extensor dorsal which muscle descends it of the where tendon, of into middle which continues dorsal the to lateral the into four of dorsal foot, the longus the tendons, surfaces digital The a the phalanges four and

the the joint, ankle is digitorum innervated deep fibular extensor dorsiflexes foot longus the The and by at nerve. the extends and toes

the tertius digitorum of part considered longus is The normally fibularis extensor muscle (Fig. 6.93). the longus immediately The and tertius muscle surface origin two the connected. originates of muscles fibularis below the extensor the medial normally are digitorum of fibula from the

of the digitorum the extensor tendon The of tendon fibularis longus. into the foot the tertius descends with aspect dorsomedial metatarsal the of of to associated into On deviates the (the V it metatarsal laterally base the the insert of dorsal foot, with the surface toe). little

assists tertius The fibularis innervated in fibular and the and nerve. of foot, eversion is the possibly by deep dorsiflexion

the in compartment of an of the aperture the forward the leg compartment the anterior the the in artery the popliteal membrane. the leg of is tibial The leg passes which originates artery, and anterior interosseous through posterior compartment into associated anterior artery with from

compartment descends membrane the tibial anterior the The through (Fig. interosseous on artery anterior 6.94). of hallucis distal anterior In the leg, muscles. and it tibialis longus between tendons the the extensor lies leaves the dorsalis and and of anterior distal aspect tibia end passing by to dorsal the foot of pedis It onto ankle the the the joint continues artery. the leg as

connects with a of knee the anterior leg, In the vessels artery tibial anastomotic around joint. recurrent has the branch, the network proximal which

of supplies the perforating joined fibular of anterior artery, its to the through is compartment course, the lower of numerous aspect branch the leg. the adjacent posterior from the forward branches Along the tibial passes artery interosseous by muscles membrane which and

artery ankle. arteries medial tibial fibula, respectively, from the and to tibia malleolar an and with artery rise form the connect malleolar of anterior network distal pass an lateral fibular vessels the around which posteriorly anterior artery, anastomotic around Distally, ends and to gives and posterior tibial anterior the an the

veins have the and Deep similar names. arteries follow

with of the anterior The associated is nerve the nerve the compartment fibular (Fig. leg deep 6.94). one the This the lateral divisions two originates in nerve the compartment of of as leg the of nerve. fibular common

fibular through compartments deep to The anteromedially septum separates intermuscular passes and then digitorum longus. passes nerve anterior from the deep that the extensor lateral the the of leg the tibial the and anterior It membrane with reaches anterior it meets interosseous descends where artery. the

the second the deep the to the the all and aspect continues compartment; muscles contributes nerve: in fibular first innervates between foot where digitorum supplies muscles, dorsal extensor skin the of the anterior it innervation interossei brevis, the innervates and The then great of two into toes. dorsal

The distal the limb ankle foot region joint. of is the lower the to the subdivided is and ankle, metatarsus, into the the digits. It

digits, the of digits are with placed laterally medially five little V) There (digit ending toe consisting (Fig. the 6.95).

a (sole; foot) of has superior Fig. inferior The (dorsum foot surface surface and an 6.95).

to and of the are digit. toes Abduction with respect defined the axis of the second adduction long is same toes. other to 90° in in thumb hand, as the great is the where other position the Unlike oriented toe oriented fingers, the the the stance. is upright platform and ground provides for of the foot The a contact stable body’s with point the forward also the body It walking. levers during

groups three the in are (Fig. foot bones There of three 6.96): except the which the phalanges, the has ankle; are of which which skeletal are the great V), toes—each framework metatarsals to toe and phalanges, form bones, has for the bones toe, of seven bones the the the (I the which two. metatarsus; for tarsal

with bones group medial the in between distal The arranged are bone intermediate of groups and an a a group foot proximal (Fig. the two on tarsal side the 6.96A).

(Latin two The proximal and for for talus “ankle”) the large the bones, group of “heel”): (Latin calcaneus consists

superior on is most the by and (Fig. the supported sits foot of bone talus top calcaneus and is The the of 6.96B)—it also projects ankle to and medial to joint foot. intermediate with of side above the the (navicular) bone tibia the articulate form tarsal the the on articulates and with fibula forward

group with the one it bones heel and the forward is of the foot. (cuboid) bones—posteriorly tarsal framework it the forms distal of the of lateral calcaneus projects tarsal of to The on of anteriorly the largest the articulate side bony

the from is when (Fig. talus, lateral The sides, or viewed medial snail-shaped 6.97A,B). projected posteriorly which medially expanded broad an neck, rounded It a connected of the which short end a is at forward to head, and has is body.

the of head depression with on posterior the talus the a the domed surface is for circular navicular bone. articulation corresponding Anteriorly, of facets articular articular continuous additional domed ridges: an separated by is three this with smooth surface Inferiorly,

bone. on articulate middle with facets surfaces and The anterior the calcaneus adjacent

articulation the The navicular the facet, connects calcaneonavicular plantar ligament—the of (spring ligament)—which articulates a calcaneus, the with the to the the to under talus. with calcaneus head ligament medial facets other for

marked medial the sulcus tali), a which neck to the forward surface side. The on the (the deep of inferior talus passes obliquely lateral across dramatically expands by is groove and lateral, from large Posterior facet the a the is with (posterior to tali calcaneal calcaneus. articulation for sulcus surface)

elevated the of by of into the superior ends tibia the the the is socket aspect formed the body ankle of and joint: distal fibula to talus to The form fit

of with the articulates end inferior upper (trochlear) this tibia. elevated surface The region of the

the The medial tibia. articulates with medial surface of the malleolus

surface malleolus lateral of with the articulates lateral the fibula. The

more larger surface Because surface. than and lateral talus is inferiorly at ankle articular the is the inferiorly medial lateral projects more the joint, corresponding the the and projects than the malleolus on medial malleolus larger

lower body lateral The the the part with lateral for the forms projection of (the part lower which process). bony facet of surface of supports the talus, the articulation the of fibula, a

(the large articular calcaneal body of has the facet facet) surface of inferior The with calcaneus. oval talus posterior for the articulation concave a the

a of process). aspect of the posterior facing medially posterior (the backward talus The of consists and the projection body lateral the posterior for tubercle the them process surface the longus from a its hallucis a on is flexor it between the and which the of leg medial marked foot. bracket tubercle, by The as passes groove tendon into

calcaneus supports the and under The sits talus. an its bone axis deviating of the is the elongate, foot, long to with midline the irregular, but midline generally (Fig. anteriorly along lateral It box-shaped oriented 6.98).

to the behind framework ankle calcaneus projects form heel. The of skeletal joint the the heel is divided this surface circular into The and parts. upper, posterior of middle, and lower region attaches part: tendon calcaneal tendon) to (Achilles the The middle

a the bursa. tendon separated part The by is from upper calcaneal

is is as the calcaneal the by part covered of continuous of heel, onto forward, surface and the tissue, The plantar bone the curves tuberosity. region weight-bearing lower is the subcutaneous

from by forward other plantar a large on calcaneal separated process (Fig. The process a notch lateral medial tuberosity a small as each and surface V-shaped the projects 6.98B). of (the the plantar ligament tubercle) posterior surface end of short the tubercle the anterior of the plantar attachment At a for the calcaneal foot. sole is of the

smooth for slightly two has regions (Fig. calcaneus of a except surface raised The contour the lateral 6.98C). other, areas—the two the grooves, which often its pass, the above obliquely (peroneal and middle of these fibular to raised surface. trochlea of anterior one shallow tubercle)—is across has the One surface they fibularis the tendons are as the calcaneus. longus the over to the lateral and side muscles of bound trochlea The brevis pass of

ankle or for to attachment a posterior raised Superior tubercle and the the area is of collateral ligament calcaneofibular the part of joint. fibular the lateral of trochlea second

sustentaculum tali; its margin The feature Fig. has of upper with one concave is and calcaneus prominent the surface associated medial (the medially posterior the projecting the the is a talus. supporting which bone more head 6.98A), part of of and of shelf

muscle distinct to the the of flexor sustentaculum groove running The longus tendon underside tali from into a of sole which of travels anterior posterior hallucis has along the foot. the and the

surface) on superior facet the articular the with head The (middle facet tali of for talus. articulation talar of the corresponding has the a surface sustentaculum middle

(Fig. itself articular surfaces the surface and posterior talar calcaneus superior the on Anterior of are 6.98A):

the with head and is corresponding on anterior surface The anterior talar the talus. the facet articulates articular small of

the superior is of the approximately posterior and the articular large near talar calcaneus. surface surface of middle is The

head surfaces, articular the body sulcus; other articulate two Between is talus, which the talar which groove the surface, with talus, articulates a articular of calcaneal Fig. the the of (the posterior and the deep with 6.98A,C).

calcaneus is between The lateral on and is the the of gap superior surface visible the of which ends when large talus the sinus, surface is skeleton aspect and calcaneal calcaneus (Fig. talus inferior its on sulcus the sulcus of form a that from the foot viewed the tali the of the anterior tarsal the together 6.99).

tarsal The of shaped) the intermediate (Fig. medial on foot the side navicular the (boat is bone 6.96). the the front lateral behind side in the distal tarsal articulates bone and group talus with and articulates This of on bones. with

projects tendon, posterior of on tibialis surface plantar One rounded bone. the the tuberosity medial a side the which inferiorly attachment is of for feature distinctive the the of navicular the prominent of

of to (Fig. consists bones group tarsal lateral distal of medial, the From 6.96):

with and bone cuneiform, the posteriorly lateral “cube”), of lateral a across on obliquely in metatarsals—the which plantar forward fibularis two the of muscle articulates anteriorly (Greek lateral for anterior prominent to the the calcaneus, from passes with bases cuboid lies groove medially which longus tendon medial. the with The the surface, the

anteriorly (Latin lateral, cuneiform cuneiforms other, posteriorly with with medial the the with articulate to metatarsals. the intermediate, three and Three for and bones, articulating each in bases addition navicular “wedge”)—the bone medial of

There from I five to lateral medial the are foot, to in V (Fig. numbered metatarsals 6.100). Metatarsal the associated thickest. toe, is I, with great shortest and the second longest. is The

a middle, the a and base. distal metatarsal Each at proximal the elongate head in an shaft end, has

base The more head and distal articulates a the each toe of group one or the phalanx metatarsal with articulates the of bones. proximal tarsal with of of the surface The sesamoid two head bones. plantar articulates with metatarsal I of also of

other. bases of sides also to of II The with the metatarsals articulate each V tendon site muscle. brevis fibularis which base lateral the prominent posteriorly side tuberosity, the projects of a metatarsal has for attachment V of The of is the and the

toes are bones the the phalanges (Fig. The of 6.100). great and distal). phalanges (proximal for distal), and has Each the has only middle, two (proximal, toe, toe three except which

base, shaft, consists Each phalanx of a a head: and distal a

of head The of phalanx related the metatarsal. articulates base each with proximal the

at the is The tuberosity digit. plantar a each the end flattened crescent-shaped into plantar the of and phalanx under head nonarticular pad of distal

than of much the total associated toe, combined the each length metatarsal. length the is of In the shorter phalanges

synovial foot type talus involves the ankle The the and of (Fig. tibia the joint the and leg in is of fibula and 6.102).

on of joint and hinge-like the leg. allows mainly the dorsiflexion The plantarflexion foot ankle

strong fibula anchored distal the The end the tibia by to is the of of end ligaments. larger firmly distal expanded deep part socket upper the and bracket-shaped of tibia the body for of the fibula a Together, create the talus:

socket of of inferior tibia. the roof The the is by the formed surface of end distal the

of The the side tibia. by medial the of socket is formed medial malleolus the

the fibula. malleolus side of longer is of the socket the lateral by lateral formed The

hyaline by The articular cartilage. covered surfaces are

lateral side onto of like end one other and the end articular is a facing flat the short medial. its with facing half-cylinder tipped part shaped The talus are by curved bracket-shaped The socket ends and of ends tibia upper cartilage into fibula. and the fit formed by the the of the the covered half-cylinder surface and two hyaline distal

wider is the of articular it much viewed is above, posteriorly. When the surface anteriorly from than talus its foot socket tighter dorsiflexed the when and the As moves the into than of when a bone the is the the part wider surface the in joint and is foot joint. plantarflexed fits is into talus talus the ankle the of narrower result, joint therefore most when foot the stable dorsiflexed. is is The

margins attaches bones. to membrane, fibrous synovial surfaces, articular also covers the a and around is The cavity the of by adjacent enclosed by which articular the synovial a which and is the membrane membrane, attached

(deltoid) and by medial is ligaments. The ankle lateral joint stabilized

(Fig. is ligament The large, (deltoid) strong medial triangular in 6.103), shape. and is Its the is medial attached bone the malleolus medial the tubercle base talus and navicular above the attached line to apex to front to extends tuberosity that behind. below of in its a of from the broad

attachment: the parts inferior points is subdivided on into The medial four of ligament based

associated bone margin of the the calcaneus bone plantar tuberosity tali to the that the ligament), ligament and the (spring the of of the part the behind, navicular ligament. tibionavicular sustentaculum of which in front part the to calcaneonavicular connects The attaches navicular is medial

more tali to the The calcaneus is which central, part, tibiocalcaneal of the sustentaculum bone. attaches

of the part side tubercle to the The tibiotalar talus. posterior medial medial and attaches

the of fourth ligament anterior talus. is to The of the (the tibionavicular medial part deep tibiocalcaneal surface parts the and tibiotalar to medial attaches and the part)

separate ligament, calcaneofibular three ligament, ligament The is of and (Fig. ankle lateral anterior ligaments, talofibular the of ligament the the posterior composed the talofibular 6.104):

malleolus the talus. of of ligament, attaches the region is talofibular a to margin anterior the adjacent lateral anterior and The ligament short the

posterior talus. and the on talofibular from posterior the horizontally runs process medially the fossa The side to medial malleolus the malleolar of of lateral backward ligament the

to malleolus of lateral calcaneus. to the ligament is surface on posteromedial attached lateral fossa The attach of the posteroinferiorly the and to side tubercle calcaneofibular on passes the the a above malleolar below

synovial joints The mainly between pronate tarsal the foot: the invert, evert, individual numerous and supinate, bones

of the foot is turning the and inward sole respectively. Inversion whole eversion outward, and

is movement. front laterally is the rotating Pronation reverse and foot, relative of the foot to back of the the the supination

surfaces. contact allow standing or stances when the and ground maintain in Pronation irregular supination with normal to when different the on foot

(Fig. major the movements The talocalcaneonavicular, at and joints which joints subtalar, include calcaneocuboid occur 6.105). often tarsal what transverse The as referred joints to form calcaneocuboid together is the talocalcaneonavicular joint. and

and cuneiforms limited cuneiforms joints Intertarsal the the and movement. the between between only navicular allow

navicular cuboid The joint fibrous. between normally the is and

facet the of the on of calcaneus. superior and talar the The calcaneal surface facet large posterior posterior inferior is the on the the surface subtalar between: joint talus, corresponding

fibrous enclosed cavity The membrane, is articular is which covered by by a membrane. synovial

foot. and involved are gliding joint which and of subtalar The allows eversion rotation, inversion the in talocalcaneal interosseous ligaments medial, the and posterior, stabilize Lateral, joint. ligament (Fig. tarsal in The the lies talocalcaneal sinus interosseous 6.106).

which ligament navicular a calcaneonavicular in calcaneus is The complex head plantar with talocalcaneonavicular (spring ligament) the (Fig. and the talus front the joint and below articulates joint in of the 6.107A).

with involved inversion movements and movements, joint The allows with gliding rotation the subtalar together talocalcaneonavicular foot. which and the of similar are of joint eversion also pronation supination. participates in and It

on the head, inferior facets and the sustentaculum the middle (Fig. anterior the surface talus the talar and facets calcaneus middle calcaneus joint anterior on the and the calcaneal talocalcaneonavicular superior parts and corresponding and the surface of are: talar respectively, between The tali, of of 6.107B).

The ligament) inferior the and the ligament the the of plantar talar talus calcaneonavicular facet and between of (spring is joint between ligament head. medial surface on part the the the

end is talar talus the navicular. surface and and joint of The between is talocalcaneonavicular largest of between and navicular corresponding posterior part anterior ovoid the head the the of joint the the concave the

the by the a by the ligament navicular, of is the passes is interosseous capsule between ligament, talocalcaneonavicular posteriorly (spring talocalcaneal joint, adjacent (Fig. ligament, calcaneonavicular and which synovial plantar inferiorly by of superiorly the the regions neck ligament) talonavicular The the of joint, which talus reinforced: and 6.107C,D).

superior talocalcaneonavicular the bifurcate is part the to of part joint The by ligament the a ligament, of Y-shaped calcaneonavicular which reinforced the joint. lateral is attached anterior of attached The calcaneus of ligament), part of and superior are arms and dorsolateral bifurcate the of aspect of surface (calcaneocuboid the the ligament its surface to: ligament). navicular dorsomedial to base cuboid the the the the the is (calcaneonavicular

front broad navicular tali in spans (spring ligament the is thick between space bone ligament) ligament plantar (Fig. that and the behind The sustentaculum calcaneonavicular a the 6.107B,C). joint, It of arch and talocalcaneonavicular in medial takes supports talus, part resists depression the the the of the foot. the head of

the joint corresponding anterior the of posterior on surface cuboid. facet calcaneus, the and calcaneocuboid is surface between: The the joint the synovial facet on a of the

on inversion pronation the eversion the of rotating joint also and the allows sliding with calcaneocuboid contributes and movements supination and and hindfoot. of forefoot The involved foot, to

ligament plantar by and plantar (short ligament the The is (see bifurcate calcaneocuboid ligament by plantar ligament). reinforced joint calcaneocuboid long and the above) the

tubercle and very ligament) wide, (Fig. ligament to inferior cuboid plantar the connects of (short strong, calcaneal is the short, The and plantar the surface calcaneocuboid 6.108A). not in the It calcaneocuboid supports the lateral the depression but of plantar of the only joint, also arch ligament assists resisting foot. long

the (Fig. and to ligament ligament calcaneocuboid lies sole is in ligament The plantar plantar the inferior foot the of longest the long 6.108B):

inferior and it Posteriorly, to tuberosity the the the attaches between surface calcaneus of calcaneal the tubercle.

cuboid longus the a the bone tubercle for behind groove to ridge broad a tendon. it on of the surface Anteriorly, attaches and inferior the fibularis

ligament the the the superficial of fibers of bones. bases plantar More long extend metatarsal to

of the ligament, and resisting long depression is the of plantar ligament lateral arch strongest supports the calcaneocuboid The foot. joint the

bones allow between are and the adjacent metatarsal sliding The bones tarsal tarsometatarsal joints movements plane (Fig. limited joints and 6.109).

the the metatarsal The range great of of extension, and the other flexion, and than is joint joints rotation. tarsometatarsal cuneiform movement medial between that tarsometatarsal greater toe the allows the of of and transverse joint, with take the The of pronation and part tarsal supination foot. in tarsometatarsal joints, the

joints bases heads corresponding phalanges proximal metatarsals the ellipsoid The of and sphere-shaped are the the synovial the metatarsophalangeal of of joints the between digits.

The circumduction. and and limited flexion, extension abduction, adduction, joints and rotation, metatarsophalangeal allow

tendons grooves their collateral long and plantar which are lateral reinforced ligaments, The by digits (Fig. by medial have ligaments, for and the surfaces joint on plantar capsules the of 6.109).

metatarsals ligaments unified Four (Fig. the deep to metatarsals structure single heads together and act of transverse link enable the the as a metatarsal 6.109). of The metatarsophalangeal ligaments adjacent the joints. ligaments blend with plantar the

the plane toe of of and is in ligament. great as the oriented deep is metatarsals linked by the metatarsal metatarsal toes the to the The second other same toe the metatarsal a of transverse great motion. the between and In a the toe limited the range cuneiform addition, metatarsal joint of has of medial 90° restricted therefore metacarpal allows independent and metacarpals between thumb The in the metacarpal bone function—unlike the between of a metacarpals of is transverse range deep the joint toe and motion. ligament the is index thumb the and very the the hand, carpal a metacarpal has wide no great to fingers, finger, of where there oriented the the

that allow extension. flexion The interphalangeal hinge joints mainly joints are and ligaments (Fig. ligaments medial plantar and and by by reinforced lateral are collateral They 6.109).

arrangement and major Tarsal of tunnel, the retinacula, ankle structures at

surfaces the the formed retinaculum the of (Fig. calcaneus; by: medial the posteromedial tibia, inferior and The surface flexor the an the formed calcaneus, of posterior depression the and tarsal of and surface medial the is sustentaculum a medial side of of by ankle the overlying malleolus talus, tunnel on of the the tali 6.110).

inferior by medial retinaculum the surfaces the surface malleolus, talus, formed (Fig. of tali calcaneus, the is flexor medial layer depression a of the the medial the and posterior the and tissue spans connective strap-like that The of sustentaculum the surface of bony 6.110). the It the and below attaches behind of above and to margin calcaneus. to malleolus inferomedial medial the

the the below and aponeurosis) deep deep above The of the fascia retinaculum continuous foot. the leg with with is (plantar fascia of

of the foot the as retinaculum the flexor muscles grooves for bones the (Fig. the posterior sole the flexor into connective convert of the the compartment leg of into from on tissue they pass channels from tendons tubular Septa 6.110). channels facilitated the tendons movement sheaths, which is of tendons. synovial surround Free the the by in

posterior of are digitorum muscles. the medial for malleolus compartments surface the longus tendons of and Two the posterior flexor tibialis the on of posterior tendon flexor digitorum medial tibialis longus. is the the of the to tendon The

and the lateral the posterior tendons tarsal to foot. posterior the the through nerve the the sole of of and its digitorum tibial the with longus, tibialis into tunnel artery Immediately associated veins flexor tibial pass artery midway and through the The flexor can between of medial pulse tibial calcaneus. malleolus the retinaculum the the be posterior felt

the the the Lateral longus for muscle. nerve to compartment undersurface the is of and talus flexor surface tibial tendon posterior on hallucis tali the the of of the sustentaculum the

extensor tendons and the strap prevent of of region the retinacula foot muscles tendon extensor the and to (Fig. Two bowing ankle the extension toes during 6.111):

tibia. deep anterior superior joint fascia thickening a of extensor in just attached ankle retinaculum A the the distal of leg the is to to borders fibula and and superior the

its lateral foot arm attached medial its of Y-shaped, the plantar and upper side the to to and medial medially over of malleolus, by retinaculum aponeurosis. the medially other An whereas the calcaneus, inferior crosses the of to arms to surface around the by wraps side attaches is the foot of attach base the one the

foot. on longus a the of digitorum of pass and fibularis through The the side the compartment extensor lateral tertius proximal tendons finally pass pedis tendons, the retinacula. (terminal the branch extensor muscle these of under anterior the the Medial and dorsalis artery tibial artery), anterior extensor the tendon of hallucis longus to of muscle, tibialis tendon the the

Fibular muscles side the brevis retinacula longus the the and the tendons fibularis (Fig. (peroneal) of bind of to foot lateral fibularis 6.112):

extends and between fibular the retinaculum A superior the lateral calcaneus. malleolus

of fibular attaches the the retinaculum. and calcaneus trochlea to the extensor around An the fibers lateral inferior of fibular above surface inferior retinaculum blends the with

brevis the fibularis the the that trochlea, fibular septum separates for longus a above At of the from muscle the below. fibularis compartment tendon for

Arches foot of the

The plane. foot lie horizontal in the a not of do bones arches longitudinal (Fig. transverse Instead, to and relative form ground they the 6.113), absorb from forces downward body standing distribute and which surfaces. and the during different moving on

(Fig. the the heads longitudinal arch and of posterior the end calcaneus of the formed metatarsals between foot is of The the 6.113A). lateral highest it the it on the longitudinal where lowest part on arch, is and where the the medial side, It part. forms of side, medial the forms lateral

of foot highest are arch is the near these head metatarsal by together the the that heads transverse a cuts of deep The (Fig. bones talus coronal the ligaments the plane the and metatarsals, in through transverse disappears where of held 6.113B).

the the and foot (Fig. support Ligaments of arches muscles 6.114):

support Ligaments plantar long calcaneocuboid (spring and the (short ligament), plantar plantar include plantar the ligaments, arches aponeurosis. ligament), and that plantar the calcaneonavicular

tibialis during the and fibularis dynamic provide that Muscles posterior longus. and the anterior arches support include the for walking

plantar of aponeurosis the in (Fig. deep a is of thickening the fascia foot sole The 6.115). the as It extends to the arranged thick tissue tuberosity of and process anchored firmly connective forward fibers. longitudinally a of band is medial calcaneal of and The bones, which the connect the anteriorly bands, dermis enter toes digital ligaments, pass and as form they fibers and diverge skin. with

which are interconnected plantar bands the digital of metatarsal metatarsophalangeal form the the superficial ligaments. aponeurosis Distal by transverse joints, transverse fibers, to

deeper the in supports and the plantar protects sole. foot structures arch aponeurosis longitudinal The of the

toes of sheaths Fibrous

digital muscles plantar digitorum (Fig. longus, hallucis tunnels flexor sheaths and of brevis, the the enter flexor digits of flexor The digitorum aspect fibrous the on or tendons longus 6.116). metatarsophalangeal sheaths to extend These begin the distal fibrous joints to the and phalanges. anterior and to the joints. arches ligaments They margins by ligaments metatarsophalangeal plantar phalanges the fibrous (cross-shaped) are the cruciate interphalangeal the and attached with associated posteriorly and of to formed

tendons are the and bowing tendon These prevent toes flexed. the fibrous bony to the hold tunnels plane when the a are by sheath. each tunnel, synovial Within tendons surrounded

(“extensor phalanges expansions digitorum complex pass hallucis digital digits dorsal the brevis, aspect dorsal proximal of The form (Fig. expand longus the and hoods”) over extensor the extensor digitorum tendons longus, the of into to extensor and 6.117).

distal V) corner and the attached of is shape apex extensor to central base II wrapped sides middle Each to with the metatarsophalangeal the the the joint. (toe or proximal hood I) in triangular each attached of to around phalanx, the the region phalanx, (toes transverse ligaments. metatarsal attach to The deep the hoods the mainly of corners

margin hood free the muscles the of of side. into intrinsic the on of each insert foot Many the at joints the be (Fig. distributed metatarsophalangeal the into from the the of these forces these muscles extending muscles The allows joints to the cause while of flexion hoods time to attachment toes same the over interphalangeal extensor 6.117). elevated ground The when foot the metatarsophalangeal flexion joints of they and overextension the prevent grip off uncertain, of joints movements the the function and toes the ground these in the interphalangeal but the is may of walking. heel during is

interossei, other side plantae the hallucis, digitorum intrinsic and (flexor brevis, the muscles—the lumbricals—are the dorsal foot insert the of foot digiti of four they flexor dorsal the in in accessorius), the the of organized on and and extensor flexor brevis originate foot; minimi, abductor brevis, flexor minimi all where hallucis plantar digiti and are layers. brevis, on foot: plantar quadratus abductor sole Intrinsic brevis into hallucis aspect muscles the extensor digitorum

toes. movements generate modify mainly Intrinsic tendons of fine the long and of the actions muscles the

fibular is are foot tibial extensor the which deep intrinsic by innervated nerve digitorum of the by lateral for the muscles plantar of the All branches brevis, medial nerve. and innervated the except part also nerve. The may receive dorsal deep innervation their two interossei the of first from fibular

dorsal the On aspect

on calcaneus roughened The area extensor to the tarsal the lateral of a is the attached sinus (Fig. superolateral surface digitorum to brevis Table and 6.10). 6.118

belly the and three which enter extensor longus, the digits deep passes foot, of tendons, to anteromedially IV. II, forms muscle The and digitorum III, flat tendons the over of tendons extensor the the tendons of longus. sides The lateral join digitorum the three long toes extends attachments hoods. tendons extensor the and extensor middle to the brevis extensor The through digitorum It by nerve. fibular the is deep innervated

brevis. originates with conjunction digitorum extensor hallucis brevis the The extensor in of base phalanx great toes. to Its proximal the tendon of attaches the the metatarsophalangeal great The nerve. deep is muscle and by toe the the extends of the joint innervated fibular

the sole In

the into four the layers. are organized of sole in foot muscles The the fourth to or are layers these second, to layers. plantar deep, dorsal, third, superficial and first, From

the the most is are components aponeurosis the and muscles, layer three layers superficial is plantar immediately There to first four which in (Fig. the of deep of 6.119 and 6.11). Table abductor medial to are abductor lateral, minimi. flexor hallucis, digitorum these muscles brevis, From digiti and the

the the medial sole medial side soft bulge The and on tissue contributes (Fig. the the foot margin abductor a hallucis to of forms muscle of 6.119). It medial and originates process retinaculum of the flexor and margins tuberosity aponeurosis. the adjacent of calcaneal from the plantar that of great tendon medial of the medial with on bone side sesamoid a phalanx and the base brevis forms tendon hallucis the the on of the It the muscle. the associated proximal toe of flexor inserts

plantar nerve. the abducts toe by metatarsophalangeal joint and medial the of innervated abductor and the branch is at the tibial flexes The great hallucis

and in of immediately the plantar digitorum lies sole the the brevis of to flexor superior tendons muscle to digitorum the foot The flexor (Fig. aponeurosis longus the inferior 6.119). flat from calcaneal and the medial muscle aponeurosis. plantar originates the from adjacent as The a tendon spindle-shaped process the of belly tuberosity

The to anteriorly converge flexor enter toes. four four the brevis which form of digitorum muscle the tendons, fibers one each of lateral of tendon each dorsally toe, the middle Near the tendon and attach proximal the to flexor of base of the margins the of longus of pass the around phalanx. splits the digitorum side to phalanx each

the at flexes the tibial innervated the brevis lateral interphalangeal and toes digitorum proximal flexor medial joints four of The branch by nerve. plantar the is

muscle large the to and on plantar minimi is on contributes of the lateral the digiti lateral (Fig. foot abductor eminence the side sole The 6.119). base of It connective and broad origin, a from from V. which tuberosity and connects processes the a the base of of the mainly band medial has the tissue, metatarsal calcaneal of fibrous with calcaneus lateral

base forward plantar of little tendon, a of the abductor the V the attach a and groove base the proximal minimi which continues side in of toe. the travels digiti to surface of of forms the lateral to phalanx metatarsal shallow The on

the is and at The by abducts little toe nerve. lateral joint the digiti branch the minimi metatarsophalangeal tibial of plantar innervated the abductor

the this and longus second layer, which and through muscle muscles pass the is sole the foot flexor digitorum with of associated tendons lumbrical (Fig. layer four consists the in of the quadratus of muscle, plantae The and 6.120 6.12). Table

of two muscle a heads plantae flat origin The quadratus is quadrangular (Fig. muscle with 6.120):

heads the the One the to of the from tali. sustentaculum medial calcaneus originates inferior of surface

surface attachment ligament. the the calcaneal head the the anterior the of long inferior of of plantar originates from the process and tuberosity lateral calcaneus other The to

digitorum the inserts of into sole flexor the The the in the longus side tendon tendon where plantae the foot divides. quadratus half of near of the proximal of muscle lateral the

also enters medial of the quadratus longus it flexor pull” digitorum as side. and toes foot of the “line plantae tendon The in the of adjust the flexing from the tendon the this may sole assists the innervated plantar by muscle lateral nerve. is The

medial dorsally muscles the The the and lumbrical extensor four worm-like digitorum the lateral are muscles tendons free margins that of the longus of to the hoods (Fig. pass of originate four flexor insert toes into from 6.120).

toe. second side from lumbrical first that The of associated the digitorum flexor the is tendon medial longus originates of the with the bipennate three tendons. originate adjacent are the remaining from and of sides The muscles

of the the muscles lumbrical flexion extensor and joints The act of through extension ground interphalangeal during the joints metatarsophalangeal hoods to when excessive walking. heel the leaves the resist

the innervated by plantar three by innervated is nerve. nerve, The first lateral are while the other plantar lumbrical medial the

(Fig. in three foot the the There of third layer in muscles are sole the and 6.13): Table 6.122

hallucis) associated flexor with great toe. brevis and adductor are Two the (the hallucis

the (the associated minimi brevis) third digiti with flexor The is little toe.

heads two The muscle origin of tendinous flexor has (Fig. brevis hallucis 6.122):

lateral the adjacent groove plantar surface behind surfaces the of cuneiform. cuboid, and lateral for from the the longus, head originates fibularis the of The

originates medial the tendon the the muscle it sole posterior The as from passes tibialis into of head foot. the of

and medial The to belly, give unite muscle and of into I. parts the lateral and which metatarsal to plantar is separated itself adjacent a medial surface heads rise lateral phalanx of the inserts great or base either of of proximal side of the to Each tendon medial lateral part a muscle the gives the toe. the that on rise

in of I. the A metatarsal surface occurs hallucis the as plantar tendon the of head brevis crosses of bone sesamoid each it flexor The the passes tendon the bones. sesamoid longus flexor between hallucis of

nerve. medial by metatarsophalangeal of the The toe flexes the is the hallucis plantar brevis innervated flexor great and joint

their the into base muscle hallucis proximal great oblique, heads, and near join The phalanx of of (Fig. side of by the originates muscular the ends adductor toe the insert which lateral transverse to two 6.122):

from the joints base plantar metatarsal the lateral the near ligaments—the from lateral foot crosses The from three sole oblique associated medial originates the the head metatarsophalangeal great head the of muscle transverse with of of transversely the ligaments associated deep toe. transverse the the and joins toes to and

than muscle—this The anterolaterally is head longus sole metatarsals passes the sheath originates and head of from fibularis of the joins bases the of the through plantar transverse larger covering foot the from IV head oblique head. and the and II the transverse surfaces to the

brevis the the associated adductor addition lateral proximal of to The in hallucis attaching to of of the attaches tendon to tendon the with phalanx. hallucis insertion the sesamoid flexor bone muscle

the The joint is adductor plantar toe at and innervated hallucis the lateral by metatarsophalangeal adducts the nerve. great

metatarsal adjacent brevis longus The base the fibularis sheath plantar of minimi from muscle the flexor V originates (Fig. of the of tendon surface and digiti 6.122). proximal the lateral It on little of of of inserts the the phalanx side the toe. base

is metatarsophalangeal at little nerve. The the plantar lateral minimi by joint innervated the digiti the flexes and brevis toe flexor

the of layer sole dorsal foot, muscle the interossei and groups plantar muscle deepest the are There two (Fig. in in the Table 6.123 and 6.14).

relative The to axis of long the second (Fig. to the toes most through in fourth sole abduct superior foot and four are toe muscles dorsal interossei the the second the the 6.123). the muscles All are of and metatarsals. four sides from originate adjacent bipennate

of of free insert tendons The hoods the interossei extensor phalanges and into base the of of the dorsal the toes. proximal margin the

associated The it, its be one dorsal two interossei side. second can axis, abducted to long of toe has with either each on so side it sides and their lateral muscle interosseous toes third have The dorsal only. fourth on a and and sole minimi) layer the muscles of great abductor abductors (the have The in the hallucis the toes own little digiti foot. of first in their abductor

the interphalangeal addition abduction, extensor metatarsophalangeal flexion extension the the hoods to dorsal through In resist joints the act to of joints. of interossei and

interossei plantar nerve. lateral the are by The innervated dorsal superior branches from dorsal on nerve. deep surfaces the interossei first and fibular second their receive The also

second the adduct the and interossei fourth, The third, little (Fig. through toes plantar three axis toward long toe the 6.123).

of and muscle of interosseous medial margin associated the its of inserts extensor from base Each and medial metatarsal originates proximal the hood the side the plantar into free phalanx.

adductor (the axis layer hallucis) has its one adducted back own in in interossei. using its toe second third dorsal adductor The muscles longitudinal of foot the of of great sole is the the toe and to its the by

through interphalangeal interossei the and joints to of to metatarsophalangeal plantar the resist flexion extension joints. the addition extensor the of hoods In act adduction, innervated All the are by plantar lateral nerve.

the pedis foot is supply the (dorsal of tibial branches to of dorsalis the artery and foot) by Blood arteries. posterior

tibial posterior the into enters lateral and medial sole plantar and The arteries. bifurcates artery of the form artery) to deep artery with pedis plantar deep plantar joins artery terminal The plantar end lateral arch. (the the dorsalis the the this toes. from Branches supply arch

pedis the artery tibial the onto of passes foot. of and aspect continuation metatarsals artery, dorsalis anterior the enter of is between the artery, I then II the to sole plantar The the as and dorsal foot the inferiorly, deep

and tarsal foot artery tibial on of posterior enters to the posterior side through medial the the tunnel medial malleolus. the the The ankle a tissue, by is pulse thin connective layer only tibial superficial heel, the artery by between the artery retinaculum, malleolus covered is here and the the because Midway of skin. the medial of palpable and by posterior posterior small location, plantar plantar lateral a much this medial tibial larger Near artery the bifurcates into artery. a and artery

the hallucis of lateral into deep proximal artery The then the plantar digitorum muscles passes to and first plantae quadratus flexor abductor (Fig. end brevis foot, and the muscle of the between the sole anterolaterally 6.124). reaches flexor abductor It metatarsal it digitorum lies the digiti and muscles. brevis between the of in groove where the base minimi V which deep bases deep here, From plantar sole the form on lateral the the arch, the muscles. interossei crosses of artery metatarsal plane plantar to the and medially the curves

the the side and II, the of I branch the dorsal deep which artery, plantar of artery) plantar arch metatarsals with from joins of foot. the terminal enters the sole pedis the bases (deep Between dorsalis

the of on to to little with sides which to three branches the between the dorsal digital arch of which toe; pass aspect of arteries, supply lateral plantar to digital adjacent and four V the anastomose toes the Major branch to side perforating great bases metatarsals a arteries, the vessels foot. II of toe; I include: medial of the deep the V and side plantar branches metatarsal of

abductor into medial artery sole by foot of deep the of (Fig. muscle passing the proximal hallucis end the the The to passes plantar 6.124). a the adjacent the digitorum flexor brevis It muscles the muscles. then supplies between and and deep branch to passes abductor hallucis in groove forward deep of arch, It great of which joining the digital medial the ends side branch the by plantar supplies toe. the

base to arteries I, gives to the into the plantar medial plantar deep branch, superficial vessels plantar that three to digitorum artery the flexor muscle metatarsal which brevis the divides rise arch. the a from superficial join of pass metatarsal Near

crosses anterior the the and artery joint dorsalis the (Fig. artery as pedis The of begins tibial artery tibial anterior ankle is the continuation 6.125). the bones, interosseous and then to artery, plantar between of talus, over the heads navicular, dorsal the cuneiform of the dorsal aspect first and anteriorly intermediate of the sole It the inferiorly, the in plantar passes passes deep deep join muscle arch as foot. two the the the pedis the of longus dorsal of to The the be felt toe. against surface by underlying foot gently artery palpating dorsalis on hallucis second the longus bones and can of vessel between tendons the digitorum the the tarsal pulse extensor the extensor

medial Branches branches, artery lateral an first pedis include a arcuate of tarsal the dorsal and dorsalis artery, artery: metatarsal and

a with bones, adjacent structures over around the of the laterally arteries network anastomosing and and tarsal vessels ankle. The formed medially tarsal supplying pass

dorsal dorsal laterally sides to adjacent lateral near of metatarsals to the II digital over to arteries artery and of the to supplies digit bases gives dorsal The V. their metatarsal digits rise side that passes digital aspect and supply dorsal a which of arteries, V, arcuate three artery the

metatarsal before the the plantar adjacent artery sole dorsalis dorsalis last the artery foot) branch toes. digital branches dorsal artery to and the of pedis continues artery great dorsal of pedis supplies The deep as second the (the sides of first the into

and arteries metatarsal arteries. with The metatarsal dorsal connect deep similar the plantar branches the perforating from from plantar arch branches

the There in are and interconnected veins networks foot. of deep superficial The veins the deep follow arteries. over on (Fig. of dorsal venous the surface veins Superficial metatarsals into foot a drain the dorsal the arch 6.126):

medial The vein the and great medial and originates the onto passes the arch from side of side the leg. anterior the of medial to saphenous malleolus

the to side arch leg. the of back and onto passes from The lateral and saphenous vein malleolus the the originates of lateral small the posterior

nerves: sural, the is by superficial supplied deep fibular, The foot fibular, and saphenous tibial,

five sensory innervation. contribute to general cutaneous or nerves All

digitorum innervates nerve by foot except The for the is the extensor the tibial all muscles deep nerve. innervated which intrinsic of fibular brevis,

interossei. often of The innervation the nerve and also dorsal to first second the fibular deep contributes

nerve through foot medial tibial enters malleolus. posterior the The the to the tunnel tarsal medial the flexor artery, supply retinaculum to is to gives In nerve origin lateral penetrate branches, the calcaneal and the the to tunnel, posterior tibial heel. which the smaller medial tibial a nerve the Midway posterior into: artery medial nerve plantar large the bifurcates plantar between the with the tibial malleolus nerve, and a (Fig. and heel, lateral 6.127).

nerves medial their together and plantar The lie corresponding arteries. between lateral

the the plantar sensory major sole medial nerve the (Fig. foot The is in nerve of 6.127). of sole includes skin great two-thirds anterior surfaces and toe. the medial toes, one-half innervates the most three of on which the It adjacent of and the lumbrical. brevis, hallucis innervates plantar of skin, digitorum this intrinsic nerve In abductor area addition the to brevis, flexor four muscles—the flexor also first large hallucis, and

between foot both branches these hallucis hallucis and brevis, the the forward sole passes plantar flexor deep abductor groove digitorum into supplying muscles. to in abductor nerve the medial and muscle of the the to The

medial three branch plantar IV. divides plantar toe of side a surface of to plantar and nerves) to then toes on The which the nerve nerve) nerves the I proper (common to (proper flexor to digitorum brevis, adjacent surfaces plantar digital continue supply digital the the medial into supplies branches great plantar forward of digital digital the common first the lumbrical plantar to first nerve. The digital nerve originates from

an is nerve flexor important except brevis, for the first by The (Fig. intrinsic and digitorum supplied medial in nerve the (the the foot hallucis hallucis, motor because flexor abductor all the it plantar lateral innervates brevis, muscles lumbrical) in plantar sole, muscles nerve 6.127). sole strip the It the of digits. and skin of lateral also two-thirds anterior the on and a surfaces the lateral plantar adjacent one of one-half side of the innervates

enters lateral by abductor plantar nerve hallucis the passing of the The foot proximal muscle. attachment to the sole the of deep superficial supplying continues deep and brevis laterally quadratus muscles, and It divides then and and the head V digitorum the these near branches anteriorly muscles, plantae sole between into metatarsal both across to branches. flexor the of

side proper skin of supply toes nerve, on digital plantar common of digital IV to digital V. the nerve, adjacent little to of on nerves the supplies plantar a plantar divides The and which lateral lateral branch rise the plantar to sides nerve to a proper which the toe, skin gives and superficial

to metatarsals digiti the and V. digital little innervates the IV toe proper the plantar side of The and nerve the plantar muscles lateral brevis flexor and also dorsal minimi interossei between

the muscle. plantar deep nerve and the plantar branch lateral and hallucis The flexor the deep the motor long accompanies artery tendons is lateral of adductor to to It and superficial innervated hallucis V, the the which branch. to the adductor are and muscles, all between IV interossei by branches except muscle, those supplies fourth metatarsals lumbrical second

of sensory branches two extensor interossei fibular sides muscles, dorsal the the innervates supplies The skin them the to to the and brevis, web between digitorum contributes (Fig. the nerve the adjacent toes and of innervation deep dorsal to and space the on first second first general 6.128).

foot side the artery, extensor the fibular the the deep parallel on dorsal pedis hallucis aspect dorsalis and lateral the muscle. to of The with nerve the of is lateral longus enters tendon of and extensor branch, digitorum its deep origin a from nerve joint, gives lateral ankle Just the brevis surface. to which to innervates the the distal

joints, over down foot, on then the into the I between the and continues two divides The deep digital dorsal the II of dorsal to forward of toes and beginning and metatarsophalangeal supply the II metatarsals of surface near nerves, beds. nail fibular fascia which deep adjacent I nerve penetrates skin surfaces

the which the the interossei contribute motor before supply dorsal penetrates muscles, of two fascia. first from Small fibular nerve it deep branches, deep originate to

the fibular for most the is the and the lateral the foot The Fig. nerve sensory nerve; toe is and side and skin on nerve) (which sides I superficial fibular of deep dorsal to of the aspect and foot sural (which skin on toes little adjacent except is on skin of innervated by toes II innervated by 6.128).

foot aspect side in leg dorsal nerve penetrates enters and anterolateral fascia lower superficial The the fascia. of superficial the the the on deep fibular of dorsal along gives branches to digital course. its cutaneous and rise nerves It

tibial originates nerve branch the leg. the is a in high The of cutaneous that nerve sural It saphenous to lateral in foot to vein. the superficial close enters posterior the fascia the malleolus short dorsolateral foot and on lateral innervate the surface little side toe the Terminal (Fig. of the of skin branches 6.128B).

nerve a thigh. The that nerve femoral in the the is cutaneous originates of saphenous branch ankle branches of of side supply enter proximal Terminal on skin medial in fascia the the medial superficial side and foot (Fig. the the the foot on 6.128B).

lower and Tendons, to major landmarks in muscles, nerves. bony used veins, locate the limb are and arteries,

system. used are vessels they large, be vascular points as can Because to the entry In from vessels the lower heart body. most limb farthest the and are in in addition, inferior the the general. about in important in circulatory of give peripheral can the system nature lower pulses Therefore, status the limb of the information the

and to assess action cord. the tested limb of are spinal and muscle sacral lumbar the regions Sensation lower in

nerve the sciatic Avoiding

in of leg the the nerve muscles and appreciable of area foot, posterior the muscles The compartment thigh, and sciatic in skin. innervates an It (Fig. enters in gluteal the region the limb lower greater palpable and ischial two major landmarks, passes 6.129) tuberosity. between inferiorly the midway and trochanter the bony the hand’s about protuberance can width one hard felt of the bony midpoint a be The trochanter inferior iliac greater crest. to easily as is the just tuberosity The gluteal fold. ischial palpable above

gluteal divided landmarks. region can palpable The lines by positioned using into bony be two quadrants

highest descends the line crest. point the One of iliac vertically from

plane horizontal other iliac line crest the The ischial and the passes horizontally first line through the between highest the of midway tuberosity. point through the

through and the of of descends the quadrant the sciatic medial margin along lower upper The quadrant. lateral lower medial nerve the corner curves lateral carried to the region major (Fig. the vessels out Injections the the to in avoid be lateral upper sciatic corner and in anterior of injury quadrant nerve can 6.129B).

the in Finding artery the femoral triangle femoral

The (Fig. artery passes triangle the into femoral femoral abdomen. lower 6.130) limb the the of from

medial ligament. adductor margin inguinal and sartorius the is muscle, the depression the longus muscle, between triangle formed the the The medial femoral the margin thigh of the of in anterior

The muscle tendon the longus pubic immediately to inferior the tubercle. cord-like structure of bone to attaches palpated that as adductor be can a

from the tibia originates spine sartorius crosses below iliac the to the knee attach muscle over thigh superior and to of the aspect medial joint. anterior The anteriorly the

The laterally superior anterior to tubercle pubic spine the the medially. iliac inguinal attaches and ligament

into femoral abdomen and into femoral by the the the inguinal passing the descends under thigh ligament The triangle. from artery pubic anterior triangle, just the and In the felt iliac femoral pulse to is midway the superior between ligament inferior its inguinal spine. easily the symphysis femoral canal, tubercle. artery to is femoral the the contains the vein vein to the and lateral is lymphatics pubic which medial to immediately lies and Medial the the The nerve to artery. femoral lateral femoral lies

structures Identifying around the knee

The prominent is palpable the knee. feature a patella at the surface it patella inferior to tendon superiorly the femoris The and ligament attaches patellar to the connects of the (Fig. tibial quadriceps tuberosity 6.131). patellar The easily the palpable. and tuberosity ligament tibial are mainly spinal L4. levels L3 (tendon) at cord reflex the activity tap and on A tests ligament patellar

condyle of tibia. surface as inferior on The fibula the lateral of protuberance the head the knee palpable the lateral of a just to the is be biceps located the tendon inferiorly. by femoris following the can It also of

inferior fibula the surface nerve to of cord-like of The common can just as in felt fibular position. around neck head the passes be and this lateral a the structure the often

on knee can that the structure Another lateral the be tract. usually located side is iliotibial the of tendinous is lateral when most knee This is the tibial attaches prominent structure, flat to the condyle, extended. which fully sharp tract the edge lateral this fold of a vertical patella. the posterior anterior the In edge the raises position, skin of of to

fossa contents Visualizing of the the popliteal

muscle fossa and hamstrings popliteal posterior the the depression diamond-shaped a knee. is to The gastrocnemius between formed inferior gastrocnemius the the formed and the heads muscle. by of margins are diamond of The medial lateral superior margins muscle The by femoris semitendinosus formed and and are the biceps medially muscles. by the laterally semimembranosus visible. semitendinosus often The tendons and muscle of muscle and biceps the the are palpable femoris

for knee curves biceps be used the of of can fibula is the landmark the fibula the which femoris crosses side just the inferior the the of out a popliteal to the laterally fibular The lateral as neck tendon the and and and nerve, of on head identifying common fossa palpable head.

the popliteal vein, contains nerve tibial the fossa fibular (Fig. artery, and The common the the nerve, popliteal popliteal 6.132). deepest upper the in popliteal fossa the is the through from structures and the The descends medial side. of artery region the usually deep palpation be find, detected medial its on a As midline consequence is the of can the of to position, fossa. to pulse but popliteal just the difficult artery

The and vein fascia popliteal the vein. penetrates the of posterior upper leg saphenous joins part deep the in small

tunnel—the tarsal the to the gateway foot Finding

tarsal The (Fig. tunnel the the side 6.133) overlying is the formed retinaculum. the tuberosity) and between the heel of groove medial malleolus on and the flexor medial in foot by (calcaneal

through tarsal and foot nerve the posterior tibial enter tunnel. The tibial artery the of digitorum retinaculum. septa hallucis The tibialis longus the longus, also tendons posterior, by and pass the tunnel tarsal compartments in flexor flexor through the formed of flexor

tendon through hallucis veins, the to tendon longus tendon and of associated of passing tunnel nerve, Dick, flexor longus, of of the flexor posterior, The very and are the digitorum posterolateral the a artery (“Tom, the nervous Harry”). the the order posterior tibialis anteromedial the tibial and the from the structures tibial

posteroinferior just the malleolus medial medial artery to face of anterior groove on tibial palpable The heel and the visible is malleolus. between the the

around and the the foot Identifying tendons in ankle

and identified the (Fig. tendons around the can be foot ankle Numerous in vessels 6.134) locating and be spinal or used testing useful for as can landmarks reflexes.

anterior is the to medial on visible ankle anterior tibialis tendon the malleolus. the side The of medial

the of descends the foot The entering the tendon tendon posterior to foot calcaneal prominent the is from aspect largest on is heel. the leg it the and as tendon levels a tendon and tests S2. A S1 spinal reflex tap cord this with activity on hammer of

everted, is posterior of fibularis leg of skin, foot lower the When which descends to lateral and the brevis fold the the the linear of a the longus from malleolus. tendons raise fibularis edge

evident and surface to of the the fibularis tertius, the is extensor aspect of on of longus, The hallucis lateral foot the The visible from lateral foot V. extensor are the the tendon metatarsal of tendons dorsal on brevis medial. the base descending longus digitorum often obliquely of fibularis to

Finding dorsalis the pedis artery

nature of (Fig. pedis pulse the The dorsalis 6.135) for the dorsalis from is heart. farthest palpable pedis important the vessel assessing peripheral circulation is artery the because person when the is a palpable body in is lowest the Also, standing. artery it

extensor is and of the the of and artery the extensor second parallel the and it onto pedis dorsalis dorsal lies passes tendon over The the to aspect longus to toe. tendon the where between bones foot tarsal anteriorly hallucis the of the digitorum longus this is position. It palpable in of into foot the heads interosseous of first plantar branch The the between passes two muscle. pedis the terminal the artery the dorsalis dorsal surface of

the position the arterial Approximating of plantar arch

by foot blood branches and posterior of of tibial provided the The arteries. dorsalis the pedis supply is

surface medial tarsal posterior plantar tibial enters lateral divides into tunnel The of and the the plantar artery. the foot and through a artery a

half curves as medially and posterior artery laterally across the then the (Fig. lateral curves of plantar The plantar sole the arch the sole. anterior through 6.136) and plantar terminal Between arch the II, of the joins branch of dorsalis I the (deep bases artery) artery. plantar pedis the metatarsals supplied Most of the foot the by arch. is plantar

sole, artery and anteriorly great of the the with supplies connects The branches through passes toe. arch, medial side medial of the the plantar plantar

veins become limb in Superficial lower often enlarged. the long, the removed used in grafts. body can be and the as are Also, vascular they because veins elsewhere

veins (Fig. Superficial limb as lower venous a in arch dorsal the 6.137) begin the foot. in superiorly medial passes thigh curves the saphenous and malleolus of the the arch as side to and anterior The great leg the medial vein. up passes (saphenous vein ring) in the femoral triangle. with fascia This the femoral through vein lata to an join the aperture in

foot side surface The leg lateral small passes malleolus venous of as vein. to lateral posterior the posterior the of and the the saphenous the up arch in the dorsal deep the through in popliteal the connects the This with in the knee. passes posterior vein fossa vessel to fascia one-third the leg upper popliteal the and of

pulses felt the be lower limb locations can (Fig. Peripheral at in four artery popliteal popliteal triangle—femoral the toe. bones in the digitorum posteroinferior anterior fossa—popliteal pubic posterior the the second to pulse longus heel between of the groove the (calcaneal the extensor malleolus the passes femoral artery the extensor of inguinal pulse tunnel—posterior and popliteal the in to between and foot—dorsalis pedis symphysis; pedis midline; on pulse to fossa artery tarsal hallucis the iliac 6.138): aspect over of inferior femoral tarsal tuberosity); pulse malleolus medial distally the near ligament the the tendon as dorsal deep tendon tibial spine the and between it the in midway superior medial in longus dorsalis in the the artery the tibial the and

Fig. 6.1 margin Upper the limb. of lower

Fig. lower of Regions limb. the 6.2

Fig. of Areas 6.3 transition.

knee)Tarsal fossa(posterior to tunnel trianglePopliteal Inguinal ligamentFemoral

Fig. and gravity. line of Center 6.4

of gravityAnterior jointLine Center ankle to ofgravityCenterof kneeAnterior gravityposterior tohip to

Fig. Movements the 6.5 hip joint. of extension. A. Flexion and and Abduction adduction. B. internal External C. and rotation.

D. Circumduction.

Fig. the Movements ankle. knee and of 6.6 extension. flexion and Knee A. B. plantarflexion. and dorsiflexion Ankle

Fig. Some 6.7 determinants of gait. of the

rotation stance. full on byeffectively of in in transverse lengthening planeminimizes the gravity Pelvic center limbsKnee drop flexion knee rotation towardmidline)No the jointCenter center knees hip of of hip in shift hip shortening effectively flexedFlexion towardmidline)Vertical gravity (kneesmove with stanceside adductionof (drop) dropLateral gravity with minimizes move of rise shift side gravityAbduction of of hip knee controls minimizes flexedCenter by toward lateralshift gravityInternal donot adductionof gravityMovement of rotationof the jointExternal incenter on on andlimits hip) swing of (knees of rise gravityWith incenter incenter gravity tilt not midline(adduction of limbPelvic of minimizes Limb incenter

Fig. limb. and 6.8 joints the lower Bones of

Fig. Bones the foot. of 6.9

Fig. arches foot. Longitudinal 6.10 and the transverse of

Fig. the 6.11 gluteal Muscles of region.

femoris) maximus)Abductors(gluteus Extensor(gluteus obturatorinternus, gluteus gemelli,quadratus minimus)Rotators(piriformis, mediusand

Fig. flexors the hip. of 6.12 Major

Fig. in 6.13 compartments leg. the Muscle and thigh

Fig. other limb the regions. communication and of between Apertures 6.14 lower

Fig. Innervation lower of limb. 6.15 the

nerve (L5 of L4)SacralSuperior (L1)Genitofemoral (S2 nerveof S2)Pudendal gluteal S1)Sciatic nerve to thigh nerve cutaneous nerve LumbarIliohypogastric of sciatic)(L4 (branch S3)Inferior to (L4 L2)Lateral L4)Femoral L3)Obturator to S2)Sacrospinous to (L4 ligamentIlio-inguinal (L2 (L2 to to fibular S4)Tibial nerve to to nerve (L1, nerve (L1)LVLIVLIIILIILI gluteal (branch S3)Common sciatic)(L4 (L2, nerve

Fig. of lower limb. 6.16 Dermatomes the minimal zones autonomous with overlap). indicate (i.e., Dots

Fig. generated by myotomes. Movements 6.17

to S2S1, L1, L4L5 L2L3, S2Adduction toes S3 of S2,

Fig. nerves of motor limb Major regions indicate the lower of innervation). (colors 6.18

compartment nerves and of thigh, thigh)Obturator(medial leg)Sciatic andsole compartmentof of Femoral thigh)Commonfibular nerve(anterior compartment nerve(posterior leg)Deep branch(anterior inferiorgluteal foot)Superior leg, compartmentof of nerveSuperficial branch(lateral compartmentof

Fig. nerves. peripheral innervated skin 6.19 of by Regions

fibular Obturator calf)Common nerve nerve)Common (L1 calcanealbranches)Lateral cutaneous rami rami of (sural nerve (saphenous branch)Common nervePosterior (saphenous plexus)Posterior nerve nerve(superficial nerve)Lateral (S1 nerveFemoral thigh(from cutaneousnerve nerve)Tibial nerve lumbar cutaneous nerveFemoral (medial to nerve thigh)Femoral of nerve(deep nerve)Tibial nerve sacral plantar nerve(lateral (sural branch)Medial fibular L3)Posterior nerveTibial to nerve (anteriorcutaneous plantar nerves thigh(from S3)Obturator fibular of of plexus)

Fig. bone. to 6.20 Nerves related

fibula)Superficial Deep branchCommon branch of (neck fibularnerve

Fig. 6.21 veins. Superficial

Fig. surface 6.22 bony External of pelvis. the view. Lateral

eminenceAnterior spineInguinal spineSacrumSacrospinous iliac abdominal superior crest of tuberosityIliumInferior crestTuberculum of spineAnterior inferior linePosterior top wallIliac spineHorizontal spineSacrotuberous iliac ligamentPosterior plane linePosterior LIV crestAnterior lineIschiumPubisPubic superior tubercleIliopubic spineAcetabulumIschial through inferior gluteal ligamentAnterior iliac iliac iliac iliac ligamentIschial gluteal gluteal

Fig. 6.23 Ischial tuberosity. view. Posterolateral

spineFor of connective andlong attachment pubic attachment bursaFor foramenBody of of magnus of and biceps head of semitendinosus tissue muscleIschiopubic by of femoris muscleFor semimembranosus attachment muscleCovered adductor ramusObturator ligamentFor attachment bone sacrotuberous AcetabulumIschial

Fig. 6.24 Acetabulum.

Fig. Multiple of the pelvis. 6.25 fractures with the Radiograph contrast in bladder. is the large bladder. A accumulation blood deforming of

Fig. (right). femur the of 6.26 end Proximal A. view. Anterior view. Medial B. C. Posterior view. view. D. Lateral

internusTrochanteric tubercleGreater site crestGluteus tubercleLesser mediusIntertrochanteric for gluteus asperaLateral margin of gluteus tuberosityAttachment minimusShaftLesser trochanterFoveaNeckQuadrate site depression mediusLesser linePectineal asperaGluteal forobturator line for intertrochanteric trochanterAttachment ABTrochanteric fossaEnd (spiral line)Medial fossaHeadNeckNeckAttachment linea externusAttachment margin line asperaLinea trochanterPectineal lineTubercleGreater for of trochanterPiriformisFoveaObturator trochanterCD (spiral of trochanterIntertrochanteric muscleGreater mediusQuadrate piriformis trochanterOval linea site ofgluteus minimusGluteus line)Lesser

Fig. Shaft femur. the 6.27 of On the posterior view of femur. right is shaft right of a proximal

Fig. anteroposterior of of the the neck This radiograph femur. fracture view, 6.28 a demonstrates pelvis, the of

of neck Fractured femur

Fig. Anteroposterior showing radiograph proximal an 6.29 femur. end of of intertrochanteric fracture

Fig. 6.30 joint. Hip surfaces. Articular A. view. Anterior B. femur Movement rotation. during and of lateral medial the neck the of Superior view.

viewLateral pelvic of rotationAB of Acetabulum labrumHead boneAcetabular femurSuperior rotationMedial

Fig. Hip 6.31 joint. Transverse A. ligament. acetabular head Ligament of the B. femur. the of laterally show The the to of femur ligament. out been rotated head has the the of acetabulum

synovial femurIschial sleeve ligamentLigament ligamentAcetabularforamenObturator around membrane of tubercleObturator of membranePubisPubic ligament arteryAcetabular surfaceTransverseacetabular arteryCut of fossaArtery of Lunate headSynovial ABAcetabular head obturator branchof tuberosityObturator labrum foramenAcetabular

Fig. 6.32 joint. the Synovial of membrane hip

ofacetabulum femurMembrane of to attachment reflects membraneLine margin Synovial back around attach head to of

Fig. membrane ligaments hip of Fibrous and the 6.33 joint. A. Fibrous capsule. joint membrane of the view. Anterior B. ligaments. pubofemoral and Iliofemoral view. Anterior ligament. Ischiofemoral C. Posterior view.

Fig. of the joint. hip Blood supply 6.34

artery circumflex iliac of femoral gluteal artery1st arteryFemoral iliac circumflex Internal arteryCommon artery arteryObturator arteryLateral arteryExternal arteryInferior arterySuperior iliac thighMedial perforating gluteal femoral arteryDeep

Fig. 6.35 lower to limb. the Gateways

ligamentSacrotuberous muscle nerve gluteal sciatic cutaneous branch Femoral muscle:• veinPiriformis Femoral from artery, major, Nerve piriformis cavityGap of below artery, superior quadratus into of Sciatic genitofemoral iliacus, nerve• internus gluteal Pudendal foramen to Lymphatics• Nerve artery pelvic nerve• muscles• nerve, pectineus bone:• sciatic Lateral inferior Sacrospinous nerve artery• between and ligament and vesselsLesser Inferior vessels Femoral and internus regionGreater femoral nerve• Internal abovepiriformis obturator ligamentPelvic tendon• canal:• vein• obturator muscle:• nerve, pass thigh• Pudendal Femoral gemellus pudendal to vein• femoris gluteal muscles• inguinal internal gemellus and musclesGreater foramen muscle cavityIlio-inguinal Psoas nerveAbdominal vein• Superior Obturator Posterior obturator perineum nerve• nerveObturator cutaneous and pudendal sciatic foramen:• nerve•

Fig. lumbosacral Branches 6.36 the of plexus.

nerve ramus anterior L3 of nerveFemoral trunkSuperior to femoris cutaneous nerveS1S2Sacrotuberous branch quadratus nerveLumbosacral anterior internusInguinal anterior ligamentInferior cutaneous gluteal of nerveLateral gluteal cutaneous of ligamentObturator ramusL2 thighIlio-inguinal nerveFemoral nerveNerves genitofemoral nervePosterior nerveL1 ramusPerforating thighSciatic and obturator ligamentSacrospinous nerve

Fig. 6.37 lower Arteries the limb. of

Fig. limb. Veins the 6.38 of lower

Fig. lower limb. 6.39 Lymphatic drainage the of

Fig. lata. 6.40 Fascia A. limb. Right view. Anterior view. Lateral B.

tractPubic crestFascia lataGluteus ABInguinal of openingAnterior legFascia tuberclePubic spineTuberculum lataSaphenous superior lataIliotibial fascia ligamentDeep spineAnterior iliac superior ligamentInguinal iliac maximusTensor iliac fascia of tubercle

Fig. 6.41 Saphenous ring. view. Anterior

Fig. the of Boundaries triangle. femoral 6.42

Fig. femoral triangle. of 6.43 Contents the

Fig. 6.44 Gluteal region. Posterior view.

Fig. the 6.45 region. Deep muscles in gluteal Posterior view. A. B. Function.

gluteus opposite tiltduring sciatic mediusGluteus sciatic prevents muscleGreater minimus swing minimusGreater foramen Gemellus excessive foramen femorisGluteus side pelvic superior stance and inferiorObturator mediuson side ABGemellus on of phase belowpiriformisContraction internusQuadratus abovepiriformisPiriformis

Fig. maximus Gluteus muscle. 6.46 Posterior view.

maximusAttachment to of mediusGluteus Gluteus deep tractAttachment of fibers gluteus maximus tractIliotibial to iliotibial tuberosity gluteal

Fig. Tensor 6.47 latae. fasciae view. lateral gluteal region, Left

of iliumGluteus fascia to of maximusFascia tibia fasciae crest Tensor lataDeep legTibiaAttachment of minimusGluteus tractGluteus lataeTubercle mediusIliotibial

Fig. Nerves the of gluteal 6.48 region. Posterior view.

obturator obturator quadratus fasciae gemelli, nerve nervePiriformis and to to cutaneous (deep nerveIliotibial Superior gluteal gluteal internus, tractPosterior muscleInferior cutaneous latae femorismuscle thighNerve internusPudendal femoris)Gluteus nerveNerve quadratus maximusPerforating to of muscleSciatic nerveTensor nerve

Fig. Site 6.49 intramuscular injections the region. for gluteal in

Fig. 6.50 gluteal the Arteries of region.

arteryFirst veinPiriformis arteryMedial femoral circumflex Deep thighInferior of gluteal artery artery veinSuperficial fromdeep circumflex muscle and artery branchSuperior gluteal branchLateral and artery perforating femoral

Fig. the from artery originating the in femoral between 6.51 vessels arteries gluteal thigh. Anastomoses and view. Posterior

arteryFirst perforating arteryFemoral perforating arteryDeep circumflex arterySecond femoralcircumflex arteryInferior Superior gluteal femoral gluteal thighMedial arteryLateral perforating arteryThird artery of artery

Fig. Thigh. 6.52 Posterior view. A. view. Anterior B. C. section Cross the through midthigh.

superior gluteus fold pelvic fossa(posterior to ABCInguinal and Anterior boneObturator ligamentAbdominal compartmentPopliteal knee)Popliteal of inguinal wallGap spinePubic canalAnterior maximusGluteal Posterior compartmentMedial nerveQuadratus fossaSciatic between compartmentPosterior tubercleMedialAnteriorLateral ligament margin iliac femorisInferior

Fig. end femur. 6.53 Shaft distal and of Lateral A. view. Anterior B. view. Posterior C. view. through D. shaft Cross section femur. of

for of head surfaceMedial for of head cruciate ofgastrocnemius gastrocnemiusFacet borderLateral(posterolateral)surfaceMedial(posteromedial)surfaceMedialborderLateral muscleFacet the asperaAnterior for fossaFacet condyleLateral of ofpopliteus surfacePosterior asperaLinea attachmentof lateral posterior muscleAdductor lateral attachment Lateral of epicondyleMedial attachment popliteus muscleLinea of gastrocnemius tendon epicondyleMedial ligamentFacet supracondylar tendon area cruciate condyleLateral supracondylar of tuberclePatellar attachment tubercleAdductor epicondyleFacet of attachment surfaceABCD attachment ligamentRoughened for muscleFacet for anterior the attachmentof for lineIntercondylar medial lineLateral of for head

Fig. Patella. 6.54 Anterior view. A. Posterior view. B. C. view. Superior

Fig. Proximal of 6.55 the tibia. end A. Superior view, tibial plateau. view. Anterior B. C. view. Posterior the tibia. Cross through shaft of D. section

cruciate attachment attachment attachment of AIntercondylar lateral perforated meniscus medial articulation of eminenceRoughened medial articulation anterior with meniscusPosterior meniscusArea of medial meniscusAttachment meniscusArea lateral intercondylar of of areaAnterior of lateral regionAttachment of cruciate of ligamentTuberosityTubercles ligamentPosterior attachment meniscusAnterior and with of posterior

surfacePosteriorMedial surfaceAttachment borderMedial of borderPosterior Anterior eminenceAnterior meniscusTubercles of of musclesShaft condyleAnterior of proximal surfaceInterosseous sartorius, attachment and intercondylar lineArticular gracilis, meniscusAttachment head facet ofmedial borderLateral fibulaD BCLateral of semitendinosus of cruciate ligamentSoleal tuberosityMedial condyleRoughened posterior medial tibiaGrooveTibial attachment and areaSite of perforated for

Fig. the end of Proximal 6.56 fibula. view. A. Anterior

B. shaft of the through section fibula. Cross

inferior onposterior kneeAttachment biceps surfaceNeckFacet for of ligament part surfacePosterior articulationwith tibiaHeadInterosseousborderPosterior site femoris nerveLateral fibular crest surfaceMedial of site of borderMedial surface muscleCommon ABApexAttachment for lateral collateral for condyle surfaceShaftMedial surfaceof tendon borderLateral surfaceMedial of surfaceAnterior posterior fibular

Fig. 6.57 midthigh. through the section Transverse

Fig. and muscles. 6.58 iliacus Psoas major

Fig. thigh. Muscles of of 6.59 anterior the compartment

compartment lateralisRectus rectus genusVastus medialisRectus femorisVastus tuberosityPatellar femorisReflected anserinusTibial tendonSuprapatellar of femorisVastus femorisVastus thighAdductor medialisVastus SartoriusSartoriusStraight thighVastus compartment intermediusVastus rectus of femoris lateralisSartoriusPosterior of bursaArticularis canal medialisQuadriceps tendonPatellaPatellar head pes ligamentPes head ligamentQuadriceps of anserinusSartoriusGracilisSemitendinosusAttachment of lateralisVastus intermediusMedial femoris

Fig. the 6.60 medial of compartment thigh. of Muscles view. Anterior

Obturator of thighPes hiatusAdductor longusAdductor thighSartorius of externusAdductor longusAdductor compartment attachmentGracilisGracilisSemitendinosus magnusPectineusAdductor canalAdductor compartment brevisAnterior anserinus attachmentAdductor magnusPosterior

Fig. Pectineus, longus, and adductor muscles. 6.61 adductor brevis Anterior view.

Fig. externus 6.62 magnus Adductor obturator muscles. and view. Anterior

magnus hiatusPerforations thigh• magnus of (adductor deep Obturator (hamstring deep part)Adductor for part)Adductor of branches tubercleAdductor artery Terminal of of end externusAdductor thigh artery

Fig. of the posterior of compartment thigh. 6.63 Muscles Posterior view.

of of of anterior femorisShort head magnusHamstring adductor semimembranosus around jointOn capsule tuberosityQuadratus of biceps attaches of biceps pes to head aspect knee thatinserts anserinusSemimembranosusSemitendinosus tibia femorisAdductor into femorisPart part magnusLong Ischial

Fig. pelvis a of thigh MRI posterior injury. Coronal avulsion showing hamstring and the 6.64

Fig. artery. 6.65 Femoral

Midway adductor lateralis muscleSartorius popliteal artery • adductor to superior medialis symphysis iliac muscleGracilis muscleVastus muscleArtery inguinal iliac pubic externalpudendal artery thighRectus muscleDeep anterior of Superficial externaliliac arterySartorius ligamentExternal posteriorlythrough externalpudendal arteryArtery muscleDeep muscleVastus epigastric passes inferior arterySuperficial and in arterySuperficial andbecomes arteryVastus medialis symphysis arteryPubic hiatus between femoris canalFemoral spine

Fig. of 6.66 thigh. Deep artery view. A. Anterior B. view. Posterior

circumflex magnus arteryLateral perforating thighGracilis longus iliacus thigh arteryThird of muscleAPsoas femoral circumflex circumflex end medialis femoral femoral tendonTerminal femoris perforating muscleCut muscleAdductor femoral muscleSartorius arteriesAdductor femoris gluteal vastus arterySecond circumflex arteryPiriformis of brevis and hiatusInferior BSuperior muscleMedial arteryTerminal arteryDeep of magnus muscleVastus gluteal deepartery branchVastus third perforating arteryAscending arteryAdductor and of muscleLateral second, musclesSartorius muscleQuadriceps arteryCruciate deepartery muscleFirst, anastomosesMedial perforating musclePectineus end arteryFirst muscleAdductor branchDescending muscleAdductor thighPopliteal lateralis muscleRectus intermedius artery of

Fig. artery. 6.67 Obturator

ligament branchPosterior branchObturatorexternus ofhead head muscleArtery femur of of of offemurObturatorarteryAnterior Ligament branchAcetabular

Fig. Femoral 6.68 nerve.

musclePectineus to femoris muscleAdductor Nerve pectineusAnterior branchNerves nervePes medialis muscleVastus branchesAdductor sartoriusRectus iliacusNerve cutaneous anserinusSartorius nerveSaphenous to muscleVastus to lateralis muscleGracilis magnus musclePosterior muscleAnterior nerve longus muscleSaphenous branchFemoral

Fig. nerve. Obturator 6.69

muscleAdductor and musclesPectineus branchAdductor adductor magnus to externus posterior muscleAdductor muscleBranch branchObturator longus muscleCutaneous muscleGracilis branchAnterior magnus iliacus from brevis nerve musclePsoas branchObturator Posterior

Fig. Sciatic 6.70 nerve.

muscleBranch nervePopliteal nerveAdductor muscleCommon head fibular head magnus to originatingfrom muscleSciatic biceps muscleShort femoris head of femoris magnus tuberosity part artery femoris biceps muscleQuadratus of and of nerveTibial Piriformis of femoris ischial muscleSemitendinosus biceps veinSemimembranosus muscleLong adductor muscleLong

Fig. 6.71 Knee joint. shown. is Joint capsule not

Fig. knee the of 6.72 joint. Articular surfaces A. Extended.

B. Flexed. Anterior view C. (flexed).

Fig. of Menisci 6.73 the joint. knee A. view. Superior

joint. the Menisci of knee B. showing Normal medial the joint meniscus. knee magnetic plane. resonance T2-weighted sagittal the in image knee the C. Normal lateral joint showing meniscus. the T2-weighted in sagittal resonance magnetic image plane.

meniscusTransverse meniscusPopliteus capsuleMedial kneeInfrapatellar fat of ligamentJoint APatellar the tendonLateral ligament

Fig. repair. injury Meniscal and 6.74 Sagittal the A. meniscus. showing joint of of medial tear a MRI knee meniscus B. tear. MRI a lateral to treat truncated knee meniscectomy of partial after a Coronal showing a

Fig. of the knee joint bursae. 6.75 associated and membrane Synovial not A. and view; femur patella Superolateral shown. B. the sagittal Paramedial section knee. through

Fig. knee 6.76 joint of Fibrous the capsule. membrane Anterior view. A. Posterior B. view.

Fig. ligaments the knee Collateral of 6.77 joint. A. Lateral view. Medial view. B. collateral joint Normal the knee ligament ligament. patellar fibular showing C. the and magnetic resonance the T1-weighted sagittal plane. in image the the medial knee menisci, Normal the and and ligaments. D. joint collateral and tibial anterior lateral cruciate posterior ligament, showing T1-weighted resonance coronal plane. magnetic in image the

Fig. ligaments of joint. the knee 6.78 Cruciate Superolateral view.

Fig. mechanism. “locking” Knee 6.79

knee and ligamentsFlat of offemoral of withtibia andmaintains tightens rotation isanterior joint to extension Medial on contact surface femur stabilizesjointLine center in gravity tibia of condylesis

Fig. around Anastomoses 6.80 knee. of arteries the view. Anterior

arteryInterosseousmembraneRecurrent arteryDescending circumflex branchof lateralgenicular arterySuperior arteryAdductorhiatusDescendinggenicular tibialCircumflexfibular arteryPosteriortibial arteryPoplitealarteryInferior femoral medialgenicular artery lateralgenicular arteryInferior arteryAnteriortibial arteryAdductormagnusSaphenousbranchSuperior anterior of Femoral branch lateral medialgenicular

Fig. Sagittal of rupture joint knee MRI showing 6.81 anterior the cruciate ligament. of

Fig. Tibiofibular joint. 6.82

Fig. Popliteal fossa. 6.83 A. Boundaries. vessels. Nerves and B. Superficial C. structures.

arteryPopliteal asperaBiceps femorismuscle(long muscleAdductorhiatusAdductor ABCLinea ofgastrocnemiusmuscleSemitendinosusmuscleSemimembranosus of muscle(short head thighLateralNerveVeinArteryMedial magnus head nerveSmallsaphenousveinSmallsaphenousveinCommonfibular femoris ofgastrocnemiusmusclePopliteusmuscleMedial nervePopliteal thighPosteriorcutaneousnerve of veinFemoral muscleSciatic head)Biceps arteryPosteriorcutaneousnerve veinFemoral nerveTibial head)PoplitealfossaPlantarismuscleLateral

Fig. view the through left of leg; section Posterior (inset). 6.84 leg cross

Fig. 6.85 fibula. and Tibia A. Anterior view. B. view. Posterior through shafts. section Cross C. Posteromedial distal of D. ends. view

for fibularis for triangulararea malleolusGroove Lateral malleolus and surfaces muscleMalleolar surfaceLateralsurfaceInterosseousmembraneInterosseousborderMedialsurfaceAnteriorborderMedialborderPosteriorborderPosterior talusMedial surfacePosterior that groove lineArticular tibiaSoleal of tibiaABCDFibulaTibiaFibular surfaceMedial musclesRoughened borderInterosseousborderMedialsurfaceAnteriorborderAnteriorborderGroove intofibular oftibialis brevis grooveon fossaLateralmalleolusLateral posterior for crestInterosseous fits longus tendon

Fig. membrane. Interosseous 6.86 A. Anterior view. Posteromedial view. B.

perforating tibial tibiofibular Aperture ligament for branch arteryAnterior anterior membraneInterosseous ligamentInterosseous for tibiofibular membranePosterior of vesselsABAperture fibular

Fig. in group muscles 6.87 posterior leg. compartment the of Superficial of view. Posterior A. view. Lateral B.

and tendonCalcaneusGastrocnemiusSoleusLateral plantarisCalcaneal of of origins tendonGastrocnemiusCalcaneus distance spanning (Achilles) head soleusTendon gastrocnemiusMedialLateralBSoleusCalcaneal nerveLigament tibial ofgastrocnemiusPopliteal and head APlantarisMedial of betweenfibular tibial vessels

Fig. of muscles compartment of 6.88 leg. group in Deep the posterior

onmedialmalleolusMedialTuberosity of talusFlexor of PopliteusSoleal calcaneus boneGroove of longusGroove longusOrigin on flexordigitorum hallucislongusLateral of lineTibialisposteriorOrigin posteriorsurface on flexorhallucis sustentaculumtali of inferiorsurface ofnavicularMedialcuneiformGroove oftibialisposteriorVerticallineFlexordigitorumlongusOrigin

Fig. the in leg. posterior 6.89 compartment Arteries of

arteryAnterior thatperforate ofgastrocnemiusmuscle arterySuperior arteryBranches lateralgenicular Popliteus Adductor tibial arteryCircumflexfibular arteryPerforating lateralcompartmentFibular ininterosseousmembrane)Popliteal musclePosterior terminalbranch arteryPosterior musclePopliteal to of intermuscularseptum tibial arteriesMedial hiatusSuperior tibial enter medialgenicular throughaperture head arterySural arteryAdductormagnus fibular artery(passes vein

Fig. nerve. 6.90 Tibial A. Posterior view. B. nerve. Sural

Fig. compartment Muscles the in lateral 6.91 of leg. view. A. Lateral B. foot ankle. the with right at the foot, of view plantarflexed the Inferior

IGroove of boneAnteriorborder ABCommon nerveFibularislongusFibularisbrevisFibular trochleaof cuboidFibularisbrevistendonFibularislongustendon aspectof fibulaInterosseousmembraneMedialcuneiformMetatarsal fibular oninferior calcaneus

Fig. and fibular and of nerve, of the 6.92 leg. nerves arteries lateral Common compartment right view, A. leg. Posterior Lateral right leg. view, B.

nervePenetrates communicating arteryin fasciaSural branches fibular compartment(vessels fibular fibularnerve deep nerveSuperficial deep sural nervePenetrates nervePerforating around fibula)Deep nerveCommon fibular ABSural and of in fasciaLateral posterior

Fig. anterior leg. of Muscles of 6.93 the compartment

surfaceof fibulaExtensor Anterior of tibiaTibialisanteriorOrigin hallucis tibialisanterior of to extensorhallucis inferior fibulaExtensordigitorumlongusOrigin of extensordigitorum and of longusOrigin surfaceof cuneiform of metatarsal ISubcutaneoussurface medial surface longusFibularistertiusAttachment longusLateral

Fig. tibial artery deep nerve. 6.94 fibular and Anterior

Fig. Foot. 6.95 foot. Dorsal right aspect, A. surface ground the aspect, contact standing. showing when foot, in right Plantar the with B.

toeDigit surface VPhalangesLittle IDigit of (fibula)Calcaneal AbductionAdductionGreat lateralmalleolus malleolusLateral malleolusHeelSesamoid (tibia)Cut tendonMedial of IIIDigit toeMetatarsals (I–V)Tarsal surface bonesABCut IVDigit IIDigit medialmalleolus bones

Fig. 6.96 the of Bones foot. right A. foot. Dorsal view, B. Lateral view, right foot.

hallucis tarsal for talusBCalcaneusFibular tendon TalusPosteriorprocessof groupof (on bonesCuboidDistalMiddleProximalA the longusProximal bonesMedialIntermediateLateralCuneiformsDistal groupof offlexor processLateraltubercleGroove undersurface)CalcaneusTalusLateral trochleaGrooveCuboidMedial boneTuberosity tubercleCuneiformsNavicularPhalangesMetatarsalsNavicularIntermediatetarsal tarsal

Fig. Talus. 6.97 view. Medial A. B. view. Inferior

withdistal surface forcalcaneonavicularligament flexorhallucis for talusPosteriorcalcaneal AnteriorArticular tibiaAnterior navicularNeckHeadBodyAnteriorPosteriorArticular taliPosterior for processof surfacefor ABPosterior malleolusMedialtubercleLateraltubercleGroove withmedial surface calcanealsurfaceSulcus navicularArticular flexorhallucis longusArticular end longusGroove surfaceArticular calcanealsurfaceMiddle surfacefor of surface

Fig. 6.98 Calcaneus. A. view. Superior B. view. Inferior view. Lateral C.

tendon)Upper talar posterior with talararticular tendon calcaneal talararticular ligamentof boneCalcanealtubercleLateralprocessNotchCalcaneal part offlexor ABCAnterior surfaceMiddle trochleaCalcaneal collateral posterior for ofposterior of hallucis talararticular surfaceSustentaculum talararticular ankle cuboid tuberosity(lower part longusAttachment surfacePosterior taliMedialMedialMiddle of calcaneofibularpart part of surfaceLateralCalcanealsulcusArticular jointFibular surfacePosterior surfaceAnterior articular surface of surface(insertion sulcus talararticular of surface)MedialprocessGroove surfaceMiddle lateral

Fig. sinus. Tarsal 6.99 foot. view, Lateral right

Fig. phalanges. Metatarsals and 6.100 Dorsal view, right foot.

Fig. 6.101 Radiograph of showing beak. ankle talar

Fig. Ankle joint. 6.102 with right plantarflexed. foot view A. Anterior joint, of posterior Schematic view. B. to Superior articular C. show the of surface. view shape the the of talus

malleolusTalusFibulaFibulaTibiaArticular ABCInterosseousligamentTibiaMedialmalleolusLateralmalleolusLateral posteriorlyPosteriorMedial surface surfacenarrow surface wide malleolusAnteriorArticular talusArticular of anteriorly

Fig. joint, foot. of the right ankle ligament Medial 6.103

partMedial talusSustentaculum partAnterior Medialtubercleof partTibionavicular ofnavicular calcaneonavicular of ankle the ligament tibiotalar partTibiocalcaneal joint taliof bonePlantar ligamentTuberosity bonePosteriortibiotalar calcaneus

Fig. the ankle of ligament joint. Lateral 6.104 A. right Lateral foot. view, Posterior right B. foot. view,

fossaAnterior talofibular ligamentPosteriortalofibularligamentPosteriortalofibular fossaFibulaTibiaTalusAB of talusMalleolar ligamentPosteriorprocess Malleolar ligamentCalcaneofibular

Fig. Intertarsal right 6.105 joints, foot.

Fig. Interosseous ligament. talocalcaneal 6.106 foot. Lateral view, right

Fig. 6.107 joint. Talocalcaneonavicular Medial view, A. right foot. B. view, removed. talus foot, Superior right right view, C. Ligaments, foot. medial right view, Ligaments, foot. D. lateral

Fig. ligaments, Plantar right 6.108 foot. plantar calcaneocuboid (short A. ligament). Plantar ligament B. ligament. Long plantar

Fig. right interphalangeal 6.109 and metatarsophalangeal, the transverse Tarsometatarsal, foot. and joints, deep ligaments, metatarsal

Fig. Tarsal and flexor 6.110 retinaculum. tunnel foot. view, Posteromedial right A. Bones. and tunnel B. Tarsal flexor retinaculum.

arteryTibialis oftibialis medial nerveFlexor digitorumlongusTibial arterymidway offlexorhallucislongusTibial posteriorFlexor longusTendon heeland hallucislongus retinaculumTarsaltunnelTendon of between arteryTibial of nervePosteriortibial veinTibial post-tibial malleolusTendon ABTibiaTalusCalcaneusFlexor flexordigitorum posteriorPulse

Fig. 6.111 retinacula, Extensor foot. right

extensorretinaculumSuperior of arteryTendon oftibialis Anterior tertius anteriorDorsalispedis extensorretinaculumExtensordigitorum longusFibularis extensorhallucis arteryFirst dorsalinterosseousmuscleInferior tibial longusTendon

Fig. retinacula. Fibular 6.112 Lateral view, foot. right

musclesSuperior on retinaculumInferior andbrevis fibular calcaneus) trochlea fibular fibularis Tendons of retinaculum(at longus fibular

Fig. of Arches foot. the 6.113 foot. arches, right A. Longitudinal

left arch, Transverse B. foot.

Fig. the of 6.114 Support foot. for arches Ligaments. A. Medial right foot. view, B. the left to arches, supporting Cross foot. show muscles foot through of section tendons the

Fig. right Plantar 6.115 aponeurosis, foot.

transversemetatarsal retinaculum ligamentsMedial Superficial inferiorextensor ofcalcaneal process aponeurosisAnterior of arm tuberosityPlantar

Fig. 6.116 foot. Fibrous sheaths, digital right

Fig. hoods. Extensor 6.117

of PIP of joints muscleExtensor overflexionFlexion transverse dorsal tendonsExtensor ligamentLumbricalFlexor jointprevents 1st hoodDeep prevents interosseous longusExtension overextension metatarsal digitorum MTP

Fig. 6.118 foot. digitorum brevis right muscle, Extensor

Fig. of the layer right First of 6.119 sole in the foot. muscles

Fig. the in sole the right of layer Second of muscles 6.120 foot.

Fig. foot a at plantar calcaneal patient 6.121 the the in shows insertion of plantar and with MRI fasciitis a thickening of posterior aponeurosis spur. calcaneal

Fig. the Third muscles 6.122 right layer foot. the of of in sole

hallucisFlexor tibialisposterior flexorhallucis fibularislongus FlexorhallucisbrevisTransverse longus brevisTendon of headOblique digitiminimi of of muscleTendon headAdductor muscleTendon

Fig. of 6.123 the right the foot. muscles Fourth of layer sole in

Fig. Arteries of 6.124 right sole foot. the in the

plantarartery arteryMedial plantararteryPosterior branchesDeep metatarsal terminal arteriesPerforatingvesselsDeepplantar tibial plantar arteryPlantar dorsalis archLateral Digital branchof artery: pedis

Fig. artery right foot. pedis Dorsalis 6.125

arteryMedial pedisarteryDeep ExtensorhoodDorsaldigitalarteriesAnterior lateralmalleolar pedisarteryAnterior II arteryDorsalis medialmalleolar lateraltarsal and toe tibial extensordigitorum dorsalinterosseousmuscleArcuate dorsalmetatarsalarteryFirst branchesExtensorhallucislongusDorsalis arteryTendon longusto arteryAnterior plantararteryFirst of

Fig. the veins of foot. Superficial right 6.126

Fig. nerves. medial 6.127 Lateral plantar and A. right of the Sole foot. foot. right Cutaneous distribution of B.

Fig. 6.128 deep of branches and superficial in foot. the fibular right A.Terminal nerves right foot. B. Cutaneous distribution

fibular nerveDeep nerveSaphenous nerveSuperficialfibular deepfibular of seconddorsal fibularnerveABBranches and interosseiExtensordigitorumbrevisBranch tofirst nerve Deep brevisSuperficialfibular nerveSural extensordigitorum to

Fig. the 6.129 Avoiding sciatic nerve. the the with gluteal sciatic position a indicated. Posterior the A. man nerve of view region of of the region the with quadrants indicated. the nerve and view position gluteal sciatic of of gluteal B. left Posterolateral

Fig. of triangle. artery the femoral femoral in Position the 6.130 thigh. Anterior

ligamentAnterior spineFemoral margin tuberclePubic of longus canalMedial femoral iliac veinLymphatics arteryFemoral nerveFemoral Inguinal margin superior passing ofsartorius musclePubic adductor through symphysis muscleMedial

Fig. Identifying the around knee. 6.131 structures Anterior of knee. view the A. right of the flexed view knee. right B. partially Lateral

right gluteal Lateral extended of thigh, view knee, the and C. region.

fasciae fibular ligamentTibial tendonQuadriceps musclePatellaPatellaPatellarligamentPatellar tractHamstring medialisQuadriceps femorisHead fibulaCommon of musclesGluteus nerveTensor lataeIliotibial ABCVastus ofbiceps maximus lateralisVastus femoris tuberosityTendon

Fig. the the popliteal 6.132 contents Visualizing fossa. of view knee. left Posterior of the

and veinCommon head fossaPopliteal tendonHead tendonSmall of muscle saphenous fibular muscleMedial Popliteal femoris muscleTibial gastrocnemius gastrocnemius head muscleSemitendinosus of arteryPopliteal of deep vein fasciaLateral fibulaPenetrates nerveSemimembranosus nerveBiceps

Fig. foot. 6.133 Finding the tunnel—the tarsal to the gateway

Fig. Identifying tendons 6.134 ankle the the foot. in and around right the of Medial side foot. A. right the aspect of B. Posterior foot. right the C. Lateral foot. of side the right aspect foot. D. Dorsal of

Fig. Finding dorsalis artery. the 6.135 pedis

tendon pedis toeExtensor Dorsalis digitorumlongus tendon second hallucislongus to arteryExtensor

Fig. arch. plantar of 6.136 Position the

Fig. 6.137 Major superficial veins. right the Dorsal foot. of A. aspect B. Anterior lower of right view limb. leg, the and aspect Posterior left of foot. C. thigh,

Fig. limb. peripheral 6.138 feel in arterial to lower Where the pulses

Fig. A. 6.139 knee medial lateral ligament collateral the showing and joint tibial the and menisci. Normal magnetic coronal the in image resonance Proton density plane. (PD)-weighted Knee a joint B. ligament. tibial torn showing collateral plane. resonance PD-weighted image in coronal magnetic the

Fig. anterior A. ligament. Knee an showing 6.140 joint cruciate intact magnetic plane. sagittal image T2-weighted the in resonance

anterior B. a ligament. Knee showing torn cruciate joint in plane. image the resonance magnetic T2-weighted sagittal Knee medial meniscus of horn into of showing C. ‘double off a the (the joint anterior broken in posterior aspect portion location). has impression the giving joint the moved torn a of the this meniscus’ sagittal in resonance density-weighted magnetic the plane. image Proton

medial medial medial posterior hornof posterior fragment “horn” cruciate femoral meniscus condyleTorn AFemurPatellaAnterior cruciateligament meniscusDisplaced ligamentTibiaAnterior of “horn”of anteriorcruciate ligamentTibiaBFemurTorn meniscusTibiaAnterior of fragmentPatellaCMedial

Fig. MRI calcaneus. ulceration 6.141 adjacent and tissue and Radiograph of the soft (B) (A) in erosion (C). of placement debridement there in wound the and progressive is beads After healing antibiotics

eFig. and the artery and vein popliteal Popliteal 6.142 sciatic showing fossa nerve. of position magnetic plane. axial the T1-weighted image resonance in

eFig. 6.143 embolus. Pulmonary tomogram. Axial computed

embolusEmbolus eFig. Left pulmonary atriumAortaRight with artery inferior 6.144 a tendon. calcaneal ruptured Ankle showing sagittal the magnetic in plane. image T2-weighted resonance

eFig. A. 6.145 ankle intact Normal ligament. an talofibular anterior showing joint image the in T1-weighted resonance axial plane. magnetic B. a anterior showing Ankle torn ligament. joint talofibular plane. resonance magnetic in image axial T2-weighted the

plexus Branches associated limb Table lower lumbosacral of with the the 6.1

major gluteal Muscles bold the are in segments of the muscle) (spinal innervating Table segments region the 6.2

anterior muscle) innervating of the in 6.3 the thigh of major segments Muscles (spinal are compartment the bold Table segments

innervating bold muscle) 6.4 (spinal Muscles the of the in the thigh are segments compartment Table major of segments medial

Muscles compartment in the muscle) bold major posterior segments the Table are (spinal the of 6.5 of thigh segments innervating

segments leg bold the the innervating are muscle) Table segments compartment of in major the muscles 6.6 posterior of Superficial in group (spinal

of leg Deep muscle) compartment segments the the the in Table segments muscles innervating major bold posterior group (spinal 6.7 of in are

Table lateral bold the segments of compartment in major muscle) the are 6.8 of segments the leg Muscles (spinal innervating

major of in Muscles Table leg anterior bold the innervating compartment of the the segments are 6.9 segments muscle) (spinal

6.10 foot aspect the in are dorsal Muscles of the Table of (spinal the innervating the bold segments muscle) major segments

layer muscle) sole the muscles in bold Table are segments segments major First of foot in innervating of 6.11 the (spinal the the

are (spinal sole the major in the muscle) layer the bold segments Table innervating of of muscles Second segments 6.12 foot the in

muscle) the Third sole in are the the segments in bold segments foot the innervating Table of (spinal 6.13 layer of major muscles

in muscle) in layer Fourth are muscles (spinal of 6.14 sole segments bold innervating the major the the segments of the Table foot

In clinic the

pelvic sacrum, the surrounding joints associated The form bones, a cavity. and ring pelvic bony is suspected pelvis fractured. organ and Soft when tissue must visceral the be damage also Patients trauma. and with injuries of trauma and investigated multiple should be abdominal, pelvic for evidence chest, limb lower

(concealed required. blood often transfusion exsanguination) can with blood Pelvic appreciable and be associated loss is fractures inhibit a which pelvic form significant this on to visceral hematoma, (Fig. nerves, press bleeding pelvic organs, compress and addition, In can function tends 6.25).

many classifying and pelvic prognosis. treatment the appropriate to determine of patient’s There enable are ways the the surgeon fractures, which generally four of are Pelvic types. fractures

of a without fracture occur (e.g., crest). Type of 1 injuries ring the the disruption iliac bony pelvic in of though to injuries iliac assessed. a trauma, to case the needs significant of These represent crest, the unlikely loss blood are of fracture be types

the break Type in ring. 2 bony with single a pelvic injuries occur with of fracture diastasis symphysis the example pubis. be would this single An of (separation) a are relatively for assess but appropriate nature, benign may Again, loss. blood be injuries these in to it

the injuries pelvic with bony occur Type double breaks ring. in 3 urethral produce damage. fractures rami, may These bilateral include which of the pubic

and acetabulum. 4 Type at occur the around injuries

joint of the sacro-iliac disruption or of rami include Other and pelvic ring without dislocation. injuries of pubic types fractures with the and significant pelvic involve visceral may hemorrhage. trauma This

elderly athletes with and as fractures and fractures, pelvic seen include Other in respectively. insufficiency osteoporosis, stress injuries patients general

clinic In the

fractures neck Femoral (Fig. can blood interrupt supply the head. to femoral the 6.28) an is and neck primarily branches the the of circumflex by neck. to around formed femoral arterial head and supply the femoral arteries ring the blood of lateral medial base The the from here, head. the femoral course along vessels penetrate the From capsule, the neck, supply and and obturator artery by a to variable. the femoral the branch The neck small enhanced is supply artery, the generally ligamentum femoral the blood and teres, head which of further of is may associated neck vessels head. of and disrupt necrosis Femoral femoral the fractures lead to divided line: midportion line can the (fracture the head-neck line and basicervical neck). passes junction), femoral fracture location the (fracture three of neck), subcapital (fracture across neck fractures passes categories transcervical the of through depending Femoral base the femoral on line of the into be across passes the of of lowest head, risk risk. highest the necrosis the fractures Subcapital the fractures have femoral have and developing basicervical following with standing as Elderly to tend such a subcapital from fractures osteoporosis low-energy trauma fall have transverse patients height. a due an a height great the patients during as after neck to more to such axial distal younger of load a a knee, Conversely, from as motor fractures high-energy accident. vehicle applied such or femoral fall trauma (basicervical) abducted sustain vertical usually

clinic In the

trochanter and involve trochanter usually the not femoral the fractures, greater to the runs break In does these through the lesser from neck. and head not ischemic. the do femoral blood neck the render fractures femoral supply preserve Intertrochanteric the most low-energy impact and elderly in result from seen (Fig. They commonly are 6.29).

can of lesser or trochanter occur. Sometimes fractures isolated greater the the of due An in an pathological underlying and isolated trochanter malignant adults lesser commonly most is fracture to deposit. the

clinic the In

femoral to appreciable shaft. of amount fracture the energy needed An is injury damage to contain. tissues, muscle they accompanied the therefore is and type structures the soft which of This include surrounding by the compartments

In the clinic

veins and drain perforating subcutaneous of drain veins, iliac veins, and deep the tissues to lower limbs from in cava. vena turn The to into the the is flow the which veins inferior the in skin superficial normal blood which via

competent depends the The system venous in blood which presence of upon of prevent reflux. the flow valves, normal contraction blood supplemented which the the lower toward muscles heart. the Venous with limb, of in the pump is return venous they incompetent distal become place incompetent. valves, may valves extra more on also to become tend When which pressure small produces veins) (long) and distribution venous dilated (varicose of veins condition This the saphenous tortuous great the (short) systems. superficial in

commonly in by men, often occur than aggravated are women symptoms in Varicose veins more and pregnancy. varicose have veins. genetic a developing Some individuals predisposition to Valves and when the interstices; destroyed, also rendering valve thrombosis destroyed is the of incompetent. healing the its incorporates into the deep occurs be vein may process recanalization clot valve during it a if

sites small Typical great saphenous the incompetence and (short) the and junction in the and saphenous midthigh, vein, vein perforating popliteal the (long) the veins between for femoral include the between vein vein. junction the valvular

chronic and Varicose occur with may may be changes veins unsightly, incompetence. soft tissue venous and damages pressure extrude into the products and increased blood capillary cells, soft the the pressure venular blood and venous As tissue. rises, a may skin, pigmentation the develop. in venous may eczema and This brown produce skin and remains break of for and Furthermore, the heal. to ulcerate, needed pressure the hospitalization if down many high this be may may weeks

great tying saphenous in for (long) “stripping” (short) the some reconstruction. veins include Treatments small off valvular the (removing) cases and varicose systems, valve, and

In the clinic

of and lower veins. occur limb the within in the the Thrombosis pelvic may deep veins wall, (venous hypercoagulable and injury was the by precipitates Virchow, who vessel Its described stasis, described classic that etiology eloquently the states) thrombosis. to triad

the femoral into calf may thrombosis deep a some patients In veins propagate vein (DVT) veins. the in pulmonary through pass in of clot off the break death. resulting enter occlusion pulmonary and arrest, may the circulation, to This and artery, cardiopulmonary heart the

to significant prophylactic so surgical number are surgery DVT, A given likely patients thrombosis. treatment prevent a are of patients specific to develop undergoing most stasis typical facilitate veins). (to deep includes regimen emptying prophylactic DVT of A and deep stockings injections and anticoagulant the graduated prevent venous

detect aim physicians DVT, clinical there because always may to the of formation possible signs. is prevent it to Although be not it no postoperative limb be tenderness, swelling helpful can pyrexia, Calf clues. and muscle diagnosis by duplex The ascending venography. or Doppler predominantly rarely made by sonography is

DVT of intravenous to the thrombus. prevent anticoagulation extension oral started and If confirmed, is are

clinic In the

the lower limb Vascular access to

ligament femoral and artery femoral and the are inguinal to inferior vein. Deep the be and head over femoral the may femoral as easily ultrasound. palpable demonstrated passes it is The using artery a femoral arterial needed use physician If these to is access or approach can venous vessels. rapidly, the

to contralateral limb, the the obtain thorax of lower vein lower procedures catheterization abdomen, involve or artery the the access Many and the radiological ipsilateral cerebral to and femoral the femoral vessels. limb, the vessels of

and use into artery the angiography to around catheters femoral also the in angioplasty. vessels the coronary and Cardiologists arteries aorta perform arch coronary place the of to

right and pulmonary distal vessels tree. the into to veins, and heart, including catheters the permits be veins, Access atrium, femoral gonadal of renal the the the artery maneuvered side the of right pulmonary the the vein to is vena cava veins of also the great the superior to and neck possible. the Access

the In clinic

the Trendelenburg’s and occurs paralyzed (gluteus in with weak of gluteus hip. medius abductor or minimus) people sign muscles by to demonstrated stand is The limb. one asking the patient sign on limb, swing When pelvis affected severely stands patient the over the limb. the the on drops

nerve. signs with patients the Positive found are in superior to typically gluteal damage this of Damage with minimus gluteus fractures, cases medius which trochanter. the there the occur greater space-occupying and surgery been extending hip in greater on associated insertion of and pelvis has with relating atrophy foramen, the nerve subsequent the may of some to to sciatic the gluteus into and lesions disruption tendons within pelvic during

In also positive with Trendelenburg’s a gait abnormal. sign, patients is tilt swing Typically abductor over of the phase limb. weakened allow the to muscles the affected inferiorly the pelvis limb, the during stance the the pelvic drop of compensates patient lurching affected pelvis the by level the The the gait maintain throughout the to cycle. side trunk for to

the clinic In

to into From injection it is necessary time direct drugs by time is, administer to intramuscularly, that muscles. This injuring procedure structures. neurovascular must without out be carried the injection is intramuscular an site gluteal A typical region. for be sciatic passes region through to and nerve this The avoided. needs inject The of gluteal region. either upper safest is place to outer the quadrant

be bony (Fig. divided can using imaginary by into region gluteal landmarks positioned two lines The palpable quadrants 6.49). descends crest. the of from iliac One vertically highest point line the and through through Another and of midway the the highest the the plane line between line horizontal first ischial horizontal passes tuberosity. is point the crest iliac

to far as important that extends forward as spine. gluteal the anterior the iliac It is superior region remember sciatic of lateral medial margin the and the lower of quadrant lateral along lower through upper curves nerve medial descends The the the quadrant. corner

nerve gluteal muscle. through, into passes its which or tibial the bifurcates even the case branches fibular nerve sciatic region piriformis fibular the into the and pelvis, common common in above, the Occasionally, in

region the and vessels superior above and normally superiorly The the gluteal forward. gluteal piriformis pass enter nerve and

corner the any of injuring in part to The and for vessels anterior nerves region. the lateral of gluteal is other used injections upper nerve the or avoid normally sciatic quadrant gluteus the in gluteus medius A the maximus. of needle to placed margin region the enters this anterosuperior

the clinic In

fascial syndrome in there muscle limbs. a is compartment occurs when within swelling Compartment the enclosed compression. causes intracompartment hemorrhage, include Typical limb trauma, limb and treated. perfusion within the can flow which As ultimately compromised, is not if blood elevates, and tissue damage lead to capillary neuromuscular compartment pressure

the clinic In

limb to lower Muscle injuries the

syndrome. may injuries as part result occur an direct Muscle a of or overuse of as trauma

occur within Muscle may area a which a as tear, may focal be the muscle. fluid muscle demonstrated minor as injuries of muscle are result fibers eventually complete muscle and torn a injuries, With in increasingly more may tear. this severe muscles. the muscles the thigh tear hamstring that usual in The are knee below within be may muscle, the muscles soleus the occur typically other muscles though affected. the Tears in

high source in and as power athletes, Injury common those is muscles pain field, the and where sprinting, (such a susceptible requiring track particularly speed hamstring very sports football) hamstring to from to of stretching. injury degree of a in excessive in the competing muscles are

tear The muscle tendon. of a muscle range mild to from a or a complete injury strain can a accelerations occurs and change It or direction. decelerations sudden during rapid usually in muscle-tendon the In zone the between commonly the which adults, tendon. and muscle injured wide the transition a junction, is most is unit of population, is the this hamstring flexion hip origin apophysis common weakest tuberosity ischial An (Fig. proximal during the in of is sudden avulsion ischial age element in attachment proximal the particularly the with group because hamstring the adolescent 6.64). about injury injury the of etc). MRI providing assess risk of be and with the not ultrasound (future of about extent the function, the hamstring only re-tear, Both information prognosis loss can MRI give to some also used the the indication but

clinic In the

reduced by blood the to legs. Peripheral disease is characterized vascular often flow This and/or lower in tibial, and the caused femoral, iliac, be fibular the disorder by stenoses (blockages) and may aorta (narrowing) occlusions vessels. “acute have chronic leg and on Patients leg chronic” ischemia. ischemia typically

narrowing 50%). is there have (usually which atheromatous Chronic a disorder undergone vessels often leg over luminal significant in is ischemia and change, peripheral have which arterial disease cardiovascular be and clinically disease), may (including Most asymptomatic. disease cerebrovascular with arterial widespread patients (critical of of limb Some ischemia is limb ischemia). that such viability severe patients these threatened develop the the

chronic symptom The claudication. intermittent is leg of ischemia commonest femoral history (usually associated (usually occlusions or Patients of typically narrowing a the develops with in with the segments). have that or associated the or muscles the narrowing in artery) buttocks calf pain aorto-iliac in occlusion and The occurs these experienced with in pain cramplike is often muscles walking. to up recurs before. rests patient is walking The able and stops to until the same continue the pain distance walking as and

acute limb to chronic the with some of the vessels reduces or blood is degree the a an supply blocks ischemia, viability such limb patients that event threatened. In the

underlying disease. become atheromatous acutely a ischemic no of evidence Occasionally with may leg heart. instances In embolized blood to a likely from clot these have the is Patients and disease. valve fibrillation mitral are with to atrial disease prone embolic

case in limb when is blood severe foot. ulceration, patients limb ischemia gangrene, this to the in and Critical the and develop the limb is occurs rest threatened, pain supply of many viability the so the severely poor that or form may which in reconstruction, angioplasty, radiological treatment, surgical urgent require These amputation. patients the be of even

In the clinic

trauma necessary for is significant a torn during get of Menisci tear to occur. but or knee, twisting forceful always the can rotation not such where are shaped various forms as tear portion or vertical plateau), There perpendicular bucket (parallel into notch). on axis the gets of to a and the to tibial patterns tibial horizontal torn of tears the long the to which (perpendicular fragment meniscus handle meniscus meniscal tears the intercondylar the handle (longitudinal tearing tears of the cleavage depending displaced plateau), the plane

and localized the locking complains knee, can of way, of pain The swelling, which patient to usually lateral giving the and be delayed. clicking, sensation or side or knee knee of usually medial intermittent

associated ligamentous (Fig. the as choice of such assess tears and is cartilage meniscal damage detect modality tears other and articular to injuries, MRI 6.74A). the usually remove entire a is performed debride tear, meniscus Arthroscopy to material, meniscal or rarely repair (Fig. the torn damaged 6.74B).

In the clinic

knee responsible excessive the the from its stabilizing for controlling motion. collateral protecting movements, are ligaments knee and sideway The joint,

force (valgus medial is injury joint applied ligament to an Injury side is outward force). applied excessive the lateral fibular of less the the to occurs the that ligament and force collateral than to force), collateral tibial damaged the side to the is excessive when of is (varus knee common inward when tibial also be cruciate the can triad” “unhappy a and ligament collateral so meniscus involves of of part medial that the to called anterior the tears Injuries ligament.

from minor of are their of the The function. where able all joint, knee ligaments to to lose the stabilize thickness to where knee are full sprains torn ligaments slightly ligaments stabilizing fibers stretched, the spectrum the collateral and range injuries tears but still

clinic In the

anterior is cruciate in (cutting when non-contact of the ligament change (Fig. most or during sudden frequently is The movement there direction injured activities (ACL) a pivoting) 6.81). sports force Contact also result injury twisting, sudden hyperextension, to direct ACL to related may in collision. due valgus and abnormal The usually complete orientation ligament the contour discontinuity the injury or a partial the itself and or of of of mid-portion ligament. the as manifests fibers affects and heard rapidly the sudden acute swollen. tear, can be and click becomes a or knee an ACL pop With diagnosis and assess is to the tests usually by used MRI. clinically are the Several confirmed injury, causes knee joint. the A tear ACL instability thickness of full the treatment level activity depends the of on desired of The patient. is of levels, reconstruction the In ligament surgical required. those activity high with physiotherapy; to the bracing the Those opt damage for low long the activity and with however, osteoarthritis. early knee the of levels leads to may in knee internal development term

so rarely cruciate ligament posterior A to isolation. (PCL) force, the significant it occurs in requires tear a during in the accident. blow or direct of against a knee occurs when vehicle knee dashboard to such as knee the result as a motor the hyperextension striking It a usually bent of called physical tibia the (the as displacement on tibial sign). so the sag posterior of examination Typically, injury presents knee inability and bear and to pain complain weight, of Patients instability. swelling, diagnosis confirmed on The MRI. is (sprain, desired activity. the depends on of degree as and the injury, partial injury The thickness, thickness) the ACL management, in level full of

clinic In the

the throughout joints within occurs Degenerative body. many joint disease may degeneration a normal Articular with with abnormal force or joint the force from result across normal a abnormal cartilage. cartilage an

synovial degenerative occurs Typically osteoarthritis. joint is disease called and process joints the in usually are membrane. cartilage with the within involved, tissues the synovial joints osteoarthritis bony the occurs where In and limited change space, bony findings the typical include sclerosis), outgrowths), The bony joint (joint eburnation and osteophytosis formation. (small cyst in reduction and severely limited, pain. be become there its progresses movement As significant may disease may may the become the malaligned, joint

hands commonest undergo and tarsometatarsal are and affected, the joints hip the sites wrist, The changes. though articulations the the the for metatarsophalangeal limb, small and of may include similar in osteoarthritis knee and lower typically

tend than affected disease joint to females), be and and associations, of metabolic nutritional underuse younger but there abnormalities. or etiology unclear, overuse (males The are is of some age predisposition, degenerative increasing joints, genetic including and include joint pre-existing disease or Further trauma deformity. articular factors

subchondral the cartilage changes degenerative osteoarthritis within histological bone. The of the and of findings consist these articular worsens joint. the upon abnormal damage Further changes, which stresses further promote pain, is which bed the is typical and the activity. of As usually day’s disease finding on progresses rising at the from a end worse it is the unaccustomed or extremes exertion. movement by of aggravated Commonly Stiffness may of and ensue. movement limitation

the to analgesia. first and alteration simple Treatment instance prevent lifestyle includes in of pain symptoms replacement and term. long risks panacea not failure and replacement for appears As in to degenerative joint the but is it be which a disease, without be necessary, short may and infection joint the include progress although joint complications,

In clinic the

joint of knee the Examination

establish the is complaint of examination. any patient’s It important the before nature to the should and the the patient’s about complaint, activity). of history The and (level information symptoms, lifestyle include signs ligament to injury examination, example, of injury might to was likely type give and the the a of tibial the suspected. clinical the significant medial on the may if a around be deformity history valgus kicked knee, collateral clue patient the findings aspect This for

while the the erect walking, in and couch. on should position, include assessment The examination be side must unaffected side. compared with the The affected

are for the knee examining tests including There techniques joint, many and following. the

on lies test—the Lachman’s the couch. patient 20° the distal The the and the and of hand femur places then the around one flexion. producing proximal around elevates knee, examiner tibia other patient’s rests on heel the couch. The examiner’s tibial tuberosity. The the be must on thumb on brisk force. hand applies a the directed anteriorly The tibia of is endpoint. a sudden comes the movement the to it a stop, If the on firm femur tibia cruciate anterior does stop, ligament. endpoint sudden is associated is the soft with to a not a and If described the of come as it tear

of a on proximal Anterior be anteriorly pulled when can test—a head the is drawer positive drawer femur. tibia anterior patient’s test the patient on couch. lies supine the The the and The placed the on and of is couch. heel to 90° are the flexed sole knee foot on The the foot, been has in neutral which sits placed examiner a patient’s position. gently of The that relaxed fingers the pull while index hamstrings the the encircle check are the upper used and other tibia to the tibia. fingers are end tibia forward, cruciate the the ligament torn. anterior is If moves as meniscotibial must this also damaged peripheral Other the structures, to such or medial be sign. meniscus elicit ligaments,

test—there variations Pivot test. this are many of shift The wedged body the examiner’s and is foot between elbow. patient’s one the tibia extension. the forward knee The pushing hand with in flat it under places examiner patient’s is placed it the pushing thigh The way. against other hand the other as fulcrum produce by elbow valgus. taken limb slight abduction body a to is acting with examiner’s examiner’s The the lower the into the and flexion the translation examiner of and tibial patient’s The initiates the knee. maintains valgus the anterior pivot the tibial lateral the reduces. occur will shift as 20°–30° about plateau At damage and the ligament. knee the corner anterior test This the demonstrates posterolateral joint of cruciate to

posterior drawer test a be posteriorly test—a drawer occurs of positive proximal head can Posterior patient’s on when femur. the pushed the tibia is knee patient in approximately neutral and flexed to foot position in the supine The 90° the with placed the position. is a on and tibial patient’s the sits tibia placing tuberosity The foot pushing the on thumbs gently both the backward. examiner posterior If ligament moves, is the torn. tibial plateau cruciate the

of other Assessment the structures knee of

can a by performed on Assessment valgus be knee. stress tibial the collateral the placing of ligament

Assessment posterolateral clinical knee of requires complex more testing. structures and lateral

muscle also will for: and be assessed fossa The masses. line and patellofemoral effusion, presence an tenderness, instability, injury, knee of movement popliteal joint

include the investigations which surfaces, the plain and examination After collateral radiologist tissues. been and and imaging, menisci, resonance further bony clinical soft out, cruciate assess has allows usually magnetic radiography possibly the ligaments, ligaments, to carried cartilaginous

structures any internal and or to out trimmed. damage carried Arthroscopy be repaired may through or is joint aspect knee of small that the knee the into An anteromedial anterolateral is joint. camera placed a arthroscope the and ligaments, cartilaginous is with saline joint solution the and assess is manipulated telescope knee joint the to around menisci, The the a filled cruciate surfaces.

clinic the In

the Anterolateral knee of ligament

knee ligament associated ligament its been described. of the has origin at A fibular with collateral the internal knee) proximal ligament of This of the of femoral lateral control of the the (anterolateral courses tibia. the anterolateral and from the end to ligament may rotation region the tibia epicondyle (J 2013;223:321–328) Anat

clinic In the

popliteal forming abnormally dilated, an artery aneurysm. The can become when exceeds diameter is 7 considered The artery mm. its aneurysmal femoral artery in as can occur they or other large most thoracic in with isolation, vessels aneurysms or such Although aneurysms aorta. are associated commonly abdominal the popliteal the artery to coexisting body. tree detected, Therefore, in for presence a the the arterial be investigated has popliteal once aneurysms entire needs the aneurysm been of elsewhere

undergo other to and to likely aneurysms. are tend rupture than Popliteal thrombosis aneurysms less artery the embolization lead lower to mainly and in complications cases tree most limb can to Therefore arterial ischemia, amputation. leg severe the distal are related of which the

artery diagnosing way of such or demonstrate of aneurysm rule thrombus the it masses most synovial dilation Ultrasound out (Baker’s cyst with helpful as because the from the fossa a distinguish the artery, of popliteal abnormal within aneurysm, duplex help can and other confirm is it a cyst). popliteal Doppler thromboembolic artery high complications. are Popliteal of risk of usually view repaired surgically aneurysms in

clinic the In

the direct related is sudden often Rupture trauma. or of tendon to calcaneal frequently type of normal healthy injury occurs a in tendon. This certain In there rupture. may that tendon are to the addition, conditions predispose tendinopathy (due age-related and certain (quinolone group). previous the overuse, such changes) degenerative use antibiotics as Among calcaneal to interventions or conditions and pharmaceuticals tendon of injections of to are these relatively is calcaneal diagnosis tendon straightforward. rupture of The “being patient examination of reveals a gap in The tendon. complains clinical typically the the or “shot” kicked” behind and often ankle,

In clinic the

legs examination of the Neurological

(particularly that root fibular diabetes legs of pathology with nerve spastic and associated conditions nerve lumbar of discs), commonest Some paraparesis. affect neuropathy the the intervertebral peripheral with lesions (associated palsy, mellitus), are the

of may or reduced of indicate Look innervation. muscle mass wasting—loss for muscle loss

the force down while the examiner examiner while joint); (L1, the of knee S2—the aspect dorsal ankle to to bend patient flexion while leg pushes the L2—iliopsoas—straight to (L5 foot femoris—the to force knee leg in attempts to the applies L4—quadriceps extension); tries knee keep applies force the the joint); foot the upward plantar the patient (L3, (S1, to to ankle applies S2—hamstrings—the examiner flexion the the Test L5—the joint). a a foot flex knee raise); leg knee while in power foot extension the the straight to plantarflex the the pulls applies plantarflexion to ankle patient leg groups—hip (L4, dorsiflex examiner ankle surface force hold the the to dorsiflexion a muscle patient the the of to

knee the a tap the tests tapping tendon and spinal ligament ankle reflexes on with S1–S2 levels. and tendon (tendon) tests calcaneal reflexes—a patellar L3–L4 levels, at at hammer spinal the reflexes Examine the

spinal of touch, to vibration dermatomes levels—test light in and sense pin status and lower lumbar general limb. cord the prick, sensory Assess input upper at sacral

the clinic In

to an dorsiflex foot. Footdrop inability the is with “steppage” characteristic footdrop have a gait. Patients is the walks, the of the to knee prevent phase the from swing abnormal an to As patient height foot elevated limb affected during dragging. the the “slaps” the of phase, At end foot ground. the the swing phase. unaffected gait limb during characteristic the pattern stance the often acquires a of Also, tiptoe the nerve, of A neck. fibular footdrop of fractures which typical to is fibular may common occur with cause damage the nerve and the nerve plexus, the of disorders spinal and lumbosacral brain. include protrusion the L5 cord and root, disc Other causes sciatic the compressing pathologies of

the In clinic

the the nerve fibula. aspect injury The the passes lateral is to susceptible around it as of of neck common fibular or to of as (blow injury secondary fibular can proximal consequence It of as trauma laceration), be fracture. result a a direct a dislocation), a knee (knee or injured damaged or the iatrogenic, can be knee nerve damage during is, surgery. to arthroscopy that Sometimes

knee with leading of consciousness, decreased external to compression injury observed to and common patients, to particularly in nerve prolonged pressure are often the those of fibular bed-bound neuropathy. in Symptoms due nerve levels tight of nerve, muscle of producing palsy. application symptoms to the Similarly, leg or the can brace a a compress cast fibular

sensation other nerve the of a the fibular injury loss symptoms from anterior the of and of of aspect over and fibular foot and common leg drop, foot, muscles. tibial dorsum Apart lateral include of wasting

In the clinic

talus, is of a there of superior distal aspect projection Occasionally the beak-shaped the is which (Fig. 6.101). It often joint with calcaneus. talus of the or bony presence the between and associated is fibrous a

the In clinic

the talus of Fracture

it unusual The primary from ossifies an bone ossification is a the neck. because which single appears talus in center, initially the last, after puberty. normally aspect of The to talus ossify posterior appears process. In small os people (the of there to is posterior the lateral tubercle posterior trigonum) 50% to the ossicle a of accessory up Articular no talar the surface covers are attachments of there approximately 60% direct muscle tendon cartilage or bone. to and the

is fractures the problems of damage. is to One bone the to the of supply blood the talus that vulnerable with sinus the supply The branch posterior main enters artery. the blood of a bone the tibial from through talus the to tarsal body This vessel of of talus. the and most supplies the neck the and fibular the head the the of the neck, dorsal supply Branches of portion branches dorsalis and supply talus. from the portion talar the and lateral aspect a of of pedis artery artery small enter neck superior the

in premature the require to talus making turn Fractures to surgery. may lead talus, interrupt extensive supply the the often the blood so aspect osteoarthritis of the of talus osteonecrosis, of neck which posterior susceptible and body the to and

In the clinic

of ankle essential anatomy appreciation understand the occur around joint. ankle to at wide that fractures variety may of An the and is

be regarded The ankle as ring can in related fibro-osseous the plane. joint a and structures coronal oriented

joint ankle ends joint and of the of the and by formed fibula the the between by tibia The part the is distal upper ring itself.

malleolus of malleolus the the sides the formed ring and tarsal ligaments medial The connect adjacent the to lateral bones. that by are

and not the ankle part ring but the is The joint of bottom subtalar ligaments. of associated consists the of joint, the

the to a from particular likely surrounding the type as fibro-osseous the of type and physician damage to result ankle a of allows predict joint injury. Visualizing ring structures fracture anchoring For to lateral malleolus medial the ligaments malleolus the and example, bones. an the tarsal may inversion injury tear

also to the (which may bones damage not ring ligaments. disrupted but fractures), to by only produces the The be damage by to appreciated be plain is damage on Unlike radiographs. unlikely bone fractures, ligaments to a plain must radiograph, there noted appreciable fracture When on physician aware also always be be may a the ligamentous is that disruption.

ankle radiographs ankle clinicians with to patients in order studies. developed Ottawa rules were investigation to deciding with unnecessary assist avoid whether The in injuries acute require rules unwarranted their developed, after implementation. the Named where of utilization the since have were radiographs sensitive ankle they highly reduced and are hospital the

is ankle is of pain required x-ray series and An if ankle any following: the there

of the distal of along the tibia or cm tip 6 malleolus posterior medial tenderness Bone the

the cm of of the tip 6 distal lateral tenderness along the malleolus or fibula Bone posterior

weight the bear to both department for injury after four Inability steps immediately in emergency and the

there of the if x-ray and foot midfoot series following: A is pain is any required

tenderness the base the metatarsal fifth Bone at of

the at bone navicular Bone tenderness

and after weight both the emergency the steps bear Inability immediately to four injury in department for

In clinic the

A metatarsophalangeal aspect occurs on bunion the joint. of medial first the weight the of body’s important it area This foot transmit the distribute tendons movement. an which and extremely and ligaments, is is during by because crossed of that postulated in bunion joint It deformity. the may abnormal stresses is produce this region the

around a Clinically, may protuberance the of of aspect soft medial that is the tissue a include bunion significant first metatarsophalangeal joint. bone the the of appears crowding toes, the toe progresses, to producing smaller move As it digits. toward

deformity factors. This and hereditary tends among occur osteoporosis who but risk a wear high-heeled also predisposition people to or shoes, pointed are

are the pain, and inflammation. Typically symptoms patient’s swelling, The may problems obtaining footwear. tends bunion enlarge appropriate in to cause and

is taking type adding shoes, to treatment used, footwear drugs. anti-inflammatory by Initial and the changing padding of surgery to and the realign patients may correct toe. deformity the need Some

In the clinic

sole of the flat the band plantar arch of that the a supports tissue is aponeurosis connective The of foot. of from toes. the calcaneal It tuberosity the runs base the to on plantar heel collagen the as body fibers. at aponeurosis the and strain degeneration excessive and increased can standing, such aponeurosis, running weight, and the Overuse with the within disorganization lead micro-tears of increased and to with thickened which on imaging Patients typically (Fig. pain, severe to appears mild heel present 6.121). may intense require treated therapies. It image-guided successfully physiotherapy, but is usually with injection the fascia section be surgically to diseased the severe of cases, removed. needs In

In clinic the

and common in usually enlarged is nerve, toes. the neuroma the third A an plantar third fourth interspace between Morton’s nerve. the this plantar of medial often lateral nerve the with region unites In plantar foot the resulting nerve than larger diameter those typically toes. is the other in As of two join, the the nerves fat to and is pad Also, the the relatively above in position, the vein. artery foot a of subcutaneous close just the it strong deep structure transverse nerve metatarsal metatarsals together. holding which the a is ligament, is the broad Above the nerve transverse the walking the is metatarsal and deep “push-off” phase enters between as patient the ligament. the sandwiched the ground Typically, of interdigital case common compress which forces plantar and is in irritated, The the tend usually can which be nerve, there some associated to change thickening. inflammatory

shoes be by dull sharp experience Typically, the usually worsened and in wearing is and third which pain patients may interspace, or walking.

be the injection Treatment it of or may drugs, remove surgically anti-inflammatory lesion. to may necessary include

the In clinic

both pointing and is one a are Clubfoot feet babies inward deformity born in downward. with congenital or which of foot, foot with straighten better to It treated is calcaneal where by the the procedure into foot and which cut followed is casts a affected to is release manipulation with position. the surgical a plaster tendon gentle the usually minor

man young weekend a long A resort. at European skiing ski enjoying was a his racing of an right caught inner While ski. friend he a edge his fell. He balance and lost from his audible right During “click.” tumble spill, he his tremendous his in knee. developed pain an heard After he recovering to he returned time his on unable skiing knee chalet, carry and for significantly He was his the day, swollen. to by was that surgeon. He see went orthopedic immediately an to

mechanism reviewed of surgeon carefully injury. the orthopedic The

parallel. slope in skis skiing both was man The down the with were The ankles slightly the knees were the held rigid and boots in flexed. to concentration of the his led of edge right A inner skier catching momentary ski. the loss external was into rotation. effect This to calf the force boot and and a away laterally tumbled. midline) knee valgus the forced Furthermore, into the the was (bowed from position skier the were detached as boots from them. skis released Both bindings the

A sequentially. damaged joint structures within were the knee of series

a anterior the rotation fulcrum. acting taut, as into As the ligament cruciate became external went knee and valgus, ligament the of lateral was the knee and tibial collateral The compressed. stressed compartment ligament the (Fig. force As tibial increased, was torn the collateral medial the 6.139A,B), (Fig. was as meniscus 6.140C). way (Fig. gave taut, cruciate ligament, the anterior which Finally, was 6.140A,B).

became hours some The swollen joint afterward.

cruciate joint anterior ligament marked swelling. Disruption of produces characteristically the has intracapsular and rich is extrasynovial a supply. The blood ligament and was ruptured the the joint. it ligament As torn into from the and Blood synovial joint. also enters tear irritates membrane the the hours ensuing the factors joint the gradual of These over cavity. produce significant accumulation the with swelling joint fluid in

surgical anterior reconstruction cruciate The of the patient had a ligament.

difficult properties. act a the as the substance demonstrate physical same the that in cruciate find way same and anterior can man-made is ligament It to Surgeons of anterior have devised the reconstructing ingenious cruciate ways ligament. methods ligament reconstruct and (tendon) the commonest patellar use the of ligament. to hamstrings the Two

patient The had surgical further procedures.

explored was resutured. collateral and The ligament tibial techniques, arthroscopic further to Using débrided in prevent tear the the meniscus complications. medial was

that diabetes with an ulcer was foot nurse A he despite not healing mellitus because man his on dressings. daily had visited 45-year-old his

narrowing arteries, the and lumen large extremities, to healing. vascular to impairing the thereby of lead reducing can supply and Diabetes disease medium blood neuropathy. peripheral blood addition, which nerves, diabetes to supply to affect leads can also In neuropathy and injuries often reduced unnoticed. go minor Peripheral therefore in results can sensation,

This heel, point under strain. is likely to his ulcer a developed and pressure patient repeated be an which has on base opinion, the examined specialist ulcer and ulcer requested looking was of MRI. the the with a the and nurse an that and ulcer x-ray orthopedic at asked who an infected The found pus for infection invading the with calcaneus MRI (Fig. and into bone the x-ray demonstrated The destruction both of 6.141A,B).

bone patient given required washout removal The dead (Fig. the with treatment surgical and and antibiotic of was infected long-term (debridement) 6.141C).

series her leg. dilated a of to right large with young woman A vascular in a veins surgeon came tortuous leg was unremarkable. her of otherwise The rest

determine to the valvular the site was A veins needed of incompetence. diagnosis and varicose made of surgeon

between and where incompetent veins. are superficial the points occur There the typical deep valves tend to marked. become varicosities the In regions these The in and deep saphenous femoral the the typical great saphenous in the 5, junction is popliteal the the calf; and 10, the saphenous veins the femoral occur, the saphenofemoral vein saphenous joined sites vein; the vein the the perforators and where midthigh between the vein 15 the of at where the between vein; malleolus great junction and perforating vein at cm calf are: of above saphena great by vein varix—the small the and medial three sites vein.

surgeon on leg. asked the The bed the the to elevated patient and supine lie saphenofemoral junction asked upper patient A around below was tourniquet thigh the was stand placed the the up. and to No on thigh aspect the medial were veins demonstrated of filling limb. the and lower

femoral the to the tourniquet the the The of in effect great flow femoral to and permitting is the saphenous vein. compress deep system deep venous of blood vein vein while

treatment. assumed medial the level Because surgical saphenofemoral no junction that the was below the veins of varicose was require surgeon of the would tourniquet, and incompetent the the filling there valve at

the also some tourniquet during surgeon veins of maneuver and the posterolateral calf. noted the posterior the aspect However, around

just by technique leg elevated. the performed of joint level of a application was similar while the the knee tourniquet below was A and of and no up patient the posterolateral stood The demonstrated in posterior veins the were filling calf. aspect to These suggested anastomoses the there for it incompetence small the of surgeon the with that popliteal was valve where saphenous findings vein. system the also

planned. Surgery was

where small saphenous the below of transverse deep incision was in A the vein the great ring the fascia. inguinal saphenous the made level through passes ligament can small circular a defect palpated This the as in be easily fascia. the was saphenofemoral the The vein. junction great saphenous and was femoral vein anastomosis identified with at ligated, its removed. surgical using special stripped saphenous and The vein was techniques great

placed of The second the operation. for the prone was part patient

of level transversely incision fossa. small the made in popliteal A was the at crease the skin vein vein. between small difficulty saphenous However, the had the junction identifying surgeon popliteal the and the time vein considerable saphenous wound the was thought was the After he the closed. ligated structure and the small located what surgeon and

clinic 2 home, sent but weeks after returned to walking. day problems the complaining of the was The patient following absence of a disturbance of the was there and obvious aspect over and muscles. lateral examination On of dorsiflexion, sensory the foot, the wasting fibular leg patient steps. was walked, between the dragged foot As the was was a diagnosed. footdrop common nerve injury fibular diagnosis clinical and of A made The surgery. occurred the at injury time of

Within divisions). popliteal sciatic nerve the artery, popliteal its and are popliteal (and the fossa vein, the popliteal deepest structure. The artery is superficial to vein the nerve (eFig. is The superficial the vein is artery to the sciatic popliteal and 6.142). fossa. at the Importantly, the popliteal of nerve divides sciatic the apex fossa. lower into popliteal the tibial continues nerve The common become femoris adjacent the wrap biceps to passes neck. The fibula and nerve to around fibular the superficial laterally muscle

had nerve small this accidentally common ligated than that the saphenous patient’s producing fibular thus the It rather vein, the symptoms. concluded was surgeon

falling at emergency after 72-year-old admitted the A to was room woman home. She of on noticeable in complained the the severe face. right had bruising her right of hip pain side and a

rotated. the shorter it leg leg admission patient’s that left and externally On was noted her right than was

of initial plain An series pelvis. of out, investigations radiograph including the was carried a

displaced The of right the the fracture a of neck the pelvis plain through demonstrated femur. radiograph

spasm The shortening leg external apparent connecting accounted the clinical on and trochanters to of the for muscles by pelvis of the and proximal examination were the femur. rotation joint largest the and group brevis, surround muscles group adductor is the (adductor hip major. that magnus) the the the Of psoas and longus, action flex The externally trochanter its hip. and inserts to the and is lesser psoas the onto rotate major is psoas in the of of the action The the fulcrum head major acetabulum. femoral neck the pulls the is action rotation. its overriding femoral external detached when However, into and proximally femur rotation muscles. external the exacerbated spasm The by the in is adductor

surgery. Extensive medical before was testing necessary coexisting remember is It have diseases. number patients of elderly important that to a may

hemiarthroplasty. The a patient underwent then

in the removed which surgical femoral is acetabulum. procedure the head Hemiarthroplasty a is from femoral reamed. shaft trochanters to the medullary The cavity trimmed of is the neck close the femoral is and medullary acetabulum, metal articulates. is is it the of femur into the head prosthesis which cavity in A the prosthesis the inserted and the into hip placed of be may acetabulum though in replaced acetabulum if appropriate. cases, Importantly, the not prosthetic straightforward is clinically a inserted

that procedure was performed. be the only An could arthroplasty

the the medullary head retinacula of of of synovium within capsule The from artery the blood the the deep ligament the sources—the running head to femur, femoral hip the in the of vessels joint. is in and to the vessels supply fibrous three cavity, replacement of red thus the cavity undergoes marrow, attenuating increasing supply. blood the With age, medullary normal fatty medullary the head the of attenuated the also is The ligament of becomes the with disease. arterial artery within this atherosclerotic and associated often femur

of the the blood at supply for vessels Unfortunately to were head the in via patient, the was fibers, this the fracture. sole transected of the retinacula femur which the time If to fracture be approach fixation an patient a damaged and the for surgical without of vessels retinacula not the undertaken hemiarthroplasty. the been have fibers need the could a different intertrochanteric would had instead,

patient The osteoporosis. has

is more common condition older postmenopausal women. Osteoporosis frequent affecting in is significantly people, but a significantly reduced occur the Many the patients is the elderly of strength neck in osteoporotic. femoral fractures bone it is of when because common osteoporotic the distal lumbar vertebrae. thoracic and include the sites for Other radius and fractures

28-year-old for a was family woman by checkup 36 her routine age. practitioner pregnancy A weeks’ at gestational seen the nor pregnancy. had the physician family patient Neither about concerns any the gradually the increased complain over did However, previous days. unilateral of which her left the 2 had swelling patient leg, of some visit she chest her by which sharp developed was deep Furthermore, the before exacerbated breaths. pain, evening

of The ordered scan a duplex left ultrasound family the system. leg physician venous

veins. of Ultrasound can vascular flow and demonstrate and occlusion the scanning of arteries tree

placed demonstrated. and was femoral left was the flow probe no The over vein the and not could be alteration could demonstrated. of be Furthermore, compressed, vein breathing flow no with the in Some demonstrated flow vein was saphenous femoral and the great vein. deep in was popliteal the and length left veins. No tibial vein, throughout the of femoral the flow the demonstrated vein,

opposite the system. The the technician excellent within flow venous femoral was scanned demonstrated right where side, augmentation to when flow addition, was the In an massaged calf noted. the was gently venous alteration was excursion satisfactory. flow respiratory of to possible and with was It demonstrate compression was left-sided extensive vein diagnosis thrombosis made. deep of A

vein thrombosis. are more to deep patients prone Certain

antithrombin to clotting promoting C, formation; predispose and injury muscular due the III, and lack blood—hypercoagulable levels movement), S. to in effect, occur; of Three of pump factors, thrombosis: to thrombus often are calf to (which may of of abnormal walls, protein flow blood wall—venous vessel vein hypercoagulability veins—significant a associated patient certain stasis states obstruction factors blood reduced as the reduced major may stagnant protein trauma such the may flow or damage with be the

deep iliac the which thrombosis. external cause vein of stasis, the the veins likely the led to this gravid compression of uterus by was left In patient,

pulmonary chest emboli. due to The pain was

in emboli Small thrombus lodge the the the of to lungs. heart were from the edge leading through off thrown pleuritic exacerbated typical emboli chest pain, breathing. is by Small which cause In respiratory a (eFig. they these precursor the but affect small emboli fatal may may pulmonary isolation and embolus large pulmonary potentially be to function, 6.143).

and had delivery. uneventful an instituted Anticoagulation patient was the

45-year-old recently man had taken squash. up A he in and severe pain a During attempted heel. game forehand shot his noticed a sudden his He him racket. had thought opponent with hit his was When hit have though, he far to away realized him. he turned, his opponent too

was ankle. of there minutes Within swelling the marked stop patient was to to unable plantarflex had his the and The game. foot Afterward subcutaneous the hematoma in developed ankle. an appreciable

or soft include possibilities bone a tissue diagnostic injury. The

was excluded was A bone tenderness. because there no bony injury

tissue patient significant The injury. soft had a On of swelling significant he examination had with a hematoma. ankle subcutaneous the on calcaneal prone a demonstrated right was within leg, tendon. was the He in the position and palpable unable on tiptoe to defect stand the

diagnosis A calcaneal of was tendon made. rupture

ruptured support has patient tendon This history this. a typical and findings clinical the calcaneal of diagnosis and carried Magnetic resonance was the out imaging (eFig. confirmed 6.144).

The repair. patient operative underwent an

The squash. has to patient tendon back the healed though not well, playing gone

back A of have the a mass 67-year-old knee. at was to man his noted transverse approximately The mass measured diameter. in cm 4 fit of The well patient history and otherwise and was no had other note.

one popliteal was fossa. mass arising the The from the in structures of

a Within the is bundle the fossa and neurovascular artery the the contains vein. popliteal nerve that popliteal popliteal its there sciatic divisions), two (and aspect joint tendons knee small with in and region. are bursae numerous also the and There posterior muscles this the of associated the of the region. joint, the the is is muscles menisci, this which and mass synovial structures this outpouchings, posterior and include knee that arising of from possible the It tendons

arterial the and The within aneurysm, cyst, commonest fossa masses a a an popliteal are demonstrated cyst. popliteal adventitial popliteal

blood Further by made and flow) was this bruit examination that auscultation. a (an pulsatile revealed turbulent demonstrated mass clinical on audible rumbling

diagnosis A aneurysm popliteal made. was artery of

abnormal is popliteal an the popliteal of artery. dilation artery A aneurysm unusual size. for It develop 5 before symptoms greater is be because usually to it it reaches cm this than

in aneurysms mural natural the distal popliteal elsewhere rupture. to with producing the the is aneurysms ischemia rather than history lesion, Unlike body, thrombus the to embolize, of patients rest of with the It aneurysms. an association there may aneurysms the in to bilateral is tree be examine abdominal arterial and with is aortic aneurysm mandatory a because popliteal

The and cyst an a adventitial popliteal other possibilities cyst. diagnostic include

the the popliteal from A posteromedial arises joint. of cyst that cyst) aspect synovial (Baker’s a is knee outpouching the fossa. semimembranosus lie The the the head within knee popliteal and joint of tendon of the to medial the gastrocnemius outpouches between synovial medially membrane tracks tendons to around semitendinosus). pes and and the that it (sartorius, anserinus gracilis, Occasionally in lie inferiorly form the

from cystic arterial of wall cyst arises an adventitial uncommon the structure An is the that artery.

An was carried ultrasound out. investigation

of popliteal characterized in the the the demonstrated. was ultrasound were dimensions Using and flow aneurysm the vessels real-time were cyst Furthermore, excluded. and completely adventitial a popliteal cyst

an graft made recovery. and patient a interposition The and uneventful has underwent excision surgical

runner came A acute aspect her ankle. of the with long-distance physician young around her lateral to swelling after into injury a in occurred running directly accidentally pothole This the pavement.

A suspected. was fractured ankle

soft patient’s bone the the anteroposterior of swelling. lateral no any injury account of Plain revealed for evidence tissue ankle to and radiographs

The patient analgesics of was given and and a crutches told to rest. pair A made. was simple a of diagnosis sprain

the the that began and went edema run, to ankle but Over an swelling the soft within the She weeks the orthopedic assessment. noted surgeon way.” patient and decreased of further for to the kept tissue “giving ankle ensuing

a test joint. ankle positive of There anterior the was drawer

of is injury. this the stage At mechanism important to review it of the on final hard phase the supination when foot. involves a Typically push-off running surface of a or the joint If is this in plantarflexion. supinating continues maneuver ankle divot, the and in pothole caught inverts foot on significant and, ligament complex structures appropriate order) This disruption given the lateral (in the strain anterior puts ligament occurs the posterior. of from to circumstances, ligament disrupted, calcaneofibular the the ligament, posterior followed ligament. talofibular talofibular anterior then the by First, is and of disrupted, the each increased. is severity significantly of these and As of tissue the soft permanent enhanced injury instability ankle ligaments the is chance is

any examination to opposite of anterior the ligament. ankle On the mm anterior the injury test an drawer compared side) to suggests (4–5 talofibular positive

assessed by placing talofibular plantarflexion. ligament foot anterior be marked in the can The of anterior talofibular the an difference suspected. disruption 10° foot If affected foot, there nonaffected is and between over ligament is

usually disrupted, three if rare to be It for there other are and so is all injuries. ligaments extremely ankle significant

ligament Magnetic imaging was carried (MRI) resonance out to damage. assess

is the of for the lateral that the MRI well the medial ankle of foot. posterior and soft tissues excellent complexes as bones support the ligament as demonstrating

this there ligament tear patient a for (eFig. anterior was talofibular of the Unfortunately 6.145), had to be repaired surgically. which

670.e2 670.e1

the clinic—cont’d In

the limb—cont’d plexus Table of associated with lumbosacral lower Branches the 6.1

Regional Saphenous Opening the • Deep Fascia and Anatomy

Fig. 6.73, cont’d

the Nerve • Sciatic Anatomy Avoiding Surface

the Anatomy Surface Structures Identifying Knee Around •

Finding Gateway Anatomy Tarsal • the the Surface to Tunnel—the Foot

the Surface Anatomy Plantar Arterial Approximating of the Arch • Position

forearm 766 of Anterior compartment the

compartment Posterior of 775 the forearm

at Carpal the structures and 788 wrist tunnel

the 810 landmarks posterior muscles region scapular of and Bony

related contents and the locating Visualizing structures axilla 811 and

artery the the 812 Locating arm brachial in

nerve of the and position brachii The radial triceps 813 tendon

Identifying vessels forearm and tendons locating 815 the major nerves in and distal

hand the Normal of 816 appearance

the Position nerve of and retinaculum the of median recurrent branch flexor 817 the

the function 817 in the of hand nerves Motor and median ulnar

Visualizing palmar arches the deep and 818 positions the superficial of

with upper lateral associated neck thoracic and is wall. of with the the the aspect The of limb lower portion the suspended by from the articulation a the joint. trunk skeletal sternum—the clavicle muscles the is small and between It and sternoclavicular (Fig. arm, upper shoulder, component limb Based the on its and position joints forearm, the into and of hand is divided major bones, 7.1A).

is the trunk attachment upper limb the of area shoulder to (Fig. The 7.1B).

wrist the and joint; the the upper shoulder between distal between elbow is the elbow the and to of the part hand the arm is joint forearm and wrist limb The joint. is the joint; the

axilla, (Fig. parts cubital areas significant limb The between tunnel of and carpal different transition the are fossa, of the 7.2). of areas. each related or are to, structures through, pass these Important

an irregularly the area and thoracic of is and pyramidal The the muscles axilla lateral of the wall. formed surface bones by shoulder shaped The lower opens directly into the the or neck. apex inlet portion of the forms floor. armpit skin of The the All through pass that pass arm and the structures between the major axilla. neck

joint. formed shaped a to depression muscles fossa cubital elbow anterior is the The triangularly by passing upper median forearm from limb, does through passes artery, to the nerves the the artery, the major one arm fossa, this nerve. the The of brachial of the major as

hand. carpal is of the tunnel the to gateway The palm the medial region the hand. carpal posterior, small arch, proximal up made an and is in of the of bones Its form walls lateral, which tunnel. the of the A and arch between thick the tissue, the flexor spans forms wall anterior of connective side of distance the retinaculum, band each and median The the from the of the all tunnel. to pass flexor passing nerve tendons carpal the the through digits long hand forearm

Positioning hand the

for the support, in which mobile locomotion, is and positioning limb, is the space. used highly lower limb stability, the upper Unlike hand for

body. The can shoulder by muscles from trunk predominantly therefore and the suspended the be moved is relative to the scapula retraction) of position reach changes the joint) on glenohumeral the (shoulder of (Fig. wall rotating joint the Sliding extends the and the hand and (protraction thoracic and 7.3). move three axes of arm allows with wide around motion. glenohumeral a range joint to The the at joint lateral rotation Movements adduction, abduction, medial this (external arm (Fig. (internal and flexion, rotation circumduction extension, rotation), of the rotation), are 7.4).

and movements forearm at (Fig. joint flexion major of extension are the elbow the The 7.5A). end end the head bone, the of medial the can radius, the adjacent be flipped over the of lateral the the of other the distal ulna. bone, At forearm, palm-posterior position over radius is the radius, moved the the with crossing articulated the of to hand Because ulna a be it (Fig. can by simply position palm-anterior from end efficiently distal a the 7.5B). forearm. movement, in solely termed This the occurs pronation, to anatomical the Supination position. the hand returns

joint, flexed, (Fig. be the hand At extended, circumducted abducted, wrist the adducted, can and 7.6). in to combined placed movements, the body. the with range positions wide a arm, of of forearm, enable those to be hand the These and relative shoulder,

The tool as hand a mechanical

of to manipulate functions grip hand One the and of major the objects. is flexing objects against thumb. generally Gripping fingers the involves the act the of and of modify actions the flexor muscles digit be and combinations that on forearm coming extensor alone Depending and type of insert digits the each the in the long the tendons hand, produce generated into emerge cannot joint that grip, forearm. movements from the the from to: of long hand within by tendons

sensory as a The hand tool

discriminate basis between is objects The on used the touch. hand to of aspect receptors. a fingers of The sensory the on high somatic pads contain of the density palmar the is that the of particularly to hand, other brain sensory cortex information from devoted the disproportionately the Also, thumb, of for skin. regions large to relative interpreting many from

and the (Fig. clavicle, the humerus bones The proximal of consist of scapula, the shoulder of end 7.7).

of the laterally The the with of joint the acromion manubrium head which articulates arches the medially glenoid scapula, the between the (the the the humerus clavicle sternum and the of and scapula with cavity of joint). glenohumeral over

the humerus is bone of the The (Fig. arm 7.7). joint joint, bones that extension is at forearm the which elbow the allows of humerus of articulates of with hinge the the distal flexion a The end forearm. and the

forearm The bones: two contains

radius. lateral is The bone the

medial the ulna (Fig. The bone is 7.7).

of with the the the proximal and each elbow At well radius other with joint, as the ends ulna articulate humerus. as

while spin and to the extending the head on the hand. humerus to pronation sliding during elbow and ulna flexing allows the the radius forearm, addition against of the joint supination the In of

also with and radius portions each the other. The distal articulate of the ulna of the ulna to This the the pronation medial end to allows side hand. side joint of lateral flip during the the radius of from the

and to the formed distal between between and The hand carpal joint the and an bones the of disc, wrist radius bones. is carpal ulna, articular

carpal phalanges the of the (Fig. bones, the The of bones and metacarpals, consist hand the 7.7).

and the five hand middle, in the The index, digits and thumb are ring, fingers. the little

unit. result, only as as Joints carpal a amounts bones the movement; eight bones allow the of limited a work together small between

The primary the for five skeletal palm the of metacarpals, each foundation are (Fig. one digit, 7.7).

(metacarpal occurs allows the and carpometacarpal limited the The one fingers. that mobility bones the the than sliding the carpal greater at between the of metacarpal of joint of movement joints thumb I)

the (i.e., to interconnected metacarpals thumb) of are ligaments. the by strong of heads II except that V Distally, the and thumb the this thumb ligamentous freedom digits with other bone of saddle between the finger connection movement of Lack with provide thumb the the index between bones metacarpal of carpus of the the greater biaxial of and hand. metacarpal the joint together than the

the of are (Fig. The bones digits the phalanges 7.7). three. thumb has the has of each other digits while phalanges, two The

circumduction biaxial (ellipsoid extension, and condylar joints flexion, adduction, joints that The (Fig. abduction, joints) metacarpophalangeal allow are 7.8). the in the an middle and is the in adduction Abduction passing finger the reference center through of axis defined to anatomical of position. fingers central abduct from laterally therefore middle both medially and side. finger can adduct to The back and axis the either that joints and flexion primarily allow The are only hinge interphalangeal joints extension.

scapula levator to as trapezius, connect of the the shoulder, and such scapulae, the rhomboids, and trunk. the muscles Some clavicle humerus. the to end the wall of Other body muscles scapula, connect the clavicle, proximal and and major, major, latissimus include dorsi, (Fig. deltoid minor, the pectoralis teres pectoralis These 7.9A,B). humerus muscles the the cuff provide supraspinatus, teres joint rotator and these muscles—which glenohumeral scapula four The the for and most muscles—the subscapularis, connect support infraspinatus, to are minor (Fig. the important of 7.9C).

by layers arm and forearm separated ligaments anterior into (extensor) posterior are compartments Muscles (flexor) and bones, of and fascia, the (Fig. in 7.10).

posterior lateral by in compartment septa. and of The of arm intermuscular humerus by the position the compartment is muscles and medial and from separated anteriorly the lies anterior continuous of arm fascia septa enclosing humerus. the with are the sides These intermuscular to the deep attach and the

a the the are interosseous of sides anterior radius compartments posterior lateral which (Fig. ulna, septum, In by an separated the and and adjacent ulna and the radius, joins forearm, intermuscular the membrane, 7.10).

the act wrist mainly fingers the the in forearm at those thumb. at hand forearm elbow and in arm the move the Muscles while function predominantly joint, joint the and move the to to

intrinsic Muscles the by fingers hand and produced digits tendons movements of delicate from the the hand, the generate modify the found thumb forearm. the and in the into of muscles, entirely coming forces intrinsic muscles Included the of a eminence, among the tissue thenar palmar small soft mound, the the metacarpal thenar of called I. three muscles, which form are hand aspect over to freely relative move the thumb other fingers. allow the thenar The muscles to

to directly is related upper neck. The limb the an of superior of coracoid aperture medial at of clavicle, the the formed of scapula, surface (Fig. thoracic the I, base each and lateral the neck scapula process is the surface on posterior is of margin axillary side inlet, which of of the Lying the the rib the margin by: the the superior 7.11).

limb by the through thorax upper inlet. pass of between the over the artery and I passing rib and major the and limb vein axillary The limb. inlet pass cord, the the and cervical the also spinal supply upper through the to the axilla derived axillary Nerves, from predominantly of portion

trunk trapezius, wall major, of (Fig. include that back scapulae, are levator shoulder the and the associated to the rhomboid and rhomboid the dorsi Muscles attach the latissimus bones minor, with thoracic and the 7.12).

thoracic limb. on anterior relationships significant has the breast wall and axilla the of The upper a with number axilla wall chest and of most humerus the It forms of overlies the which the wall pectoralis attaches the major (Fig. anterior muscle, the to 7.13). Often, process as the into breast the of axilla. pectoralis around lateral the major margin known axillary of extends the part the

axilla. breast into of nodes in lymph the predominantly the is or major veins gland arteries Several drain supply and originate the vessels. that from, or also into, axillary drain

C5 by formed C8, (Fig. limb Innervation rami is to and the which plexus, of by is upper T1 the anterior brachial cervical the spinal of nerves 7.14). inlet continues and initially the axilla. plexus the through This is in the into axillary formed then neck forearm, plexus Major hand brachial the ultimately from axilla. innervate that and nerves the arm, in originate the

out limb. myotomes, reflexes by is in and testing cervical and As of upper consequence clinical nerves dermatomes, lower pattern, the T1 of tendon this carried examining innervation a in of to pins-and-needles or the sensations, clinical the and limb. lower problems cervical muscle consequence is nerves—pain; signs paresthesia; twitching—appear upper related Another that

(Fig. of limb Dermatomes upper the sensation. often tested are for 7.15A) the overlap lateral spinal spinal cord little palmar of upper cord pad medial cord spinal of pad minimal of thumb level the spinal finger C7, elbow level region of Areas the: the for the C5, finger level arm T1. the and of skin for pad is on aspect where include the for C6, cord spinal index C8, for dermatomes level for of cord level

to used are myotomes movements Selected test joint (Fig. 7.15B):

of the glenohumeral by joint arm C5. is the predominantly at controlled Abduction

primarily joint forearm elbow the C6. the of by controlled is Flexion at

of at is by C7. Extension joint mainly controlled forearm elbow the the

the mainly of by controlled C8. fingers Flexion is

predominantly the and and middle, Abduction index, fingers is ring of T1. controlled adduction by

tested be functions reflexes: In levels unconscious cord both and sensory somatic spinal an can tendon motor of using patient,

for biceps C6. cubital cord spinal tap level the of mainly the tendon the A in tests on fossa

for tap A the mainly posterior tests of C7. the elbow tendon the on triceps to

associated associated immediately levels above the with cord C4, the The innervation upper with cord of spinal level is major limb. diaphragm, the spinal

can spinal in cord and below the limb C4 level. develop that spinal information breathing upper damage the of myotomes potential important about problems Evaluation complications just regions in to dermatomes provide the of as might

of axilla forearm (Fig. each plexus major the intrinsic the of arm in the originate one the compartments innervated of muscles by and the Each nerves from the muscle in is brachial of that and hand predominantly major the 7.16A):

of muscles are All the nerve. anterior compartment by musculocutaneous the arm innervated the in

innervated the medial and forearm, profundus anterior the ulnar two carpi The in ulnaris median nerve wrist are of flexor by flexor flexor muscle) of fingers muscles of part with one of of the digitorum (the flexor compartment (the muscle) half the the exceptions—one innervates nerve. the the

lumbrical lateral are two the thenar muscles and ulnar innervated for median Most nerve, the by which are hand the muscles, muscles innervated intrinsic except of by the nerve.

All by of are the radial nerve. in the innervated and muscles the compartments posterior forearm arm

innervating skin the of major from each to the muscle different In from addition nerves peripheral from quite originating groups, major dermatomes patches (Fig. of 7.16B). nerve test areas can lesions: peripheral used Sensation in be these for to

nerve on the The skin forearm. of innervates anterolateral the musculocutaneous side

and and the medial innervates one-half ulnar nerve nerve digits, three lateral innervates median surface one-half one of The the digits. and palmar the the

the and forearm dorsolateral of the radial nerve hand. surface on skin surface the of supplies posterior The the

Nerves related to bone

of are to (Fig. parts Three nerves the related important directly humerus 7.17):

of the joint, muscle, the which around axillary the supplies posterior humerus of the glenohumeral neck). major a upper nerve, at abductor of (the humerus surgical passes aspect part deltoid the the The

extensor of radial nerve, the diagonally supplies in the of middle the the surface upper muscles around limb, all of groove. which the radial the passes The posterior of humerus

to end destined epicondyle, the for humerus. on the nerve, medial ultimately the distal is medial the the side passes bony a of protrusion, which The of hand, posteriorly ulnar

nerve. of regions Fractures related of the these endanger can one humerus any three in the

veins used the embedded are the vascular system fascia superficial to limb and access blood. in upper of patient’s often a to withdraw Large median significant (Fig. cubital basilic, of and these cephalic, The the veins are veins most 7.18).

and the the back on veins the dorsal of cephalic from originate basilic network hand. The venous

The base distal and the to proximally. at then the cephalic laterally the reach passes anatomical vein snuffbox surface forearm continues over of the anterolateral the limb, the around thumb, of originates passes then and pectoralis a into triangle deltoid clavicle. It the (deltopectoral crosses muscle, the arm elbow, major triangular triangle)—between clavipectoral muscle, depression—the up the In to vein depression, deep by clavicle. passes the this just inferior penetrating axilla fascia the into the

and the of surface the network up hand medial proximally the vein side dorsal basilic of originates passes the posteromedial from the of The venous forearm. It arm. proximally the just limb to and continues of elbow midway penetrate to anterior surface fascia deep onto up about passes the inferior then the the

elbow, the the vein, connected and the by the cubital At fossa. cubital median veins crosses which of the cephalic basilic are roof

of Orientation thumb the

of index, thumb fingers (Fig. right to angles and at the is The little orientation positioned ring, middle, the 7.19). of a other angles result, of right those movements at occur thumb to the digits. As the abduction it whereas palm, the across moves the For to right angles example, thumb the away the at palm. flexion fingers brings from

the a of angles the positioned wrist thumb the right the only palm, of rotation a pads fingers. the directly of on pad with the other to Importantly, slight I facing brings into metacarpal the at thumb position function. normal opposition thumb This the of for essential is hand

to shoulder of attachment trunk. The upper the limb is the region

the the the clavicle the humerus. (shoulder which and consists bone the of of: pectoral end shoulder of proximal and girdle The girdle), form scapula, framework

shoulder muscles form the contour consist part The of trapezius superficial muscular of the of muscles, the shoulder. together and lateral which the over the deltoid smooth the to connect and clavicle the and arm, respectively. These muscles to trunk scapula the

between limb. The trunk only the is and upper the bony the clavicle attachment contour, the is part part medial along It forward-facing S-shaped has lateral. its with a the and concave forward-facing palpable convex entire length gentle and sternal in end the the (Fig. whereas (lateral) is flat, robust shape and acromial clavicle of is The quadrangular (medial) end more somewhat 7.20).

articulation the the the a facet oval acromial of a surface end The small the with has of of on on scapula. similar its acromion for facet clavicle medial surface

for a sternum, extent, larger first the with a and to cartilage. the lesser of with costal sternal has articulation manubrium mainly much facet The the end

a The conoid of surface (the the ligament. attachment inferior for (the tubercle possesses lateral consisting trapezoid lateral tubercle) coracoclavicular important distinct third a line), the clavicle and of of the tuberosity roughening of

the margins of attachment limb. the the by clavicle addition, of to are and the thorax, connect In clavicle neck, and that upper surfaces roughened the muscles the inferior surface. smoother is superior than surface The

scapula and medial), three posterior), flat (lateral, (costal angles is spine, coracoid lateral, superior, inferior), (acromion, and and borders (superior, and with: surfaces triangular large, two three (Fig. three process) bone and The processes a 7.21).

with by scapula marked lateral to of (Fig. is somewhat which articulates cavity, angle head the The the comma-shaped a joint form glenohumeral shallow, humerus the of the glenoid 7.21B,C).

of the inferior is head tubercle) the of attachment cavity roughening triceps triangular-shaped infraglenoid A the glenoid long large to site brachii (the the muscle. for

the attachment muscle. less supraglenoid cavity the tubercle glenoid for A located is long the and of site the to biceps superior head distinct brachii is of

A scapula much a larger, and inferior of small, supraspinous into a superior spine posterior (Fig. surface subdivides the fossa fossa the infraspinous prominent 7.21A).

distal small a the the projection facet of its which articulates, clavicle. over glenohumeral is joint via spine, the anterolateral with oval on arches end, an The and acromion,

of the The the the to notch between the region notch). greater attachment spine scapula the the scapula (spinoglenoid posterior lateral angle and surface of is of the scapular

of subscapular extent characterized fossa shallow concave being surface, a the surface is the the Unlike (Fig. of unremarkable, much by over its scapula posterior costal 7.21B). related with and surface underlying muscle The thoracic wall. provide margins its for the costal moves and costal (subscapularis), attachment, together muscle over surface, the freely

scapula thick is thin sharp. whereas border lateral and and medial for muscle of the the border The is of strong and the attachment, superior much border

structure the the process, superior The notch, a anterolaterally that which but root part process. the the its lies distinct lateral to medial coracoid marked projects hook-like inferior of lateral the directly clavicle; by: suprascapular is of end and border to on and small immediately is coracoid the positioned

a border The angle, tip can and process, the the be of the spine palpated medial patient, inferior acromion of of coracoid scapula. the readily much the can and as on

humerus neck, and (Fig. and end head, surgical of the the of anatomical superior consists shaft proximal greater The tubercles, the lesser the the half the of the the of humerus neck, 7.22).

half-spherical in is the articulate and with much The the smaller to head scapula. somewhat shape superiorly cavity projects glenoid of medially and

and short distal The anatomical to head. the constriction is immediately very narrow a formed is neck by the and lesser It and the and head laterally, medially. lies head the between shaft greater more the tubercles between and

the the four tubercles are the on prominent of sites landmarks cuff end for and joint. lesser rotator humerus of The proximal the muscles as glenohumeral serve attachment greater and

The greater lateral position. is in tubercle and smooth three surface tendon Its marked for superior are by posterior muscle large attachments: surface facets

the superior muscle. The facet of supraspinatus attachment is for

infraspinatus. middle of for is attachment The facet the

minor. the for attachment facet inferior The of is teres

is and by The muscle. marked surface a subscapularis smooth the its anterior is position in lesser impression for of large attachment tubercle

and separates lesser humerus and shaft the continues sulcus A proximal groove) (Fig. of greater onto intertubercular inferiorly deep tubercles the (bicipital the 7.22). this brachii The sulcus. biceps the long of head of the tendon through passes

dorsi for of and attachment pectoralis the latissimus major, floor mark medial and teres sites muscles, major, Roughenings the the sulcus respectively. lips intertubercular of the the on and on lateral

the The its lateral the lateral along sulcus of length intertubercular a midway inferiorly surface (Fig. large is V-shaped on lip continuous humerus deltoid the of with tuberosity deltoid the where humerus. onto the muscle which 7.22), inserts is

but position, the of a same approximately the roughening bone, the medial surface the attachment vertical In is of coracobrachialis for there on thin muscle.

end surgical of the (Fig. the of neck important most of the features proximal the humerus One is 7.22). part anatomical the tubercles) expanded region and the humerus shaft. of between plane proximal This and horizontal (head, oriented is neck, in narrower the the the neck. the circumflex the axillary region posterior into from posterior so do to surgical which deltoid the axilla, immediately pass and humeral artery, nerve The Because neck the one more surgical of humerus proximal the of is where the regions is weaker commonly than it sites bone, the fractures. humeral) this associated fractures region. nerve (posterior artery circumflex damaged in (axillary) by can be The and

the The sternoclavicular, complex joints. the acromioclavicular, and shoulder joints glenohumeral are in three

pectoral and the link The bones joint of trunk. other the joint sternoclavicular girdle the the each two to to acromioclavicular and be the joints the The a “reach” limb. combined the by movements positioned over range scapula to thoracic at two upper wide substantially on increasing wall, these enable

humerus the is (shoulder joint) between the articulation the arm and the joint of scapula. glenohumeral The

clavicle The manubrium the together the the sternoclavicular between of clavicular proximal cartilage of sternum the occurs of costal the part small end the joint first a (Fig. and of with notch 7.23). synovial is shaped. saddle It and compartments The completely articular articular into an disc. separated is by cavity two vertical joint some predominantly occurs. allows the the in clavicle, rotation of and anteroposterior also The movement although planes, sternoclavicular

reinforced joint ligaments: by by four surrounded is joint sternoclavicular a is capsule The and

anterior joint. sternoclavicular posterior, respectively, The and to anterior posterior ligaments and are the

two clavicles the the ends other superior of the to of An links of manubrium and sternum. to the the surface interclavicular each ligament

related of and the the the is laterally ligament links first proximal positioned cartilage. The the joint to rib costal and to costoclavicular end clavicle

joint acromial of clavicle the joint the a acromion surface The a of oval on facet the similar facet medial the on is small an between synovial acromioclavicular and (Fig. end also Fig. see 7.24, 7.31). and allows anteroposterior planes It together rotation. in vertical movement axial the with some

a maintaining the (which the the providing a inferior a of coracoid not clavicle of weight-bearing the the is the to and the reinforced between related posterior scapula a and acromial process the adjacent acromion, the and and tubercle). (which to important upper trapezoid end to is coracoclavicular on larger an ligament the regions ligament, passing limb an joint clavicle of ligament, on clavicle) superior ligament trapezoid but distance of of and by: acromioclavicular ligament is conoid capsule on is anterior directly and comprises clavicle the the the support between surrounded The spans line accessory the surface much which clavicle much attaches position acromion—it joint and strong conoid the acromioclavicular the for joint, attaches by the to small of related the joint and

and synovial head scapula the the ball glenoid humerus articulation glenohumeral of is between joint a the the and The cavity (Fig. of socket 7.25). is the at of It stability. of cost provided movements range a skeletal wide with multiaxial the rotator extracapsular related cuff head brachii muscle, bony and muscles, of processes, provided, Joint the long instead, the stability biceps by ligaments. is abduction, extension, adduction, Movements flexion, circumduction. at and include medial rotation, the rotation, joint lateral

spherical head scapula glenoid of the joint surfaces glenohumeral small the large the are the The of and articular the humerus (Fig. of cavity 7.25). of by the covered hyaline Each surfaces cartilage. is

is glenoid which labrum), deepened fibrocartilaginous fossa. margin the peripherally expanded the of cavity by to glenoid The a attaches (the and collar head the of to continuous superior labrum the the of through this which the long the humerus. the with biceps passes cavity and brachii head of the supraglenoid muscle, attaches tendon to Superiorly, tubercle articular is

joint (Fig. to capsule the synovial lines of of fibrous and membrane margins surfaces the attaches the The articular the membrane 7.26). synovial membrane is loose The inferiorly. of related abduction membrane membrane and of redundant fibrous region arm. This the accommodates synovial

between membrane. bursae, form membrane in the to protrudes of tendons surrounding fibrous through muscles and The apertures membrane the the which fibrous synovial lie is lies subtendinous the fibrous muscle of which the of consistent and the bursa between subscapularis, The membrane. these subscapularis most the sulcus. of muscle also the long membrane and in folds extends brachii head into the the as the tendon the around intertubercular the biceps passes The synovial tendon of along it joint adjacent bone. the between friction tendons joint All these synovial and reduce structures and capsule

but In it. that fibrous in associated communicate addition with other are the bursae not membrane, connected to the with articular apertures to cavity through the are bursae joint acromion the between deltoid subdeltoid capsule) in capsule, of muscle) process head bursa), acromion coracoid brachii, between (coracobrachialis, tendons These joint the and and and or muscle of the the (the (or triceps subacromial long and around relationship muscles dorsi the teres latissimus joint between joint skin, major, muscles). (or to occur: and supraspinatus

muscle, of glenoid attachment of labrum the The the and to the the the of joint glenoid (Fig. the brachii of cavity, anatomical the margin head humerus the fibrous long neck capsule attaches of and biceps the to membrane outside 7.27).

onto neck the extends and occurs attachment On more than the medial the inferiorly the humerus, shaft. In this fibrous in folded or region, anatomical loose is position. the membrane also the abduction redundant the area arm. the of accommodates of fibrous membrane This

around bursae muscles the the articular and Openings capsule between of continuity biceps long the of muscle intertubercular in surrounding the of tendon occur fibrous provide joint the head cavity with the membrane sulcus. the in that and brachii

thickened: inferiorly which from The middle, the (Fig. of glenohumeral superomedial ligaments, and the cavity anterosuperiorly to form fibrous membrane of to tubercle locations the margin joint lesser anatomical glenoid neck of and related pass the the is three inferior humerus capsule in superior, sulcus of of superiorly the tubercle (transverse biceps and (Fig. brachii the the of greater coracohumeral intertubercular muscle process the in the 7.27); (the tubercles ligament)—this the ligament); humeral head the between the holds of between coracoid and humerus the long the base tendon humerus greater and of lesser 7.27).

tendons coracoid superiorly by ligament and formed the stability and is muscle coraco-acromial acromion (Fig. by a Joint and process the arch provided skeletal surrounding 7.28).

(Figs. collar capsule blend glenohumeral joint the joint subscapularis Tendons anterior the form of rotator posterior, minor, cuff the that a with and and aspects surrounds and of superior, the supraspinatus, muscles muscles) infraspinatus, teres musculotendinous (the 7.29). and 7.28 the and arm’s of the scapula This without stabilizes humerus compromising motion. glenoid the cuff in the and the holds head flexibility of cavity of muscles of range of brachii muscle glenoid humeral through tendon and superiorly of head upward the the head The long the the restricts joint cavity. on passes biceps the of movement

Vascular posterior anterior the and joint branches glenohumeral through and of suprascapular supply is humeral circumflex arteries. to the predominantly

of The glenohumeral suprascapular, from by and the the from the joint cord plexus, posterior branches pectoral nerves. axillary, brachial and innervated lateral is

of (Fig. muscles the superficial trapezius the two shoulder deltoid muscles The are and most Table 7.1). and 7.35 shoulder: Together, the provide characteristic of contour they the

clavicle to the the attaches trapezius The scapula and trunk.

clavicle deltoid the the and The humerus. scapula attaches to

trapezius the and spine the Both of and and attached clavicle. the surfaces deltoid are acromion, margins opposing to scapula, of between clavicle can and The palpated of the be scapula, acromion, trapezius deltoid. the and attachments

muscles—the minor, column scapula and to to rhomboid rhomboid by Deep trapezius major. levator the vertebral scapulae, three the the is attached three trapezius muscles muscles to These the on trunk. with work the the scapula anteriorly) found with (and position

TXII has trapezius origin on The (Fig. muscle CI skeleton, and which skull axial an includes from from vertebrae, the extensive sites to the the 7.36). attaches From the to vertebrae CVII, to the through the ligamentum nuchae. muscle CI shoulder muscle The the plane, oriented directed framework bottom the laterally. margins the with inner of skeletal in of line U continuous horizontal along U-shaped a attachment the of inserts onto of the the diamond left right trapezoid is derived. or and shape, Together, name a the trapezius from which muscles the form

shoulder of the the to elevator is extend trapezius The scapula rotates superiorly. and also powerful the reach muscle a

muscle (Fig. nerve trapezius and the and C4 by the Innervation the [XI] C3 anterior cervical rami of nerves accessory of is 7.36). surface muscle. the vertically of along nerves pass deep the These by muscle. can trapezius be the of testing nerve function the evaluated The accessory shoulders their resistance. patients asking against This most done easily to by shrug is

deltoid large its base to is scapula and triangular shape, apex and the attached its to humerus attached muscle The the and in (Fig. clavicle with 7.36). of trapezius and of insertion It the U-shaped the the line clavicle originates sites the scapula, attachment adjacent along continuous mirroring a to muscle. surface on into humerus. inserts the lateral deltoid shaft It of tuberosity the the the of

of The the is arm. of abduction the deltoid major muscle function

which The axillary cord the is deltoid the of a innervated nerve, is plexus. by the muscle posterior branch brachial of around (the neck artery the The vein) blood axillary posterior posteriorly the nerve passing the humeral deltoid and by associated vessels circumflex and surgical enter of humerus.

levator of (Fig. processes the The transverse originates to scapulae CIV from CI vertebrae 7.36). surface the descends from bone It root the the to medial triangular of the of the area attach the angle superior scapula to laterally at of posterior border spine. of the to smooth

directly levator C3 innervated nerve nerves. muscle C4 and spinal scapulae and dorsal the The by from scapular is

scapulae levator the scapula. The elevates

rhomboid attach medial of laterally and and scapulae descend muscle to muscles to to the attach the inferior scapula to column medially the vertebral (Fig. minor The the levator major border 7.36).

of lower spines ligamentum CVII the nuchae of minor rhomboid from originates the and vertebrae. The end and TI the the of spine into the the bone on root of the smooth the at laterally area triangular posterior scapula inserts surface. It of

rhomboid from originates of The from the vertebrae to intervening supraspinous and spines TII TV major ligaments. the surface of to insert medial scapula from posterior of descends inferior to laterally the along border It the the insertion the of the minor the angle. rhomboid

rhomboid plexus. is nerve, a brachial muscles are scapular the dorsal by innervated which of the branch The

The retract major the elevate minor and and scapula. rhomboid

the The posterior posterior scapula of (Fig. aspect region deep the trapezius deltoid scapular located occupies and to muscles is and the and Table 7.37 7.2). scapula teres the infraspinatus, four proximal supraspinatus, the teres pass It humerus: muscles. and major of contains muscles, the between which and minor, end

part long of end and of the also the which forearm. muscle, contains scapular region the The triceps posterior head of the additional scapula the one brachii, between passes proximal and forming a the enter participates the of spaces humerus, region other vessels muscle, which with nerves number region. This and the leave of muscles along in and through

the and stabilizes The teres infraspinatus, cuff, minor supraspinatus, rotator of which components the are muscles glenohumeral joint.

the the supraspinatus fossae, two The one infraspinatus on large spine, (Fig. and originate of from and posterior scapula one the muscles surface above below 7.37). insert form humerus. They tendons the of that the greater tubercle on

passes the facet the subacromial by tubercle. tendon glenohumeral the joint, bone of a under where greater supraspinatus is of from inserts the the over The separated it on bursa, passes and the acromion, superior

The the greater joint inserts facet the middle glenohumeral tendon and the the infraspinatus on of tubercle. passes posteriorly to of

the The supraspinatus abduction arm. participates in of humerus. The the laterally infraspinatus rotates

scapula border the below muscle minor flattened immediately infraglenoid its muscle tubercle the that adjacent teres The cord-like (Fig. area from a of is lateral a to originates 7.37). greater inferior of the humerus. of on facet the tendon tubercle inserts the Its teres component minor the cuff. is of rotator laterally and humerus the The a rotates

teres oval muscle The region (Fig. angle posterior the originates major the from the on large of a inferior scapula of surface 7.37). the a the the passes sulcus humerus. that as lip broad medial flat surface muscle on the to superiorly tendon attaches of and This ends cord-like intertubercular of anterior laterally and rotates extends The major medially humerus. the and teres

triceps brachii Long of head

originates muscle, the the The from the of tubercle arm of of this down head passes olecranon brachii the heads and the medial vertically (Fig. muscle triceps ulna lateral somewhat and with long infraglenoid insert, the on to 7.37).

triceps the at primary the joint. forearm brachii extensor of the The elbow is glenohumeral the joint, adduct can the extend long Because and crosses also the head it humerus.

vessels with the and course forms the regions. brachii posterior and these vertical through major, teres of between its which that is teres spaces together nerves between importance region the triceps and in muscles humerus, the scapular minor pass The

region the scapular Gateways posterior to

base posterior neck structures and suprascapular through the pass which is the The scapular foramen (Fig. route the of between the region 7.37). It the foramen. into which suprascapular superior scapular converts a the (suprascapular) is scapula of and the formed notch ligament, notch by the transverse

foramen; vein the follow The suprascapular transverse through and to through course suprascapular ligament as (Fig. the immediately but artery nerve, pass scapular same the suprascapular nerve superior the the suprascapular normally superior the and passes not the foramen 7.38).

region and (the (Fig. anterior passageway more nerves vessels for The regions axilla) between space posterior quadrangular provides passing scapular and a the 7.37). lateral of brachii. of the the the In the region, margin margin posterior margin teres of and the of formed minor, surgical humerus, teres of scapular the are its superior major, by: long neck the head the triceps the inferior boundaries the

pass through humeral this space posterior (Fig. axillary the and nerve and vein artery The circumflex 7.38).

posterior is axilla between (Fig. of the triangular and space communication the an region scapular The area 7.37). by: is brachii, of margin major, viewed formed inferior of long margin posterior medial the the the the triangular of teres margin the scapular the the region, and space superior minor. the head of the teres triceps When from

this The (Fig. pass vein circumflex through artery and gap scapular 7.38).

lateral of The the humerus, triceps the interval the by: of the long head shaft of margin brachii, triangular margin the teres is (Fig. the the formed inferior major and of 7.37).

which this posterior compartment between defines between interval the boundary space is as triangular serves and inferior of below the arm teres the the passageway and axilla. the anterior the a axilla, of compartments the margin the posterior inferior the the major, of of and Because arm artery (deep nerve, artery The profunda brachii radial it the and (Fig. through of arm), veins associated pass 7.38).

plexus the are in of major posterior region axilla of and scapular nerves, (Fig. nerves The axillary brachial from the two suprascapular the the originate both which 7.38).

plexus. originates trunk the suprascapular of of the superior in from The the neck base brachial the nerve the its posterior in to the muscle it scapular through where and bone posterolaterally reach between region, from lies the plane passes suprascapular foramen It (Fig. origin, 7.38).

then the of through the and the (spinoglenoid) the cavity, passes of infraspinatus innervates the to innervate scapular It supraspinatus and the greater terminate spine between scapula in and muscle notch, root the muscle. glenoid

suprascapular Generally, no branches. has the cutaneous nerve

nerve of from cord plexus. axillary The originates brachial the the posterior the by It posterior the passing (Fig. region scapular axilla of the space through enters and in the quadrangular axilla, wall the exits posterior 7.38). the posterior directly surface humerus. with the the of the surgical vein, posterior related circumflex Together of artery is it humeral to and neck

nerve minor axillary The muscles. teres the deltoid innervates and the skin sensation the of muscle. the carries from the addition, superior the over lateral a cutaneous part arm, which nerve branch, has deltoid of In cutaneous general it inferior

Three region: the circumflex the and scapular in circumflex arteries are posterior arteries. scapular found posterior humeral, major suprascapular, vascular arteries contribute to These interconnected around the network an (Fig. scapula 7.39).

in the of thyrocervical a base is trunk, the of suprascapular in turn, subclavian branch a artery artery the as branch which, (Figs. major originates of neck The the and 7.39). 7.38 also subclavian directly the part the The third originate may vessel of artery. from

foramen, normally enters scapular region nerve The suprascapular the the artery the whereas to through foramen. passes suprascapular posterior the superior the vessel nerve. region, In scapular posterior runs the with the suprascapular

numerous structures supraspinatus the infraspinatus In its branches supplying to the along contributes to muscles, and artery course. addition suprascapular

in artery from axilla the third posterior the humeral of circumflex the artery axillary originates part (Figs. The 7.39). and 7.38

quadrangular through nerve space The scapular in axillary enter axilla artery the posterior leave circumflex the the posterior and and humeral region. posterior wall the joint. The muscles and the supplies related glenohumeral the vessel

the that artery branch from axillary (Figs. third The the of a artery artery scapular in subscapular of also part is the the axilla originates circumflex 7.38 and 7.39). arteries connections through enters scapular axilla region. of forms the the anastomotic scapular the the teres leaves posterior muscle, other with through minor artery triangular space the passes region, in The and circumflex origin and the

the and in axilla. posterior arteries in the generally Veins back, vessels follow region neck, connect with scapular arm, and the

(Fig. between and arm gateway providing an the is transition limb, of the to the upper The axilla area neck the 7.40A). (Fig. shaped irregularly wall, floor a the an the (base) and four with: space pyramidal muscles, inlet, the humerus, by related thoracic sides, an upper is clavicle, the and axilla the scapula, Formed 7.40A,B).

continuous axillary and inlet the arm. lateral part floor neck, The is the superiorly the with the into of opens

the pass through axilla into passing the (Fig. structures out major and All upper limb of 7.40C). the regions). (the Apertures pectoral, anterior posterior to and formed immediately scapular, between in deltoid pass structures walls muscles the enable and axilla regions and posterior between adjacent

(Fig. horizontal is triangular in shape, directed and The the plane in its laterally with is apex inlet axillary oriented somewhat 7.40A,B). The bone: the are formed of completely inlet margins by

the of border lateral The I. medial is margin rib

surface anterior The margin posterior of the the clavicle. is

margin scapula up to the is posterior process. the superior The of border coracoid the

in formed triangularly axillary apex shaped coracoid aspect the The by medial is is lateral inlet of position the of and the process.

Major (Fig. through the over and border rib lateral the the and axillary between I axilla the nerves pass and by inlet of crossing neck vessels 7.40A).

axilla. of blood subclavian rib the margin supplying lateral the crosses limb, enters as and the The artery I upper becomes axillary it the major the artery, vessel passes vein as subclavian the margin the it rib axillary Similarly, and axilla vein I the becomes neck. over of to lateral the enter the leaves

the is anterior the is trunks in At artery, the anterior to axillary axillary of inlet, which, axillary turn, the to the vein plexus. brachial

the in artery subclavian on I the trunk (lower directly neck, does and The inferior lies as plexus brachial trunk) vein. rib of the of rib over pass separated and the by I, insertion anterior are artery (Fig. the muscle vein they As scalene the 7.40A).

axilla lateral major pectoralis underlying part anterior is and and of formed wall the pectoralis minor muscles, the fascia the the muscle, of clavipectoral 7.3). subclavius the (Table by The

(Fig. the largest muscle is muscle of wall the superficial most The pectoralis and anterior major 7.41). marks Its the axilla. margin which anteroinferior underlies the fold, anterior the of inferior axillary border muscle has heads: two The

from the half the head clavicle. medial clavicular originates The of

from head forming anterior fibers the originates muscle. and additional abdominal from The of part the continue to head medial an the the of wall, thoracic wall—often, this attach anterior inferiorly part abdominal sternocostal to medially

the intertubercular the The into muscle of of lip lateral humerus. inserts the sulcus the have muscle the a origin the originate inferiorly. insert on of lip lower intertubercular muscle the The on parts parts trunk of the sulcus anteriorly and that than the that lateral superior of more

glenohumeral the of two pectoralis and rotate joint. the heads arm together, flex, Acting the at adduct, the medially major whereas arm position, from sternocostal flexes The against from head position, resistance. arm the extends head clavicular a flexed an particularly the the extended

innervated and by the the from major medial axilla. nerves, originate which pectoralis lateral in plexus brachial the pectoral The is

The small I between muscle to deep subclavius that rib (Fig. and a lies muscle pectoralis clavicle muscle the the passes major is and 7.42). rib medially, the a its junction I It tendon, as at and costal originates rib the cartilage. from between a groove of attachment the into passes of middle on to clavicle. superiorly surface It an elongate shallow laterally and the the via insert inferior muscular third

clavicle stabilize by the pull shoulder act but clavicle the subclavius it down to the of may by is and the not may entirely clear, the function pulling The sternoclavicular depressing also medially. joint

brachial is branch of the plexus. the trunk superior from small innervated The by a subclavius muscle

a the pectoralis to coracoid major the minor pectoralis lies the The muscle to (Fig. muscle deep is thoracic and of small passes process wall scapula the from muscle that triangular-shaped 7.42). the It margins ribs three to fascia of V as overlying intercostal related of from anterior the surfaces muscular originates from muscles slips spaces. and and upper III the aspects and superiorly insert coracoid to the upper process. into fibers medial the and pass muscle of laterally The

scapula the protracts scapula. of the lateral the on scapula anteriorly The minor the pulling pectoralis (by depresses thoracic muscle wall) and the angle

axilla. the The by pectoralis is plexus originates minor nerve, which medial innervated from pectoral in the the brachial

of of floor thick that clavicle sheet the is connects (Fig. fascia to clavipectoral connective The axilla the tissue a the 7.42). muscles and subclavius It between them. spans encloses gap the minor and the pectoralis

muscle. the pectoralis subclavius the the muscles of between fascia the either minor the clavipectoral axilla the passing inferior pectoralis or axilla and and Structures between minor travel wall through by to anterior

the vein, structures and that the pass include lateral muscles between the minor cephalic the thoraco-acromial and pectoral subclavius pectoralis artery, nerve. Important

inferior the minor pectoralis by The lateral fascia leaves the artery the passing axilla muscle. through thoracic to

the through muscle. the to and supply leaves axilla penetrating by the reach major medial minor muscle pectoral this The pectoralis to muscle pectoralis directly nerve

to pectoralis reach medial overlying Occasionally, margin and nerve lower the the the branches minor around pectoral pectoralis the pass of muscle. major of innervate

medial thoracic the axilla the and wall of intercostal of the serratus tissues) (the ribs related The muscle anterior upper and consists wall (Fig. Fig. 7.4, see Table and 7.43 and 7.40).

the fascia of to I lateral from The muscle spaces intervening muscular a (Fig. the surfaces number and originates serratus slips ribs as the anterior related of intercostal IX deep overlying 7.43). the thoracic wall insert flattened border forms a medial posteriorly sheet, around scapula. passes surface of the to the of muscle which The primarily on the costal

rotation. forward over thoracic The scapular pulls the facilitates and the wall anterior scapula serratus thoracic surface the opposed of the keeps closely It scapula costal the wall. also to

roots vertically the long through the just passes its from deep plexus, and surface, serratus the serratus the innervated thoracic the nerve, and medial anterior brachial is The passes anterior is skin muscle along the derived by fascia. on axilla to which down wall, superficial external of

into (Fig. the only and the axilla medial intercostobrachial The the directly structure that major wall passes is nerve through 7.43). of of T2). This ramus the nerve is branch the nerve (anterior lateral cutaneous second intercostal medial skin the side is posteromedial T2 part dermatome. and arm, branch cutaneous arm) the in on communicates brachial nerve the the of upper a of of plexus It with supplies the axilla of which (the the

the (Fig. The and wall of intertubercular lateral axilla humerus of by is the narrow formed entirely the sulcus 7.44). the pectoralis attaches of wall muscle to sulcus. anterior the The of intertubercular the lateral major lip and 7.5). The to latissimus sulcus, (Table of medial the intertubercular of dorsi floor attach wall the respectively and posterior the major muscles lip teres

(Fig. complex axilla wall the is posterior of The and 7.45 Fig. see 7.50). costal the of is formed surface framework Its the bone by scapula. muscle the the triceps parts of the (which scapula), long brachii wall and wall passes latissimus into subscapularis Muscles the scapular the the arm). and proximal pass are: part distal the the posterior and the head the with down of the the muscle muscles of from vertically and teres major dorsi surface back the (associated costal of region), (which into of wall

the between Gaps compartment arm. apertures wall of posterior of posterior posterior muscles which region, and the the scapular structures through the pass axilla, between form

of axilla. wall forms posterior muscle The the the subscapularis of component largest the fills, the originates humerus the (Figs. and inserts the and lesser tubercle It fossa on subscapular of from, 7.45 7.46). and capsule to joint anterior the crosses the glenohumeral joint. of tendon The immediately

muscles), Together is of which three rotator scapular group, the (the subscapularis stabilizes member the teres minor supraspinatus, with the joint. infraspinatus, of muscle muscles a posterior the glenohumeral cuff and region

inferior nerves), which brachial (the branches plexus The by originate of innervated is subscapular the and in superior axilla. the subscapularis

of muscle of posterior the inferolateral major teres axilla the by the and of tendon wall formed The (Fig. the latissimus the terminal part is the dorsi muscle of aspect 7.45). structures the under posteroinferior marks the axillary two axilla. These border posterior which the of fold, lie

to flat posterior muscle of and of intertubercular most latissimus above distal on the floor sulcus. intertubercular attachment the the teres lip the medial tendon of into sulcus slightly muscle humerus, of inferior to muscle the major the around curves dorsi major teres The margin of insert the the the anterior wall of to the the a As major the of defines limit laterally. consequence, muscle axilla of the the inferior teres inferior margin the

inferior crosses of artery major of brachial margin axillary it the arm muscle. the as the becomes teres artery the The

the of triceps brachii Long head

the head posterior surrounding wall: the through posterior with vertically formation structures and, adjacent in muscle The quadrangular of muscles space, the and results interval the long triangular passes pass the brachii the (Fig. major which space, the bones, apertures axilla, three triceps through together of of through the wall triangular and 7.45).

“Gateways wall (See in region,” pp. also posterior posterior the Gateways the to scapular and 706–710, Figs. 7.38.) 7.37 and

and and passing nerves passageway more vessels for The scapular quadrangular the the and (Fig. deltoid a axilla posterior between regions space provides 7.45). the When margin brachii the the lateral the the formed of surgical are the subscapularis of the viewed the of of superior humerus, the of boundaries inferior margin from head neck long anteriorly, teres and triceps muscle. its muscle, muscle, by: major margin

Passing artery axillary the and vein. are circumflex through humeral and the nerve space posterior the quadrangular

space between area and an triangular of is region posterior communication the The the (Fig. scapular axilla 7.45). anteriorly, the margin the teres major the When head formed of long viewed the brachii muscle. inferior it the and is subscapularis medial margin by: the from muscle, triceps muscle, of margin of superior the of

The into vein this space. pass artery circumflex and scapular

(Fig. head margin and of of by: triangular of major long muscle, the the the interval of inferior muscle shaft is the teres the This lateral triceps margin humerus, the the brachii formed 7.45).

out compartment of posterior to passes of reach the traveling axilla The nerve this arm. interval radial the through the

and dome distance of fascia the by formed skin (Fig. axilla floor the of that The walls between the margins of inferior is spans a the 7.47 Fig. see and 7.40B). the fascia. It clavipectoral is by supported is anterior in posterior axillary the patient, fold. is more fold a On than position superior axillary the

of anterior posterior the walls and the structures is lateral into anterior the and out the axilla pass with compartment and to arm. converge axilla where of the immediately the Inferiorly, floor continuous the where of axilla

the axilla of Contents

nerves, major Passing are upper limb. and the the of lymphatics the axilla through vessels, which proximal breast, of of lymph of axillary chest limb, two process collections also wall, arm, the contains and breast. nodes, muscles of space upper the the The the parts and drain the

parts of 7.6). pass The the brachii axilla biceps and muscles through proximal coracobrachialis (Table the

biceps originates heads brachii The muscle as (Fig. two 7.48):

process originates where the axilla of the and through passes and of the coracoid vertically joins long the the short from the The head. it scapula head apex into arm

in a arm. it head of belly muscle glenohumeral between the the forms head the The from the of joint intertubercular long and the the is passes the spans transverse enters in by in tendon capsule the the and originates the sulcus a the as greater supraglenoid ligament, the position over tubercle passes humerus where sulcus the the intertubercular scapula, of tendon lesser proximal part ligament, and tubercles; held which a distance through to joint, humeral the deep of axilla

the the The the and of forearm. as and distal in long into in short single the insert tuberosity of join radial arm muscle regions primarily heads a tendon

powerful the and elbow at forearm. joint primarily biceps is powerful supinator a the in muscle the brachii a forearm flexor The of both an accessory the as the muscle from Because heads also the flexor acts at originate arm the joint. glenohumeral scapula, of long addition, glenoid cavity. superior the In on humerus of prevents movement the head the

by innervated The nerve. brachii muscle is musculocutaneous biceps the

of head The short muscle, the coracoid from muscle, originates apex the together process brachii biceps the the with (Fig. coracobrachialis of 7.48). aspect medial through the the the on insert humerus, midshaft. roughening passes to approximately of vertically axilla linear on small a It

The the flexes glenohumeral joint. at the arm muscle coracobrachialis

nerve, to which passes coracobrachialis is the the the then muscle the the medial through innervates muscle axilla, enter and musculocutaneous arm. by the pierced In surface of

regions, axilla of The supplies continues blood the distal to and the the upper parts the walls supply major related more (Fig. the and artery axillary as of limb 7.49).

axilla, artery through I rib brachial the the The margin inferior artery becoming margin passes the the neck of artery becomes teres the at in and muscle. the lateral major the at axillary of subclavian

into is pectoralis by the muscle, artery vessel separated anteriorly the (Fig. three minor to crosses which The parts axillary 7.49):

first part The minor. is pectoralis to the proximal

is part to pectoralis second the The posterior minor.

the part The minor. third pectoralis distal is to

branches Generally, arise the artery: six from axillary

the part. originates from first branch, artery, the One superior thoracic

and lateral part. thoracic the Two artery thoraco-acromial the branches, originate second artery, the from

third artery, part the humeral the and originate (Fig. circumflex humeral artery, circumflex the from the artery, posterior subscapular branches, anterior Three 7.50).

anterior originates surface small and of part the superior axillary artery the artery the is thoracic (Fig. from first of The 7.50). It the axillary and walls. upper medial supplies of anterior regions

margin second of of axillary the short surface posterior is just the of (Fig. artery minor originates thoraco-acromial the The medial from muscle (superior) the artery anterior to the part and pectoralis 7.50). curves superior regions. clavicular, the deltoid, divides related pectoral, the which fascia, the the margin into penetrates branches, immediately of and anterior four wall supply It axillary acromial and branches—the muscle, and clavipectoral around

accompanies supplies the triangle adjacent the vascular contributes the clavipectoral supply the the cephalic (see and passes and it pectoral structures branch Fig. Additionally, vein breast, into to deltoid where branch 7.41).

the the second artery the artery the the axillary (inferior) pectoralis (Fig. margin part lateral of posterior surface of The anterior of from lateral minor to arises thoracic 7.50). muscle axilla. the to and the the margin of thoracic and the of wall supplies medial walls follows the It anterior the emerge margin breast. major the supply women, In muscle of vascular inferior pectoralis and the around to of from branches contribute the

axillary The largest the of subscapular the axilla to wall posterior blood and of major (Fig. is the the branch supply artery artery is the 7.50). to the It blood the of contributes region. also posterior supply scapular

its the follows of the a part short artery and muscle branches, into thoracodorsal then posterior surface distance, the third two of circumflex the terminal subscapular margin artery artery. originates scapular for inferior divides subscapularis and artery, of the the the The from axillary

triangular head passes circumflex the teres triceps long The muscle. space between of scapular the artery and the through major, subscapularis, the passes teres inferior to, minor or it enter of the the pierces, fossa. origin Posteriorly, muscle infraspinous to of transverse anastomotic artery to It of artery) contributing branch scapula. around the and the deep an anastomoses suprascapular with the artery, the cervical network vessels scapular (dorsal thereby

approximately the The to scapula border inferior thoracodorsal lateral angle. of artery follows the the vascular of the supply axilla. of to It posterior the walls medial contributes the and

artery, originates of compared part circumflex artery artery The and humeral of third from side to the (Fig. the is axillary humeral lateral posterior circumflex the the anterior small 7.50). of with surgical the It anterior the anastomoses humerus passes and the posterior to artery. neck circumflex humeral

which artery glenohumeral include circumflex head joint and anterior the surrounding supplies to This tissues, of humerus. the branches humeral the

The to artery humeral posterior posterior circumflex anterior of artery axillary surface immediately the artery circumflex the of humeral origin the third the from lateral part originates (Fig. of the 7.50). and axilla passing quadrangular by leaves axillary the through With space humerus. triceps the the muscle it surgical brachii the the head long teres and minor, neck nerve, teres between the of major, of the

curves surrounding the the and the circumflex humeral muscles posterior surgical artery joint. glenohumeral The supplies and humerus neck the around of from profunda anterior It circumflex thoraco-acromial and arteries. and artery the with anastomoses branches suprascapular, the with brachii, humeral

(Fig. major vein the of the lower The teres begins of basilic is vein the axillary and margin at muscle continuation the and hand middle the the penetrates arm. fascia of deep in vein and the drains forearm superficial is surface a that the which of posteromedial the 7.51),

the anterior vessel vein crosses medial the axilla passes through the and artery and at of axillary I the vein The the the becomes as subclavian lateral axillary axillary inlet. border rib to axillary generally Tributaries follow the branches of axillary vein of artery. the the include follow the and that veins Other brachial brachial cephalic the tributaries artery vein.

a The parts forearm, and is the lateral that superficial vein of hand, posterior arm. drains the the the and cephalic vein and triangular shoulder, deltoid area into muscle, inverted cleft between the it clavicle. In pectoralis major triangle) the of clavipectoral an (the the passes muscle, the clavipectoral muscle join axillary the to vein the superior the passes clavicular triangle, the and pierces of head cephalic the In deep part clavipectoral major to pectoralis of the fascia vein. lost critically or requires who which have are fluid, ill replacement. Many patients blood vein fluid. peripheral the is to to Access necessary a replace cephalic lie hand in veins the sites typical cubital venous for the are fossa. the the vein The or superficial of within that tissues access

the of C5 somatic T1 ramus a formed C8, of (Fig. rami The to brachial by of nerve plexus is the plexus and most anterior anterior 7.52). I, laterally originates rib neck, and the passes plexus and over enters the The axilla. inferiorly in

divisions, roots, are and lateral, trunks, The plexus, parts the medial cords. to brachial from of mostly All upper from originate the brachial limb major from the the that nerves cords. plexus, innervate the surround plexus neck, to are regions the parts brachial axillary artery. plexus Proximal the more artery the posterior distal subclavian while the of of in

anterior The most the plexus of roots C8, brachial and T1. C5 of to are rami the of origin, roots to the sympathetic gray rami Close from receive the communicantes (Fig. trunk their 7.52). distribution roots carry to onto fibers These for the periphery. postganglionic sympathetic the The roots superior and the neck enter subclavian and the lie between to anterior posterior scalene the scalene artery. muscles and passing middle by the of posterior trunks and triangle

enter laterally over the plexus brachial The trunks of (Fig. from roots, the pass axilla three rib the and I, originate 7.52):

by of C5 C6 trunk roots. formed union and the is The superior

middle is trunk a of The the C7 root. continuation

by formed C8 roots. trunk and the of union the T1 inferior is The

are to the the lies The I trunk posterior on more subclavian superior artery; middle trunks and position. rib in superior inferior

divides anterior an a trunks (Fig. three and the into division of of plexus brachial posterior Each the 7.52):

compartments forearm. rise associated three to anterior and parts with divisions arm the anterior that brachial the the give peripheral nerves The form of of ultimately plexus

give that plexus the the brachial combine nerves posterior rise of form parts to The associated compartments. to with posterior three divisions

brachial the No originate from of peripheral nerves plexus. directly divisions the

second the The of the and of to originate the three related part from plexus the (Fig. are brachial artery cords divisions axillary 7.52):

artery. therefore anterior and of to of The axillary is C7—it divisions contributions the results union the lateral the C5 the lateral middle to cord the of second trunks has from part from upper positioned and

the of The the cord is anterior second and inferior to continuation of and T1. of medial division axillary artery contributions is part contains medial the C8 trunk—it the the from

as cord of of union to plexus axillary all to occurs the from posterior of The artery and divisions—it the part brachial T1). contains originates posterior roots second posterior all contributions the (C5 three the

of brachial major nerves peripheral Most from limb upper the originate of the cords the the plexus. of anterior of from the nerves the and the nerves compartments from posterior cords compartments upper limb cord. posterior originate and with the associated associated Generally, medial arise the with lateral

Branches 7.7) (Table

roots Branches the of

brachial neck of phrenic to the to addition C5 of the long and C8 a the muscles small nerves roots rise of and the C5 to thoracic the from plexus to (Fig. segmental scapular nerve, branches In contribution give to dorsal 7.53).

reach C5 scapula in neck, (Fig. of the middle The the to originates of scalene plexus, passes medial root dorsal posteriorly, and the the the border nerve: often muscle travel piercing along the brachial from scapular surfaces. and innervates minor deep major their 7.54), the from rhomboid muscles and

the The down the through nerve: C5 the medial to anterior long neck, passes axillary wall C7, axilla muscle serratus of thoracic inlet, from the the rami and originates down to of vertically anterior supply the (Fig. the and the muscle. serratus on aspect of 7.54), anterior lies superficial

of Branches trunks the

the brachial superior trunks that trunk from plexus suprascapular the The nerve trunk): are the nerve subclavius from to muscle only of the branches two (upper the (Fig. nerves and originate the 7.53).

passes the through The brachial the (Fig. trunk and superior laterally of posterior the C6): nerve suprascapular triangle of originates neck the from plexus, (C5 the through the and parts supraspinatus in posterior by region the scapular scapular accompanied of lateral suprascapular the neck 7.54) innervates infraspinatus and suprascapular and in the foramen to muscles, the is posterior region, artery. the enter and

nerve is passes plexus, the to and vein, the brachial muscle the trunk that: superior subclavius small (C5 anteroinferiorly The innervates subclavian subclavius of the a originates nerve and the from muscle. artery C6) and over

cord lateral Branches of the

originate partly lateral nerves the from Three or cord entirely (Fig. 7.53).

of from is lateral the the lateral nerve most The the cord. pectoral proximal branches anteriorly, the together gap the spans It penetrate muscles to clavipectoral minor fascia that thoraco-acromial between subclavius the the artery, passes (Fig. and pectoralis with major 7.55), the innervates and pectoralis muscle.

terminal the a large branch is The cord. musculocutaneous nerve of lateral passes and It innervates nerve the penetrate muscles coracobrachialis to compartment forearm. muscle laterally in terminating pass flexor lateral arm, the arm, of anterior the cutaneous the the three as brachii brachialis the of between muscles and all and the biceps in

the the to the medial the nerve median from cord the branch terminal passes largest medially join The of nerve lateral (Fig. form a branch of median and is root to lateral similar cord 7.55).

Branches medial cord of the

five The branches has medial (Fig. cord 7.55).

medial most The proximal pectoral the is branch. nerve a axillary then receives vein. between pectoral passes and and It branch the the nerve axillary lateral artery anteriorly communicating from muscle. of nerve Branches and the minor the supply pectoralis penetrate these through Some reach muscle pass the the muscle. major and branches supply pectoralis to of pass reach the pectoralis inferior lateral around pectoralis the of branches or major occasionally margin to muscle. minor muscle Other the

nerve deep penetrates medial passes side arm the cutaneous axilla into arm. The and (medial third supplies the over through of of arm the of and brachial fascia the the where nerve) it the medial cutaneous distal skin the In axilla, the nerve communicates intercostobrachial the of T2. with nerve Fibers the of the the of nerve of medial arm cutaneous the floor and of upper medial the surface arm part of innervate axilla. the

medial of distal just of the the the origin forearm cutaneous cutaneous to The medial (medial the cutaneous antebrachial of nerve) originates nerve arm. nerve fascia forearm. over vein, to into passes then brachii the penetrate biceps a where the and over off continues the inferiorly the branch out gives it the and skin down to the anterior skin muscle, of supply the arm to It with the the surface of the axilla arm continuing deep basilic the skin the medial of surface forearm wrist. innervates to over the It down

to part of anterior with root The the the axillary the root form from of the the to third cord medial laterally similar artery. a nerve lateral nerve to join median passes median

a cord of ulnar branch medial large the (Fig. nerve is The terminal 7.55). branch often nerve origin, root lateral the lateral a carrying However, communicating near originating cord receives C7 (see from of its from it the Fig. median the and from fibers 5.73B). forearm passes muscles). muscles where arm hand through two nerve ulnar lateral The lumbrical the intrinsic of into three and the (except thenar it hand all and muscles innervates for the the the On medial and the through digitorum of the flexor profundus muscle passing nerve half of carpi flexor the ulnaris forearm, muscle. ulnar the branches innervate the ring the over the skin the of medial palmar associated part medial the of the wrist, the little surface ulnar and half innervates of finger, skin palm of and surface and nerve hand. dorsal finger, the The over

nerve. Median medial and lateral plexus to the median roots and of the artery is of brachial formed medial originating (Fig. of from the third union axillary by nerve anterior part The cords the the lateral 7.55). nerve). the It the compartment (except ulnar flexor forearm through innervated medial of digitorum into half the of and the of brachial ulnaris muscle, into by anterior in the the muscle artery are the the to where forearm, for flexor anterior innervate and muscles arm the which passes arm most branches the the profundus carpi

to associated with the into the the median with of thumb, index three the middle skin of muscles one-half and and The hand continues the associated digits the of palm movement fingers, wrist. and surface innervate: the lateral side of lateral two palmar three nerve and and over middle the the over lateral the lumbrical muscles thenar the

(Fig. lateral root nerve, M nerve, musculocutaneous medial form of nerve over the part third of the nerve, and The root median the the median an of median the artery nerve, axillary ulnar the the the 7.55). used This nerve, together of of identify to muscle be components plexus by in penetration brachial the the the feature, can musculocutaneous the coracobrachialis with axilla.

posterior of cord the Branches

superior inferior nerve the radial the subscapular (Fig. the and originate the the subscapular nerve, brachial the nerve, thoracodorsal nerve, cord the from of nerves nerve, posterior plexus: axillary Five 7.53).

and shoulder region the All radial with passes wall except the of innervate associated nerve forearm. or axilla; posterior the radial the nerve nerves into muscles these the the arm

pass axillary originate cord superior into nerves sequentially wall subscapular, inferior and posterior (Fig. with the The thoracodorsal, associated subscapular from muscles posterior and directly the 7.56). subscapularis The into muscle. superior passes and short subscapular and nerve is supplies the The the axillary along is three of the vertically thoracodorsal posterior these passes nerves wall. nerve and longest muscle. penetrates innervates and dorsi It the latissimus teres axillary also muscles. inferiorly The and inferior subscapularis wall major along posterior the the subscapular nerve innervates passes and

to the along axillary originates quadrangular (Fig. from posterior cord inferiorly the and exit axilla space wall posterior the nerve the through The and passes laterally 7.56). the around It neck both innervates and of teres humerus the and posteriorly muscles. passes the surgical deltoid minor the the from in after to of loops nerve skin deltoid and that space passing A axillary margin arm posterior the of innervate muscle originates region. the nerve through the cutaneous around lateral quadrangular superior axillary circumflex humeral is The accompanied by the artery. posterior nerve

of the is posterior terminal cord branch the The nerve largest (Fig. radial 7.56). teres the humerus. the interval inferior the the the by muscle, through compartment triangular triceps posterior of It border and of brachii and muscle, out the axilla passing the head passes of the of between arm into long the major the of shaft anterior profunda the by triangular It the originates from compartment is brachii artery through in of interval accompanied brachial which the the artery, the arm. in arm surface and of innervate: of lateral compartments the of skin arm the forearm, the the the lateral hand. surface the of posterior and radial its arm, muscles dorsal lower the branches posterior aspect nerve all and The and the on forearm, and the

posterior nerve) arm from of on the surface the The the arm. of axilla cutaneous nerve the posterior the innervates skin originates radial brachial and in (posterior cutaneous nerve

upper the the lymph (Fig. from drain nodes in All limb lymphatics into axilla 7.57).

In shoulder, trunk, extensive regions the adjacent drainage an and nodes the upper anterolateral of addition, back wall. neck, and on includes the abdominal receive which the chest, the upper area axillary lower from 75% from of drainage mammary gland. the nodes approximately receive Axillary also

location. generally The axillary the of on basis into nodes five 20–30 divided groups are

receive drainage vein from lymphatic the the of (lateral) posteromedial the nodes most limb. Humeral upper to axillary

the and pectoralis the vessels along the lateral the of the along and Pectoral occur the receive chest, from course muscle thoracic nodes gland. inferior of minor margin mammary the drainage wall, (anterior) abdominal

with receive posterior the back, on from and lymphatics the the neck. subscapular in wall the association axillary the and (posterior) nodes Subscapular wall posterior shoulder, vessels axillary drain the

tributaries fat axillary in Central humeral, subscapular, nodes nodes. embedded groups from of are and receive and pectoral

of groups most in other nodes Apical drain and all in are nodes region. the the the group nodes of superior axilla addition, region that gland. receive of vessels the as that vessels the drain they vein well mammary superior accompany In lymphatic the cephalic as

in between jugular subclavian right the junction joins form to at the which vein the vein internal group and Efferent the system subclavian right the from the vessels neck. venous apical the converge usually trunk, in left, neck. the On subclavian the joins the thoracic trunk duct usually of the base the

gland Axillary process mammary of the

toward superficial superolateral is thoracic fascia mammary axilla. major its in margin region of overlying the wall, the along gland pectoralis Although inferior the the muscle extends the axilla and pass (Fig. to some muscle fascia of cases, the In this penetrate the may the enter margin around deep 7.58). apex axillary as as This high the axilla. rarely reaches the process of

limb the The upper is (Fig. the the shoulder of region and the elbow arm between 7.59). arm The the medially axilla. aspect of with communicates the superior positioned and pass fossa, the cubital joint. forearm the is important of the arm through which to anterior Inferiorly, between a number structures the elbow

divided intermuscular surrounds by compartments the from pass the and the into limb sleeve each humerus fascia is septa, of arm deep two medial (Fig. which The outer that side lateral of to 7.59).

the that the the compartment posterior arm contains joint; contains flex The extend anterior that elbow the compartment muscles muscles joint. of predominantly vessels and each pass compartment. supply through nerves and Major

skeletal the (Fig. the humerus is for The arm support 7.60). into at flex the of extend the the ends large bones muscles forearm, arm the of the joint. of the the the proximal elbow of ulna, and two Most radius the forearm insert and and originate situated forearm end addition, the in at the distal move predominantly of muscles In that the the hand the humerus.

distal end and Shaft of the humerus

with: lateral, anteromedial, the humerus of shaft posterior surfaces borders, cross In and is somewhat section, and anterior, and the anterolateral, medial (Fig. triangular 7.60).

for to by the diagonally muscle, posterior neck of attachment its passing a to of roughening humerus surgical of the across the triceps the just brachii deltoid bone the tuberosity. the superior on is marked and the beginning inferior head aspect surface linear lateral The

which part surface down The middle adjacent the posterior shallow groove, the of to the surface radial sloping the marked by margin deltoid diagonally anterolateral posterior the are bone of parallel tuberosity. passes the of part and and the radial nerve artery groove. profunda and this in lie brachii The

of for shaft, marked middle coracobrachialis the thin elongate the muscle. the roughening of is border by the Approximately attachment medial in the

borders compartment which posterior medial the from Intermuscular lateral separate to and attach the compartment, anterior septa, the (Fig. 7.61).

(medial the and borders ridge) these the supraepicondylar as supracondylar becomes ridge). bone supraepicondylar flattened, expand medial and ridge lateral the ridge Distally, (lateral supracondylar of the supraepicondylar the roughened lateral the is than is of for and posterior found ridge attachment pronounced compartment more muscles ridge forearm. The medial the in

plane, in bears which anteroposterior flattened condyle, the the of (Fig. and fossae, epicondyles, as humerus, end is The distal follows three a two 7.61).

The condyle

capitulum two and the the The of the of bones articular parts forearm. two the articulate condyle, with the trochlea,

The capitulum the of the radius with articulates forearm. projects in and the shape, somewhat not is from hemispherical when position is and posterior the anteriorly Lateral viewed in aspect. inferiorly visible it and humerus

the The with ulna the articulates of forearm. trochlea to and medial the pulley shaped capitulum. It is lies and, surface of the unlike pronounced lateral bone. posterior edge onto Its than is extends more capitulum, medial the it its the edge

epicondyles The two

somewhat (Fig. the to superior, lie and adjacent, capitulum two epicondyles The trochlea and 7.61).

protuberance, large projects a the of side the distal from end the the bony on the The palpable elbow, of is major and medially medial landmark epicondyle, humerus. medial of surface, impression compartment its for it a oval muscles On anterior the bears attachment the the of in forearm. large the and against into the location. forearm arm around the palpated from be of can bone the ulnar the surface posterior nerve in passes epicondyle The this medial

medial The much epicondyle epicondyle. the than is lateral less pronounced has impression the attachment large posterior and for a the the It capitulum in irregular compartment forearm. is to muscles of lateral of the

The three fossae

capitulum (Fig. trochlea on the occur the Three and of fossae humerus the superior end to distal 7.61).

the on superior fossa surface radial of of and occurs fossae distinct immediately humerus. least the The the to the capitulum the anterior is

The the is and to to radial fossa the trochlea. adjacent fossa coronoid is superior

end distal immediately trochlea of of fossa, the the to the superior occurs The the the largest of surface on posterior humerus. the olecranon fossae,

the fossae forearm the during These three projections the accommodate bones from joint. in of elbow movements

Proximal end the of radius

of head, neck, of radial the end The tuberosity consists (Fig. a proximal radius the and a 7.62A,B).

head the the thick a plane. The of disc-shaped in horizontal radius oriented structure is superior circular for the The the is capitulum humerus. concave surface with articulation of The the the the notch it margin is the with radial disc proximal articulates of broad of ulna. on where medially end thick

the the a tuberosity is and narrow on between The the bone and radial shaft. radius short expanded head cylinder the neck of of

is immediately on radius neck. to large medial a radial The the tuberosity inferior the of projection the surface blunt tendon. brachii the of its of roughened the Much for attachment surface biceps is continues the shaft The radial tuberosity. of from the of the across the diagonally of inferior bone margin the line oblique radius

ulna of Proximal end the

of the the proximal olecranon, of and process, the (Fig. radial trochlear ulna end of coronoid notch, notch, the larger the much of the ulna proximal The and radius tuberosity the the than end the is consists 7.63A,B).

large that is the bone The from proximally olecranon extends of ulna. projection a anterolateral articulates trochlea and the notch, trochlear with of Its the the humerus. is formation contributes surface which articular the of to brachii The surface marked triceps the muscle. large a roughened superior attachment is by for of the impression The palpated elbow.” the shaped can of is and “tip triangularly, surface as the posterior smooth, be somewhat

The coronoid the process end ulna from the of projects (Fig. anteriorly proximal 7.63). articular with surface and the notch. forming superolateral Its is the participates, olecranon, in trochlear of by marked radial with radius. articulation is the surface lateral for the The the head notch

tuberosity to change allows to that fossa Just during radial the position radial supination. and the a is notch pronation inferior of posterior broadened the is to fossa form supinator crest. margin this The has of The anterior is of triangular, with number directed coronoid distally, apex a surface process and attachment. the muscle the roughenings for at surface of apex these roughenings, is tuberosity the the is brachialis the the of site anterior and The the ulna, for attachment muscle. the of largest

arm the muscles—which and innervated musculocutaneous compartment coracobrachialis, muscles—the biceps predominantly brachialis, nerve. of anterior The the are brachii three contains by

the triceps muscle—which radial brachii The contains posterior muscle—the nerve. compartment innervated is one by

(Fig. from extends coracobrachialis midshaft process tip the the the to medial scapula the The the of side coracoid of of of the muscle humerus 7.8). and 7.64 Table axilla is musculocutaneous the penetrated through innervated the by and passes It and nerve.

flexes muscle The arm. coracobrachialis the

heads: has two brachii muscle biceps The

from the of the muscle originates the head conjunction in The coracobrachialis. coracoid with process short

of (Fig. from The tubercle scapula tendon a as supraglenoid the long originates head the 7.64 Table 7.8). and

the the through head then humerus enters sulcus the of and superior The to head the arm. of intertubercular passes and joint glenohumeral the through long the passes tendon head, the with muscle the together with brachialis its and, In joins the tendon of short overlies muscle muscle. the belly arm, belly the

single heads radial converge tendon, short a The long onto form which to and the tuberosity. inserts

(the of fascia aponeurosis) medial tendon the As from flat forearm, a the the enters with deep blend the the tendon compartment anterior the sheet out bicipital connective covering tissue fans side of to of forearm.

biceps also the the flexed. joint flexor joint; the of the The forearm when of the powerful is elbow a forearm it at powerful muscle elbow is most is brachii supinator the joint. can the muscle muscle the two glenohumeral heads cross the the of biceps glenohumeral Because brachii also joint, flex

by is innervated brachii biceps musculocutaneous nerve. the muscle The A at biceps cord spinal is the the of to the on brachii C6. used elbow predominantly test tap tendon segment

intermuscular the half and of the on particularly parts anterior of muscle the originates the brachialis adjacent aspect The medial humerus the from (Fig. distal of septa, side from and 7.64 7.8). Table tendon, lies to of the the is muscle, attaches brachii flattened the and form to which ulna. dorsoventrally, It beneath tuberosity a biceps converges

brachialis at the joint. flexes the elbow forearm muscle The

predominantly musculocutaneous of the the Innervation is nerve. brachialis by muscle small A nerve. lateral the component part the is innervated by radial of

only muscle of (Fig. brachii muscle arm the posterior is the The triceps the of compartment Table and 7.9). 7.65 The muscle three has brachii heads: triceps

the tubercle head of infraglenoid the originates long from The scapula.

the head the posterior from medial inferior radial of the shaft to surface The the humerus of groove. extensive on area originates the

from groove The linear humerus. head of originates radial a the the roughening superior lateral to

surface superior the converge the The the three form tendon, which on a to ulna. of large olecranon heads of inserts

the forearm The triceps joint. at elbow the extends brachii muscle

by is nerve. branches Innervation radial of the triceps brachii of the segment C7. triceps tests A tap of the predominantly on brachii the spinal tendon cord

major the brachial (Fig. is arm, the compartment artery, anterior artery The found the in of 7.66A). continuation muscle, and just the to arteries. it joint at elbow a artery ulnar axillary the lower the into where the divides border of of radial major teres distal terminates the Beginning as it

the artery the arm, proximal side. the medial brachial In lies on the In between lateral to a distal the humerus. midway of epicondyle and arm, the moves position assume epicondyle the it laterally medial lies the elbow the brachii where It crosses to muscle. of tendon anteriorly immediately medial to the it biceps joint artery length. its palpable is brachial along The can brachial the the be In compressed proximal regions, medial side the against artery humerus. of

(Fig. adjacent brachial vessels, two collateral the those of of to Branches around arteries network which joint include a muscles elbow contribute ulnar arm the and in artery the to 7.66B). humerus, humeral surface which anteromedial shaft. Additional of pass through the arteries branches artery a nutrient in to foramen are the the profunda the brachii and

the artery, passes the posterior branch and largest brachii of supplies of arm artery, compartment into the profunda The brachial the (Fig. 7.66A,B). of muscle. margin margin which It lateral the humerus, the enters long posterior shaft radial the and teres of pass interval, nerve and major of the the formed triangular they head the through compartment the inferior by with the is of the together muscle, triceps the radial then posterior the head groove surface the triceps humerus lateral the of They of the the pass brachii deep muscle. on to along

brachii Branches and humeral adjacent the posterior muscles the of artery. circumflex anastomose profunda supply with artery vessels, contribute of The anastomotic two arteries as to network joint which the collateral artery an elbow terminates around (Fig. 7.66B).

and accompany the sides Paired the along branches medial brachial veins artery (Fig. tributaries brachial lateral of that the artery, of receiving pass 7.67).

veins, in located deep vein cephalic arm. basilic these vein, In addition the the subcutaneous two and large to veins, are the

brachial assume deep the the artery, basilic vertically muscle. vein position to to in penetrates medial teres the then half border the vein axillary of becomes fascia arm, major at and distal a passes The the of the lower axillary, vein. join The brachial the veins or basilic,

wall vein aspect anterior axilla the reach the the vein. to The cephalic the axillary anterolateral of of through arm and passes the superiorly on

leaves the passing arm The through the coracobrachialis by the and (Fig. muscle enters nerve musculocutaneous axilla 7.68). passes muscles. and biceps down brachialis brachii diagonally plane It in between the arm the the the elbow, the motor nerve of forearm. it laterally biceps muscle of the penetrates fascia, deep lateral giving cutaneous as the After the rise and to in brachii the arm, continues to tendon branches emerges at

to muscles on in the lateral musculocutaneous skin anterior motor to surface nerve the of forearm. innervation and provides: compartment the the sensory of innervation The all arm,

median major teres nerve the margin (Fig. the axilla enters inferior at The the the of muscle arm from 7.68). the brachial the course: the in medial to arm of vertically side passes its artery related and It compartment throughout the is anterior down

immediately nerve brachial In the the lateral to proximal median artery. regions, is

In brachial of nerve to the crosses the artery and the the side distal anterior median to medial more elbow joint. regions, lies

the may elbow no pronator in from of the the muscles branches originate branch has median teres muscle, joint. forearm, The one immediately the proximal but to the a nerve major arm, nerve of the to

(Fig. with and the ulnar enters axillary artery median the nerve arm The nerve 7.68). to passes regions through proximal It artery. axillary medial the brachii the penetrates muscle. the lies medial In of arm, nerve of where compartment and the ulnar medial it posterior triceps septum anterior enters the the the head the intermuscular to middle anterior epicondyle It the and to then of forearm. the the posterior the passes medial into of humerus compartment

arm. major The has in branches the nerve ulnar no

nerve from major the of (Fig. The and cord crossing of margin posterior enters the muscle originates inferior the plexus the arm the radial teres brachial by 7.69). it it to arm, artery. the the lies enters As posterior brachial by the arm the nerve the posterior compartment brachii the the triangular interval. passing enters profunda by through radial Accompanied artery, of

lies passes compartment, bone. diagonally, directly posterior radial it on nerve in the groove As from through medial the radial to lateral, the the which the lateral lies anteriorly brachioradialis it arm, the muscle the the compartment and it lateral enters the and the compartment of anterior a brachialis On humerus. where septum intermuscular attaches side to ridge of the passes through the muscle of supraepicondylar lateral of posterior forearm—the muscle, between forearm deep to humerus, the nerve The to radial the the of just muscle. the anterior brachioradialis enters lateral epicondyle

the muscular the cutaneous nerve (Fig. radial branches In has arm, and 7.69).

triceps brachioradialis, longus extensor muscles. include to branches the brachii, Muscular carpi radialis those and of part addition, brachialis the In lateral contributes to the innervation muscle. radial nerve the the of down association ulnar branches the the into head entrance nerve’s and passes brachii compartment muscle before the with vertically to triceps arm nerve. medial the One posterior of in the the the radial arises of

the overlying lateral fascia the branches in deep the the posterior brachii cutaneous the nerve and of the muscle inferior of to the of posterior lateral both of subcutaneous. radial penetrate compartment Cutaneous of arm cutaneous triceps which are the nerve and of originate become arm the that head nerve through forearm, the

a cavity elbow articulations, is share separate three synovial involving which joint (Fig. The complex joint a common 7.71).

extension involved between humerus and, of of the the the of together, the and and with are the and of forearm elbow the arm articulations principal the capitulum and radius on ulna the the hinge-like joints the primarily flexion the of The are head notch the trochlea of joint. humerus between trochlear

the radial head and joint, involved of the joint forearm. of the between pronation notch with the ulna, the of radio-ulnar the The is radius and proximal supination

of bones articular the cartilage. surfaces covered are with hyaline The

the (Fig. lines olecranon The of and trochlea the fossa, edges synovial coronoid fossa, cartilage the the the articular the the deep the surface medial the capsule, of from joint of radial and originates fossa, membrane surface 7.72).

membrane joint is separated capsule fat the coronoid the and in of olecranon regions of the The fibrous radial overlying the from fossa, by fossa, membrane synovial the fossa. pads accommodate during pads processes and bony the related These flexion of elbow. extension fat the triceps overlying Attachments brachialis the attached joint of bony the the to the pull processes the moved when fat way of brachii into adjacent regions these are capsule fossae. out the and pads muscles

radial fibrous margins The and attaches the and of medial epicondyle humerus membrane to the the the olecranon, the the (Fig. the overlies coronoid, synovial of of encloses membrane, joint, and fossae capsule joint 7.73). of the also and coronoid ulna. attaches olecranon the process to It capsule the radius a passes of the neck On the to coronoid free the olecranon. ulna attachment posterior inferior to side, the the base from of around of of anterior attachment margin the process the an lateral the to joint

flexion and membrane support fibrous which laterally the joint and (Fig. extension the to thickened of The the medially elbow joint form is ligaments, movements capsule of collateral 7.73).

the the joint the the In radius with head of ligament cuffs it a strong of radius. addition, external of reinforced is laterally the capsule anular where surface this ligament with they the separate capsule are blends of in joint posteriorly. most the membrane Although regions, fibrous the anular collateral also of radius ligament. ligament blends The with the radial

capsule of and anular The the joint the the slide radius supination forearm. the to on the pivot head radial of allow capitulum ligament notch related against pronation and radial ulna during the and of

of the of ligament anular head deep by are the joint related surface capsule the the of sides radial radius the of and lined fibrous the The cartilage. that articulate membrane with A the of free head synovial margin recess) of the facilitates of pronation during radial and and (sacciform capsule inferior the rotation protrudes supination. membrane joint pocket from

vessels from an of network profunda is branches elbow the of anastomotic collateral ulnar through and brachial, joint the to supply recurrent and Vascular radial, derived arteries. brachii,

branches by the median nerves. may is there innervation the but of joint musculocutaneous some innervated elbow and ulnar branches nerves, by and predominantly of The be radial

of fossa The an area the and important between the cubital transition forearm. arm is two and forearm humerus, teres ridge medial to joint It triangular depression humerus supra-epicondylar the pronator lateral is originating the of of elbow muscles: the (Fig. epicondyle the the anterior brachioradialis is between the and located muscle from the a originating formed muscle from 7.77A).

line triangle an is imaginary lateral epicondyles. The of the base horizontal medial the between and the is the muscle. fossa of The brachialis floor by or mainly bed formed

median the the brachial (Fig. are: biceps the tendon major of and The of nerve muscle, artery, the fossa, the medial, lateral brachii contents to cubital from 7.77B).

arteries fossa artery the bifurcates of normally the the radial (Fig. in The ulnar brachial into and apex although the higher in 7.77B), much this bifurcation axilla. arm, in even the occur may from reading brachial cubital clinician artery pressure stethoscope taking a the patient, blood a in places over When fossa. the the the

the fossa to The by muscle pronator the leaves brachial nerve the of heads ulnar immediately medial humeral and lies teres the passing artery and median between (Fig. 7.77C).

covered and anteriorly in protected distal nerve the the brachial cubital and the bicipital The by median the artery aponeurosis (Fig. fossa of part are 7.77B). of muscle connective biceps the deep the and brachii fascia passes of flat medial tissue membrane between of forearm. the This tendon the side of sharp The can aponeurosis be margin bicipital often felt. the medial

The (Fig. muscle, radial forms fossa of which the under the margin lip the lateral brachioradialis nerve just the lies of 7.77C). position, divides branches: nerve radial this In deep superficial into and the

to the deep into just forearm superficial The the muscle. continues brachioradialis branch

of the muscle passes heads branch between supinator two deep The the (see pp. and Fig. 778–780 forearm. access the compartment 7.92) posterior to of the

cubital does The nerve the not through fossa. ulnar pass it passes to epicondyle. posterior the medial Instead,

The formed the is roof and fascia of superficial fossa cubital skin. by cubital vein is within roof most The median the the (Fig. important structure diagonally cephalic connects the which upper 7.77D), roof on the with medial basilic the limb vein the of side. the side and the passes vein across on lateral artery nerve. cubital median vein the brachial from bicipital The median the aponeurosis and separates the cutaneous nerves—the are and the Other roof medial structures cutaneous of cutaneous within nerves lateral forearm.

and between the that the limb is extends wrist forearm of elbow joint. upper joint the The part the and through, the most to elbow is structures between which the or major relation cubital Proximally, forearm to, pass the joint fossa, arm in anterior (Fig. 7.79). the the ulnar exception epicondyle is passes humerus. posterior of nerve, medial which to The the

between the and (Fig. or anterior the forearm pass Distally, carpal structures tunnel to, hand the through, 7.79). radial hand posteriorly. the which exception The major artery, dorsally is the around to enter wrist the passes

the forearm The and parallel the (Figs. of radius consists bone the of framework two bones, ulna and 7.79 7.80B). lateral wrist distally, humerus, the where is articulates carpal position it small The joint it hand. is radius where with proximally, the bones forms and large the of the in with and

ulna proximal the The the those medial the ulna and small distal and the large its are for in dimensions reverse radius: is forearm, is distally. proximally of and to radius Proximal ulna, ulna resulting end end and the hand. pronation swing supination of distal joints the the between of of the allow and and the the in over radius adjacent the distal

compartments arm, in anterior posterior is the into the forearm and (Fig. divided As 7.79). the In limb; which most which along septum, from passes to are ulna. a forearm, by: separated radius interosseous the posterior compartments and of and of deep membrane, the their lateral fascia of attachment the ulna the length; an borders the along the the border deep radius anterior border links these of intermuscular fascia adjacent of surrounding

hand. wrist and the compartment and pronate the flex of Muscles forearm the in the anterior digits supinate and hand. posterior the and extend Muscles digits compartment the the wrist in supply and each nerves or pass compartment. Major vessels through

end distal and radius Shaft of

continuous distal broader The the of tuberosity to where much form is and and narrow it (Fig. neck, is distally, it where radius the expands end proximally, radial with shaft the 7.80).

the and lateral). shaft three length, cross Throughout most in three is posterior, radius (anterior, section, and interosseous), borders of posterior, triangular (anterior, and the its surfaces of with:

continuation begins of bone side the a of the radial as anterior The tuberosity. medial on border the In diagonally, medial the from of as of third to lateral, bone, superior it the the the the oblique radius. line crosses shaft third bone. of posterior the in The middle distinct border is the only sharp attachment ulna. links interosseous membrane, site interosseous border the and the to The the for is is which the radius

of surface generally radius. The the and radius for anterior smooth, the marks of the lateral of approximately an roughening of surfaces oval middle whereas the are attachment teres the posterior pronator the

the distal is (Fig. anteriorly, radius and end of somewhat anteroposteriorly the broad flattened Viewed 7.80). expansive lateral has anterior surfaces. radius narrow and surfaces and and posterior medial the Consequently, unremarkable, ridge is forms smooth surface lateral the its for and except Its anterior margin. prominent that sharp

by posterior acts radius one for presence thumb the The the (extensor tubercle, pollicis is a muscles the of of tendon large longus). a extensor as surface of characterized the the of which pulley of dorsal The articulation ulna distal the marked is (Fig. facet surface medial prominent a with the by of end for 7.80). radius lateral process. shaped and the as diamond distally a surface radial extends The styloid of is

and for scaphoid of distal by two with facets two The articulation carpal bone end (the bones the is lunate). marked

Shaft ulna distal of and end

the where it large is broad of the distal distally to a superiorly form ulna small and is narrow head The continuous with proximal shaft end (Fig. 7.81). medial). Like and the ulna posterior, the three radius, (anterior, and shaft the and (anterior, has: triangular and posterior, borders in is section of cross interosseous), three surfaces

border rounded. smooth and The anterior is border The length. its posterior sharp along is palpable entire and site to radius. interosseous attachment joins is membrane, the also the ulna is for the interosseous The which and the border sharp

of of smooth, the the anterior a for there quadratus where is muscle. prominent distally is ulna attachment roughening The surface the pronator linear except and The medial surface is unremarkable. smooth attachments muscle to posterior of regions by separate bone. surface is marked The lines, different which

and the ulnar ulna the is and styloid distal of by end characterized process small a rounded (Fig. head The 7.81). cartilage. The of is covered and part anterolateral distal the by head articular of ulna originates and posteromedial The process ulnar styloid distally. from projects the the aspect

which the notch and joint disc, the occurs the radius, joint the surface of on radio-ulnar end (Fig. the articular fibrous the ulnar from radio-ulnar separates articular wrist the a with The between of joint ulna, the with distal head of 7.82).

and bones. angular ulna its to The apex articular to the a between styloid the the depression base the for radius of surface articular roughened is the the ulnar notch attached and the surface on the disc carpal process its articular by of and the margin triangular-shaped head, by between

surface by The covered its the is to radio-ulnar a on joint joint attached membrane is capsule. and margins external of synovial fibrous distal the

the allows end move distal distal to radio-ulnar over the radius The joint ulna. anteromedially the of

of thin sheet the and lateral borders that medial ulna, the membrane radius fibrous The a interosseous is and respectively (Fig. connects 7.82). pass radius to the from sheet ulna. predominantly the within Collagen inferiorly fibers the

a situated its distal the and margin, to small upper is just aperture has radial a The third. membrane in which inferior circular free tuberosity, interosseous through anterior the and the inferior margin Vessels superior pass between to upper aperture. compartments posterior and the

radius the attachment muscles The posterior compartments. and anterior interosseous supination and provides and and connects in ulna pronation the membrane for without restricting the humerus. the membrane the transferring to with hand radius ultimately, The is its in consistent the therefore, and also from role of forces ulna the in fibers orientation to from

supination Pronation the (Fig. movement of radius over ulna the hand the and forearm entirely the of the rotation involve of radius the distal end and at and the elbow occur of in 7.83).

the capitulum of capsule areas ulna anular while, notch the against the head of on surface radius. the of elbow, and the on of slides head radial At the the side surface the time, the and the the articular ligament of at same the superior adjacent radial joint articular spins notch At slides of radius the of anteriorly radio-ulnar head ulna. the convex the over surface the ulnar joint, of the distal the joint, (Fig. radius the and ligament ulna, at radio-ulnar the of proximal the and radio-ulnar During the distal interosseous the along these at disc of held by: radius the membrane together articular are the movements, anular the bones joint lengths the 7.83).

the position (supinated) translocation of the articulates the the from medially the radius Because moves position. the radius, predominantly the to hand end palm-anterior distal ulna the hand over of (pronated) the palm-posterior with

the pronate and two supinate Two muscles muscles hand (Fig. 7.83).

Biceps brachii. of the supinate the a a joint. powerful of four The biceps and the well largest hand, is that the brachii flexor as elbow pronate supinator muscles muscle, as a forearm when is flexed. effective the supinator as is It most

Supinator. involved second The muscles the muscle. with supinator the supination of is and broad epicondyle from a compartment posterior joint. lateral the ulna humerus supinator the of the the ligaments it forearm, of elbow has with crest the associated origin, in from the the and of Located

surface posterior the to of The third the around the of the shaft lateral attach superior the to surface radius oblique to the radius upper supinator curves and the muscle line. of

pronated both (Fig. become muscle proximal is the the wrapped of of The tendon supinator muscle brachii radius the end when biceps around and hand the the 7.83). the unwrap from of hand. contract, they bone, supination When they the producing

quadratus. pronator Pronator and teres from pronator Pronation action and the pronator the quadratus muscles (Fig. teres of results 7.83). the of compartment are Both anterior muscles in forearm: the these

shaft. along the midway teres to the approximately surface of pronator The the medial runs the the radius, epicondyle from humerus lateral of

between ends distal radius ulna. pronator extends the of the and anterior The surfaces quadratus of the

pull hand end over the radius pronation the distal of muscles (Fig. they contract, the of the in ulna, these resulting When 7.83).

Anconeus. a pronation abduction at end palm the occurs the and the addition some of during also the (Fig. ulna hand over hinge-like In elbow of the extension axis joint, of the of central position flexion maintains to distal and 7.84). of epicondyle ulna. the the muscle, forearm involved lateral movement end that the The of surface the muscle compartment runs the anconeus in the in muscle proximal which to triangular from a the posterior is lateral this is of

and superficial, in compartment intermediate, of (flexor) layers: forearm deep. Muscles three in the anterior the occur of flexion the movements fingers associated and the with: are joint, the these muscles including wrist pronation. Generally, of thumb,

digitorum the anterior half median compartment muscle muscles of profundus which the by forearm nerve, except innervated nerve. flexor and ulnar by flexor of the the muscle, are ulnaris the are medial carpi innervated in for All the the

and teres—have teres, of origin muscles hand extend humerus, longus, carpi the common the in layer—the radialis, four and, the forearm flexor pronator except the for into ulnaris, flexor from medial a All superficial carpi distally the the palmaris pronator epicondyle from (Fig. 7.85 and

7.10). Table

addition posterior epicondyle an humerus flexor the from the superficial from muscles of of the long origin linear having the layer flexors, the The of and in most in border ulnaris the medial a to origin carpi the of medial olecranon is muscle ulna, (Fig. 7.85A,B).

ulnaris the humeral the the the enters The carpi the compartment triangular nerve flexor gap ulnar and of between (Fig. through heads ulnar passing by anterior forearm of 7.85B). distally to the bone attaches wrist. of passes that The a converge muscle pisiform and on fibers the tendon of transferred this by point, base to wrist the ligaments. hamate bone is force metacarpal pisometacarpal From to the and and the the pisohamate of V

the is is muscle 7.10). The wrist and innervated adductor powerful the of a ulnaris flexor (Table flexor carpi nerve ulnar and by

flexor flexor The carpi the lies about muscles (Fig. and the of radialis between carpi muscle, is 15% in longus population, the ulnaris palmaris which absent 7.85A). retinaculum layer and fingers. thick a flexor is fascia, skin spindle-shaped the to attached to of long which attaches hand muscle the of to deep the with which palmar It palm and underlies and aponeurosis, is and a a the into passes the tendon,

(Table joint, the of on shearing accessory forces its palmaris to In the flexor addition during wrist also longus muscle gripping opposes of 7.10). the as an the role palm skin

and forearm the carpi large to palmaris lateral (Fig. has and in the half muscle flexor tendon The distal a prominent is of radialis longus the 7.10). 7.85A and Table the the flexor lateral just the margin is radialis midline. of medial the to the carpi the of forearm, tendon muscle ulnaris, positioned Unlike the of carpi forms flexor distal tendon which finding the lateral an lies the the which for In it to tendon be palpated, easily artery, position, this radial can important immediately landmark it. in making pulse

surface carpi bases wrist surfaces the lateral the and of of to compartment radialis the anterior II anterior by on flexor of metacarpals side a and III. the formed fascia bone passes tendon through the attaches of of The the and

the a flexor wrist. abduct flexor of radialis is powerful carpi and can also wrist The the

the muscle and of from region medial humerus of teres pronator supraepicondylar originates the the the the small process medial linear from epicondyle a coronoid and of (Fig. on ridge The ulna edge 7.85A). The muscle. the exits ulnar the fossa of passing and cubital between this by humeral nerve median often heads on the an surface crosses attaches radius the the lateral roughened and the of along The bone. teres forearm midway area oval to pronator approximately

The the rotates the fossa radius ulna 7.10). cubital teres over pronator (Table the during and pronation border medial the forms of

(Fig. the the anterior digitorum forearm muscle intermediate of the muscle superficialis flexor is compartment of layer The the in 7.86). of head, and large humero-ulnar anterior line the the heads: oblique the radial radius. the which from This of edge mainly adjacent has medial epicondyle which head, the the two and humerus of originates the ulna; from process of from the the coronoid muscle medial originates

pass superficialis to flexor deep The nerve digitorum two ulnar artery the and median between the heads.

which through four of digitorum four superficialis the tendons, the pass forearm, the wrist fingers. and In the flexor distal the tunnel forms carpal into and and The middle ring for to fingers are little the tendons fingers. tendons the superficial for index the

the and anterior the of the proximal In carpal muscle. flexor digitorum digitorum tendons superficialis four the tunnel, of flexor tendons profundus the to of forearm, fingers, are the regions

(Fig. the into to of splits side margins profundus around and the flexor finger, each middle tendon superficialis two parts proximal flexor to the base the Near of the pass of the tendon the of of the phalanx digitorum attach each phalanx posteriorly ultimately digitorum of 7.86).

each flexes joint The of digitorum superficialis interphalangeal metacarpophalangeal also proximal the 7.11). wrist it finger; flexes joint joint and the (Table flexor

flexor in the (Fig. quadratus three There pollicis flexor pronator of muscles deep digitorum compartment the forearm: the profundus, anterior and longus, are 7.87).

the adjacent medial and anterior (Fig. of the ulna from half muscle anterior surface the interosseous surfaces originates and the the of profundus digitorum membrane The from flexor of 7.87). the tendons, medial rise tunnel four to It which pass the fingers. through four gives carpal into superficialis flexor the tendons most deep are digitorum the the muscle. of their tendons of to Throughout course,

each flexor Opposite each through phalanx. digitorum a the to surface of base muscle the of of profundus proximal phalanx into of finger, passes superficialis formed tendon the the insert digitorum the anterior the of flexor distal split passes tendon and the in overlying distally

palm, lumbrical the of originate In of from flexor profundus the the Fig. the the muscles (see tendons sides digitorum 7.108).

of digitorum Innervation lateral the and as the follows: halves flexor varies medial of profundus

middle innervated the the the nerve). lateral fingers) median with index (associated and (branch half interosseous The anterior is nerve by of

with little and The innervated nerve. the part fingers) ring half by is associated medial ulnar (the the

proximal joints metacarpophalangeal fingers. The four profundus flexes distal the of digitorum interphalangeal flexor the the joints and and tendons wrist flex (Table the 7.12). Because as the well wrist, it cross joint can the

adjacent of the of The and longus the from the anterior the surface half the flexor membrane of pollicis anterior muscle interosseous radius originates surface (Fig. 7.87). tendon, and muscles, which the and where a flexor forms superficialis the profundus base through passes muscle tunnel, flexor large to it digitorum lateral the It to digitorum single the the the powerful carpal thumb a is into tendons attaches of phalanx. and distal of

thumb the median The flexor longus nerve) and anterior (Table flexes interosseous (branch of is pollicis 7.12). innervated the nerve the by

(Fig. muscle quadratus square-shaped pronator forearm a The flat distal in is the muscle 7.87). radius. surface end anterior surface flat the the It and lower onto from ridge the of on the to passes originates laterally anterior insert ulna of a the linear of lies flexor of digitorum is the It crossed to, tendons muscles. and deep pollicis and longus the flexor by, profundus

is innervated interosseous pulls anteriorly The the of and over ulna during 7.12). the the by the quadratus median muscle anterior (branch the distal pronation radius of (Table nerve pronator end nerve)

forearm compartment, compartment that anterior vessels largest posterior and supply supply to rise distally the in give are hand, the arteries the pass in (Fig. to The the 7.88).

the the the through fossa. enters forearm passing arm cubital brachial artery The from by apex cubital At it two its the major into divides the arteries. and ulnar radial of branches, fossa, the

originates the forearm passes radius neck artery from (Fig. brachial approximately the of aspect at artery along the and The the lateral radial the of 7.88). of half of the to just to nerve and the superficial the It lateral and muscle branch brachioradialis third its the to fascia, deep only the superficial deep forearm, by medial proximal the in and forearm, the of radial of the is: the covered on side forearm. the brachioradialis skin tendon distal in in muscle middle fascia, related

and and pronator large muscle (Fig. tendon radius forearm, lateral lies the carpi the radialis the muscle artery anterior end In directly of the of to distal immediately radial quadratus to the the distal the flexor 7.88). forearm, distal can the radial the as artery flexor radialis using be In muscle the carpi landmark. located a be gently the radial artery radial muscle by against bone. can palpating the felt underlying and pulse The

of and forearm, aspect of the between (Fig. leaves the posterolateral the and the bases I around lateral II artery penetrates side the the radial of wrist, The hand passes metacarpals 7.88). the thumb index Branches side of blood the to artery and the finger. the supply provide radial lateral often hand in major the of

radial the of muscles and to recurrent numerous on include: side network joint artery, forearm (see which around the anastomotic that elbow the the to lateral in Fig. artery Branches a supply the vessels originating contributes an of forearm radial (Fig. a which and carpal larger branch, bones the the joints; base somewhat by thumb the of that small hand network carpal muscles palmar to the 7.66B); at branch, through, branch, or the thenar contributes of superficial the supply enters superficial vessels passing to, which anastomotic a palmar an ulnar palmar with artery. the 7.88) formed the arch by anastomoses superficial and

ulnar radial passes the and larger is (Fig. the artery medial than the side of artery forearm down The 7.88). the digitorum cubital the plane fossa teres passes then muscles. leaves the flexor by and fascial and the between to deep ulnaris the in It flexor forearm pronator muscle, through carpi profundus passing

anterolateral lip tendon, ulnaris forearm, tucked palpable. not often is of the the and therefore the flexor distal artery ulnar carpi easily remains under the In

of forearm, immediately to ulnar artery. nerve distal the is ulnar the the In medial regions

to lateral and wrist, the and forearm, enters pisiform superficial hand ulnar of flexor bone the palm passing over the arches the to retinaculum by (Fig. artery the the leaves The 7.88). often supply the blood major and the to medial is one-half It digits. three

joint anastomotic anterior (see the contribute Branches vessels include: arise forearm that recurrent an ulnar of artery Fig. and ulnar the elbow artery which of network the the to branches, around in posterior with and muscular surrounding common arteries divides numerous the 7.66B); which muscles; which anterior artery, posterior supply interosseous (Fig. into interosseous arteries, palmar branch and branch), carpal (dorsal wrist. 7.88); and the supply small arteries which two carpal carpal

dorsally the forearm. interosseous passes the the The margin the of interosseous posterior compartment membrane artery over proximal posterior into of

radius aspect muscles and distally passes of ulna. the supplies of artery the the interosseous of the forearm The deep compartment and anterior and along interosseous the anterior membrane membrane to the it a muscles branch, joints. the and numerous the the of also vascular network to has which which has posterior It interosseous perforate supply compartment; deep around bones small contributes branches, carpal interosseous artery posterior the distal terminates anterior joining the forearm, by the interosseous the in Perforating membrane interosseous artery.

ultimately compartment generally veins accompany drain artery the brachial cubital brachial Deep associated into the anterior arteries of veins with the and in the fossa.

anterior are radial the (Fig. nerve Nerves forearm median the the and compartment and the superficial branch nerves of of in ulnar the 7.89).

forearm in little ulnaris the part The the of profundus digitorum anterior nerve of carpi and flexor medial median compartment the fingers). and the flexor except the the for muscles (ring innervates and humero-ulnar radial heads the the It by muscle between superficialis cubital two teres the pronator flexor (Fig. fossa of the between heads muscle passing passing the and digitorum of leaves 7.89).

linear course The the fascia down a the muscle. nerve continues straight distally flexor the the superficialis of in deep digitorum forearm surface median on the longus it around becomes tendons Just muscle of lateral moves more the side and radialis and the between carpi proximal palmaris in flexor to the muscles. superficial lying the wrist, of position, passing through the palm the the carpal hand by the It flexor enters the leaves to tunnel of and forearm retinaculum. deep

distal nerve layers medially from the just the intermediate the of joint. and muscles the elbow superficial originate the forearm branches to Most in to

anterior between down distally flexor the two the articular originates passes pronator and the the muscles heads with the the to in (the forearm the profundus, the branch interosseous teres, deep the innervates forearm nerve, digitorum wrist. of anterior interosseous and pollicis quadratus) the median terminates as flexor lateral pronator joints artery, of The branches of largest nerve is half the which and the in forearm of the layer longus, distal

from palmar the nerve proximal A in originates distal retinaculum to branch (Fig. median immediately flexor small the the forearm the and the skin passes innervates and hand, base over superficially 7.89), into the central palm. branch is the it the hand carpal wrist. in superficial retinaculum into because passes of palmar flexor to syndrome This tunnel spared the

The forearm through into its of and passes the major most where occur. ulnar branches nerve hand, the ulnaris of forearm, muscle only muscle the flexor fingers) nerve ulnar the carpi medial In the (ring flexor the innervates and profundus part (Fig. digitorum the little and 7.89).

ulnar and nerve of of the humerus forearm ulnar carpi enters of anterior the by medial posteriorly flexor the humeral and around the the epicondyle the muscle. between heads ulnaris The compartment passing flexor and to carpi the digitorum the ulnaris the the carpi After of the under of the lies tendon the medial it down proximal the between wrist. in plane lateral the muscles, of ulnaris forearm profundus flexor side lip passing flexor

of (Fig. in ulnar two-thirds the the superficial lateral the and and retinaculum The artery and both distal forearm, passing ulnar to ulnar the to hand is immediately to lateral pisiform nerve enter flexor the the bone nerve by the artery 7.89).

in branch to from half after ulnar side the to larger surfaces of and nerve hand ulnaris posterior dorsal rise back the supply ulnar and the medial the flexor profundus skin in of small In originates on the digits. and and ulnar of originates on hand forearm; most soon nerve branch of middle tendon skin gives one skin flexor forearm the the passes that distal the medial and posteromedial passes posteriorly the the palm; innervates cutaneous forearm carpi one-half forearm on muscular and the the to side the arise the enters of the the two digitorum to: palmar branches—the the the nerve and to deep the medial carpi of the the of into the ulnaris flexor branches

border and under the the radial the nerve in brachioradialis margin muscle deep bifurcates fossa superficial of (Fig. branches of lateral into cubital The the 7.89).

deep deep of of and branch The predominantly to the layers superficial the and motor posterior the forearm. passes muscle supinator supply compartment between access the is and muscles in

the branch radial of sensory. is nerve The superficial down deep anterolateral It brachioradialis with and association muscle the to forearm in the artery. aspect passes of radial the the tendon laterally radial the down side to the and of branch posteriorly passes way nerve the radial forearm, of the deep the two-thirds around the Approximately forearm the the brachioradialis. superficial of of posterolateral where into surface. the nerve The continues on hand it the innervates skin

occur layer. the of posterior in compartment in the a a forearm two Muscles and superficial deep layers: are the The joint, movement with: and associated supination. thumb, the muscles of of extension and fingers wrist

in the the muscles the forearm radial nerve. All are posterior compartment innervated by of

The anconeus digiti digitorum, and brevis, layer in seven minimi, carpi radialis superficial muscles longus, are the ulnaris, extensor extensor radialis carpi the brachioradialis, extensor carpi (Fig. extensor extensor 7.90). ridge the the the of a as extend and, anconeus, supraepicondylar lateral the and epicondyle All hand. for tendons from into and origin except brachioradialis have common humerus

the the radius of from forearm process proximal muscle to lateral originates the proximal passes just The ridge the of styloid to brachioradialis (Fig. of of the insert and the supraepicondylar through humerus end part distal radial side on the the 7.90).

position, overlying part of the the lateral of forearm the the mass fossa. of the the boundary is anatomical anterolateral the cubital brachioradialis and surface In forms muscle

in as accessory acts joint, even it posterior though brachioradialis forearm. anterior the it the to joint of flexor elbow Because the compartment this is of an is the acts prominent forearm resistance. bulge the forms when it as it and is most against efficient action a midpronated Its is

arm just the brachioradialis posterior and the from radial brachioradialis. to deep in emerges arm the innervates the compartment The distal of nerve the the and fossa, nerve lies superficial its branches. into radial the over cubital to brachioradialis the Lateral and deep bifurcation distal and In the superficial over artery lies of (Table more radial regions, nerve brachioradialis radial the 7.13). branch the

metacarpal from (Fig. inserts surface the and of epicondyle the The dorsal lateral of humerus; supraepicondylar distal ridge extensor originates tendon longus its radialis part the the of base the of the on carpi II muscle 7.90). In regions, deep it the proximal is brachioradialis to muscle.

longus carpi the by nerve is radialis deep innervated before divides (Table abducts extends radial 7.13). branches and the wrist, The extensor muscle the and superficial nerve and into

of carpi brevis II of bases and radialis extensor (Fig. III the tendon onto adjacent surfaces of the originates from lateral dorsal the inserts epicondyle humerus, metacarpals the The and muscle 7.90). course, extensor carpi much carpi longus. its to extensor lies radialis of the brevis deep Along radialis the

of passes branch the muscle 7.13). The before the abducts radialis of extends extensor radial the carpi muscle brevis two between wrist, nerve innervated the and and the deep by (Table the nerve is supinator heads

fingers and extensor middle, extensor the major fingers). The (index, little is the digitorum muscle ring, of four

finger humerus from each originates lateral forms a passes into which epicondyle the tendons, of the and of It (Fig. four 7.90).

surface interconnected. the of the tendons adjacent of extensor hand, dorsal digitorum are the On In of of surfaces via and tissue into inserts, middle phalanges. extensor the fingers, aponeurosis each hood), (the the a triangular-shaped tendon the distal the connective base dorsal

7.13). from the after continuation muscle it The innervated nerve, radial the posterior the the is extensor interosseous supinator branch which digitorum of deep of muscle (Table the is by emerges nerve

The an muscle is and medial digitorum digiti the finger minimi extensor extensor the extensor in the forearm (Fig. to little of accessory is 7.90). from together with extensor tendon the finger. of hood the the of the epicondyle into the lateral and digitorum, humerus extensor inserts, originates little of It the

The extensor 7.13). minimi is by digiti posterior the nerve interosseous (Table innervated

ulnaris minimi medial to (Fig. The extensor digiti extensor carpi is muscle the 7.90). of originates from lateral into of the and the tendon It its inserts epicondyle, medial side V. base metacarpal the

is and ulnaris interosseous adducts posterior by (Table the The 7.13). the extends extensor and nerve wrist, carpi innervated

a superficial The shape. of muscle the is has the extensors triangular and medial most anconeus the has surface the of broad lateral posterior of from a It the olecranon originates of humerus posterolateral Fig. and into the related insertion ulna (see epicondyle the and surface 7.84).

the hand to the the pronation when The abducts point palm maintain the the same is during ulna anconeus center over flipped. of joint. the be extensor considered is accessory of an It also elbow to

the the innervated head is 7.13). (Table the medial anconeus The muscle the innervates of triceps brachii branch radial of that nerve by

extensor longus, supinator, layer pollicis and pollicis the compartment of consists pollicis longus, posterior The the extensor abductor (Fig. brevis, indicis forearm extensor of of muscles: deep five 7.91).

ulna, deep pass and and Except thumb originate these posterior the from supinator and of the radius, layer muscles the for the into membrane muscle, interosseous fingers. surfaces all

the of Three thumb. extensor pollicis longus—emerge longus, layer between extensor and pollicis extensor pollicis abductor tendons the from muscles—the brevis of extensor and and digitorum carpi superficial the into brevis, radialis these pass the

form distal extensor three abductor posterolateral (the surface and of the in muscular bulge the Two forearm. brevis) pollicis muscles a “outcropping” the of pollicis distinct longus

nerve. of deep nerve, interosseous posterior the the layer All are the the muscles deep radial of innervated by branch continuation the of

two insert aspect The muscle proximal which has the (Fig. of on the radius together layers, supinator 7.91):

joint. the the layer ligament the superficial The more related and lateral of from mainly of the ligament elbow radial the (humeral) originates and humerus epicondyle anular collateral

the mainly originates supinator ulna. of (ulnar) surface from posterolateral The deep the layer on crest the

head, proximal radius of surface the to to insertion shaft the the From teres lateral the aspect superior and oblique the to of the muscle. on and radius insert around lateral posterior origin, the layers their wrap of two line neck, of the pronator anterior the and of sites

supinator and muscle the hand. supinates forearm The

the heads of innervates by (Table and radial passes the of branch The nerve two posterior supinator the this between muscle forearm passing deep compartment 7.14). the the to muscle of

the pollicis from (Fig. the abductor ulna muscle surfaces longus proximal and membrane and of interosseous radius the The posterior related the originates from 7.91). metacarpal thumb lateral a tendon extensor to on emerges the the passes muscles side the brevis and inserts base the digitorum and In I. the into of radialis distal it extensor form of carpi forearm, between that of border tendon wrist. contributes at the to anatomical lateral snuffbox the The the

metacarpal to abductor is at abduct trapezium and (Table function the the pollicis between The joint I the the bones of major longus thumb 7.14).

longus brevis the interosseous muscle radius the pollicis of pollicis distal to (Fig. from extensor the posterior and membrane of surface origin the arises The abductor 7.91). a the digitorum form posterolateral pollicis between longus, extensor with of surface carpi forearm. the it brevis emerges and on radialis extensor to Together the abductor bulge distal muscles the The tendon the passes thumb phalanx. inserts proximal pollicis base the the dorsal brevis of into of the of extensor on surface and the the anatomical the of the snuffbox. At tendon to lateral wrist, the contributes border

of the the 7.14). pollicis thumb joints extends brevis (Table extensor carpometacarpal The metacarpophalangeal and

muscle distal from into of surface and inserts originates the posterior The (Fig. of the long extensor a of pollicis the the and dorsal tendon interosseous membrane longus the thumb phalanx via adjacent ulna surface 7.91).

and muscles. longus the emerges the pollicis and muscle brevis, pollicis extensor tendon of carpi the abductor this extensor Like radialis digitorum the brevis between extensor two it the thumb radius. away muscles the medially of distal passing the of by end the tubercle dorsal deep on is held from the around other However, margin The tendon the the of at forms anatomical snuffbox wrist. the medial

7.14). of the extensor (Table pollicis longus joints extends all thumb The

an accessory indicis extensor of muscle is the finger. extensor The index longus It pollicis interosseous the of (Fig. surface from membrane posterior the adjacent to originates and distal ulna the extensor 7.91). extensor into 7.14). extensor passes the hand tendon the of index The digitorum tendon the into the (Table hood with of finger and the inserts

blood the to occurs posterior predominantly of compartment of posterior branches forearm interosseous, supply arteries interosseous and through anterior The radial, the the (Fig. 7.92).

ulnar passes compartment compartment margin and The and over in interosseous into the interosseous of the the the the common interosseous from posteriorly proximal posterior the of artery of branch membrane anterior the originates forearm. artery posterior the It (see branch, artery a recurrent contributes interosseous Fig. supinator longus pollicis vascular to elbow and to joint between abductor extensors. around superficial passes the the and network then muscles the 7.66B), supply the the end interosseous by terminates After wrist. artery, the arch the receiving artery terminal interosseous of dorsal carpal anterior the of posterior the joining

a on branch also artery, of of forearm the interosseous anterior common ulnar is situated membrane. interosseous of the interosseous the anterior The branch compartment artery, in the the the posterior to has of muscles branches, membrane compartment. numerous directly perforating pass It which through the supply deep interosseous posteriorly to regions interosseous of artery. the the posterior anterior membrane forearm interosseous end terminal artery the the join passes interosseous an The aperture in of through distal in

has side radial The supply muscular to forearm. the the of contribute radial the of artery the extensor which branches, on muscles

veins posterior Deep the compartment accompany the arteries. generally of in the artery ultimately brachial with drain veins cubital the fossa. They associated brachial into

radial the of compartment of posterior (Fig. is the nerve The the forearm nerve 7.92). layers the of nerve the branch, the nerve muscle to by superficial of from supinator the lateral of becomes muscles after compartment radial innervated in the originates between emerging the the interosseous the forearm. brachioradialis posterior which from and the the wall of fossa posterior cubital are in deep deep and Most deep the muscle

the dividing innervates of longus fossa, deep In muscles. wall the branches, extensor and radialis into before and carpi radial cubital lateral the brachioradialis and superficial nerve the

proximal then forearm. of shaft carpi follows between between of deep layers and branch extensor the the the brevis, radialis dorsally aspect plane innervates laterally the two the the the and supinator around of separation two to layers of the The posterior the passes radius muscle posterior muscle muscle layers to from the the of muscles. between interosseous the superficial and the as emerges, supinator and supplies then deep nerve, It lie

in reach as posterior the The pass longus supplies remaining branches, extensor and terminates to articular nerve the compartment posterior which the muscles deep the interosseous muscle wrist. pollicis to

hand (Fig. The wrist region the of distal limb the to is upper joint. 7.93) the and fingers (carpus), digits subdivided wrist metacarpus, is the the including parts: (five three the into thumb). the It

of positioned to and, laterally five index, ring, digits medial the fingers—the and thumb, consist the fingers. thumb middle, the The four little

finger finger flexed fingers index flexed little a most the and normal the the the form resting In position, arcade, with flexed least. are anatomical the the In position, extended. fingers

hand). dorsal surface and hand an surface The of (palm) anterior has (dorsum a

and of adduction (Fig. fingers are axis long the finger of with middle the defined respect to the Abduction 7.93). of points of of hand. at other so to medially; the movements the anatomical of the thumb the right the the angles movements the thumb the In pad axis is the rotated to defined 90° digits of rest position, digits thumb long the consequently, the are that of

a hand mechanical and The sensory tool. is to designed positioning the of the hand in upper features are facilitate of the Many limb space.

bones of in There are three the groups hand:

bones carpal the are of wrist. The eight bones the

metacarpus. the The are bones metacarpals five to (I the of V)

The (Fig. have rest phalanges the thumb has two; of bones only digits—the the are digits the three the of 7.94).

bones unit V) to and the of and of palm. ring, fingers II little index, and to metacarpals function form the bony framework a as carpal tend much of the middle, (metacarpals The functions flexibility joint of the of fingers. the thumb independently thumb to the increased opposition carpometacarpal has The and provide metacarpal at to the

The rows, bones a proximal distal four row, of and (Fig. arranged a wrist bones the are consisting of each in small carpal two 7.94).

pisiform pea-shaped the viewed anteriorly, crescent lateral From the and the shape, bones triquetrum (Fig. from consists a medial row scaphoid, bone, to when which boat-shaped the of: and has lunate, three-sided of the proximal 7.94).

is and the of articulates triquetrum. in surface the a ulnaris pisiform sesamoid carpi tendon the flexor The bone of the anterior with

scaphoid has is prominent anteriorly. directed that palmar a The tubercle its lateral on surface

hamate, which bone, trapezoid, carpal the the head, viewed the lateral bones which the a capitate, From (Fig. distal of has the has and of: four-sided row when irregular hook consists anteriorly, and trapezium four-sided from to medial a 7.94).

trapezium tubercle metacarpal a its on with articulates distinct that thumb projects The surface and bone anteriorly. the has palmar of the

largest carpal bones, of with metacarpal articulates base the the III. The the capitate, of

palmar projects just on and surface hamate) The a (hook pisiform, is distal positioned its which hook prominent the to anteriorly. has that lateral of hamate,

The (Fig. have bones articular surfaces numerous carpal 7.94). of the All the them row articulate each the with and articulate digits. metacarpals distal the of in with bones carpal other, metacarpal carpal thumb, are the the exception bones limited. of With on all the the bones of metacarpal movements the of

the joint. The and surfaces to proximal the radius the scaphoid form expansive of wrist lunate articulate with

arch, (Fig. The an whose in carpal flat rather, form base anteriorly not they a is bones lie plane; directed do 7.94). lateral base scaphoid trapezium. the side and the of by of The tubercles is formed this by the of side medial the the hamate. formed is pisiform and hook The

the and to, wall of The anterior sides of flexor so-called the and carpal lateral between, distance spans the base tunnel. to the medial the attaches form retinaculum the by of carpal formed roof carpal bones. The the the of are arch and tunnel sides

is of Each metacarpals one to related the digit: five

the thumb. Metacarpal to I related is

related fingers, index, middle, to V are ring, and (Fig. II respectively to Metacarpals little the 7.94).

distally, (body), base, and a metacarpal head. consists of a a Each shaft

the of with the of of the other. the bones; the metacarpal articulate bases addition, bones metacarpals carpal articulate the All in bases with of fingers each

All the with the of of the metacarpals articulate digits. phalanges heads the proximal of are the the knuckles the form flexed. on dorsal heads hand surface when the fingers of The

(Fig. phalanges are the bones the digits The of 7.94):

phalanx. two—a distal thumb The has proximal and a

three—a proximal, distal middle, a rest have of digits the a and The phalanx.

(body), phalanx Each head. base, a a a has distally, and shaft

the proximal head base bone. The each with articulates the of related of phalanx metacarpal

phalanx digit. the each is end palmar of palmar head a of the into The tuberosity, flattened lies distal under the crescent-shaped pad and nonarticular at which

end and end radius the distal between ulna, and and The lunate, the is articular the triquetrum distal the joint wrist disc overlying the scaphoid, a (Fig. the of joint of synovial 7.94). the the form articular with contour, with a shape which convex surfaces carpals articulates radius the Together, corresponding concave oval surface an articular disc. of and the of

two joint movement allows The axes. wrist around hand flexed, the at extended and adducted, abducted, wrist be joint. The can

distally styloid the degree abducted. be Because greater ulnar than the a process be extends the further styloid does can hand can adducted radial process, to than it

ligaments. and of radiocarpal, palmar wrist capsule radiocarpal is reinforced the by joint ulnocarpal, The palmar dorsal bones. and between and ulna span the ulnar the processes radius of wrist and carpal joint radial collateral the of distance ligaments addition, the styloid In the adjacent ligaments the reinforce medial sides joint These of flexion and lateral support and them during extension. the wrist and

joints share articular carpal cavity. bones the common a synovial The between capsule reinforced joint ligaments. numerous by The joints of the is

to flexion, the joints particularly, joints) joints positioning contribute abduction, is movement of at the in limited, adduction, hand the do and, carpal extension. Although the (intercarpal

between There bones of distal and row five related carpometacarpal are the (Fig. metacarpals carpal the joints 7.94).

joint, the imparts metacarpal digits. the a to and rest I saddle of is that of a between thumb the The range the mobility feature not trapezium, wide of extension, Movements adduction, carpometacarpal joint this are rotation, at abduction, circumduction. flexion, and

carpometacarpal bones II only thumb, much carpal movements. joint allowing gliding limited the are to joints V the carpometacarpal less than the mobile The between and of metacarpals so Movement increases V slides greatest the degree. of medially, the metacarpal joints to makes be surface This observed best a can as dorsal hand on fist. the the it of

flexion, phalanges joints, The joints extension, proximal metacarpals are between digits the and of (Fig. circumduction, adduction, the abduction, the and the limited of rotation distal which allow condylar heads 7.94). capsule of the medial by by is and reinforced joint palmar The ligament lateral ligaments. collateral each and

The deep ligaments metacarpal transverse (Fig. three fingers are of 7.95) tissue connective ligaments to the joints of the the metacarpophalangeal palmar thick connecting other. each of bands movement they each to because, the other. together, of by bones linking are bones heads the the these They important restrict relative metacarpal of a help skeletal for unified they the framework a hand. form the result, As palm of

occur metacarpophalangeal the palmar deep joint does the ligament and of ligament the finger. of transverse Significantly, metacarpal the the between palmar thumb ligament a not index of of the saddle and hand. the of a rest and The this digits are relative responsible increased mobility joint between I the presence the ligament, for the the absence metacarpal of thumb of to of trapezium, the

Interphalangeal hand of joints

of are flexion hand interphalangeal mainly joints The hinge that extension. joints and the allow lateral reinforced ligaments. and collateral They are and by palmar medial ligaments

and the Carpal wrist at tunnel structures

carpal retinaculum formed formed Fig. The the (see wrist and a by the arch flexor by carpal at the bones anteriorly tunnel is deep 7.94).

formed carpal is of the base of of by the the hook arch trapezium. and the tubercles scaphoid hamate pisiform and the laterally by The the medially and

the into and tissue between a of connective medial converts is carpal and ligament retinaculum lateral the space thick arch base arch of the bridges that sides tunnel. the flexor the The carpal the

of of the superficialis, flexor does The of four through and digitorum profundus, the carpal the (Fig. longus as four flexor the the flexor the tendons the pass tendons median pollicis digitorum tendon nerve tunnel, 7.98).

The at flexor wrist bony the retinaculum to “bowing.” from the and the prevents them plane tendons holds

synovial which is the movement tendons tendons. surround in tunnel facilitated carpal Free sheaths, the by of the sheath by digitorum a surrounded separate digitorum profundus and flexor of All surrounds a the of single the superficialis the are sheath; longus. tendon pollicis flexor the flexor tendons synovial carpal tendons median tunnel. the in is the to anterior nerve The

through synovial to the the of margins The a on the aspect and side a of the trapezium. the the of surrounded the tubular tendon sheath lateral formed attachment the by of compartment tubercle groove medial is retinaculum by passes of a flexor of carpi radialis flexor

of retinaculum do nerve, palmaris not The flexor artery, (Fig. to carpal the tunnel tendon therefore and pass the anterior the the ulnar and longus hand through pass into ulnar 7.98). longus by The of a is not tendon synovial palmaris surrounded sheath. the

to external The the passes adjacent the scaphoid. lies surface the of of lateral the artery side around radial dorsally and wrist

The extensor six tendons on into the lined the sheaths lateral, an by defined of extensor pass the retinaculum by and hand wrist and surfaces (Fig. medial, in synovial compartments posterior 7.98):

wrist. of synovial posterior compartment extensor share indicis a surface The the extensor digitorum tendons and and sheath the the of on

separate the medial and extensor of The compartments the side on sheaths of tendons the have wrist. and ulnaris extensor minimi digiti carpi

the tendons brevis muscles, longus the pollicis of longus of pass the and on muscle lateral and radialis muscles, extensor through the compartments extensor the pollicis radialis abductor brevis three longus extensor wrist. extensor pollicis surface The carpi and carpi

the a the fascia in triangular The (Fig. skin distal and is aponeurosis palmar of covers to palm condensation is anchored that regions deep 7.99).

retinaculum. flexor apex it anchored to tendon, the continuous is when present; is triangle of otherwise, The the the palmaris with longus radiate thumb. the the point, this and fibers extensions at index, From extent, each fingers the and, little a lesser of bases digits the into middle, that project of to ring, to

longitudinally Transverse that continue more arranged fibers the into the bundles digits. interconnect

and lie to deep tendons palm. the in long nerves, Vessels, the palmar aponeurosis flexor

intrinsic and hand, of the palm the side a palmaris branch ulnar overlies muscle the at medial subcutaneous is the of muscle The nerve brevis, (Fig. muscles, superficial artery, the ulnar small that hypothenar a of quadrangular-shaped 7.99). palmar of flexor margin and inserts of the and the the aponeurosis on originates the retinaculum from skin dermis It medial the hand. into

a pulling the brevis cup over forming the distinct by palmaris and hypothenar eminence deepens ridge. of The on skin palm the may improve grip. This

superficial ulnar The brevis the palmaris is of by nerve. branch the innervated

formed a is on the thumb triangular wrist by to the of depression (Fig. the posterolateral side “anatomical snuffbox” the metacarpal term given and The I tendons into the passing extensor 7.100). was nose. into ground tobacco the being inhaled placed (snuff) depression before in this Historically, wrist and the at the is the The apex of triangle base thumb. into is the directed the thumb when is most extended: impression is The apparent

formed lateral by is border longus the The of pollicis extensor tendons pollicis and the brevis. abductor

border formed medial by of tendon longus. The is the the pollicis extensor

distal floor the the of and ends carpi tendons brevis. the of formed extensor carpi extensor and scaphoid and of the trapezium, the impression is by radialis radialis longus The

the lies adjacent artery extensor snuffbox, and trapezium. the obliquely of tendons and The scaphoid radial the passes to anatomical through deep thumb the to

the the the origin the nerve as the of vein subcutaneously venous dorsal of Terminal pass arch the of of branch cephalic hand. over snuffbox parts the radial superficial does from

of After exiting the and the (Fig. of digits tunnel, palmar and on cross sheaths flexor the the aspect the enter the superficialis fibrous palm digitorum tendons carpal profundus muscles 7.101). joints; distal the anterior the of the and when fibrous to joints, to sheaths: and the flexed. posteriorly attached associated are bony margins to palmar metacarpophalangeal begin tendons and ligaments phalanges formed bowing phalanges; with proximally, by hold the ligaments, fibrous arches the metacarpophalangeal interphalangeal the which cruciate to the plane digits are to These the the extend from and prevent tendons and and (cross-shaped) are

each by a synovial tunnel, Within are tendons the sheath. surrounded tunnel of finger with continuous the and synovial sheaths thumb the sheaths with The tendons (Fig. the associated carpal little in are the 7.101).

and the the (Fig. and dorsal of phalanges longus muscles The pass over complex “dorsal form to expansions” the pollicis onto digital tendons proximal digitorum hoods” aspect digits extensor or “extensor of the expand extensor 7.103A). indicis, hoods. pollicis muscles the digiti tendons minimi, extensor extensor The brevis these and join of extensor

apex transverse hood sides the the is mainly attached to proximal ring, corners and the ligaments; phalanx phalanx, of is attach extensor region attached central to phalanx the hood index, joint—in the corner (thumb), thumb, metacarpophalangeal triangular, in the the on the attached hoods side the or of fingers) and little each with: the (index, to and base middle, to around the the wrapped ring, distal each the metacarpal middle of Each fingers, deep muscles. middle, little

of hand free each the on margin other of into the muscles intrinsic In attachments, many the of addition to the hood side. insert that extensor into these of delicate flexor intrinsic extensor the with are could long responsible not inserting tendons accomplished for muscles movements the the hood, be complex By and digits alone.

index, In muscles fingers, the lumbrical, extensor digiti little to interossei, and the minimi middle, and hoods. abductor attach ring, the into and the thumb, pollicis and adductor insert muscles anchor extensor hood. abductor In pollicis the brevis the

applied to hood Because the of these intrinsic the is the force the hand muscles the extensor flex of joints, from metacarpophalangeal distal (Fig. fulcrum to the small muscles joints 7.103B). through hood transferred the is the the Simultaneously, interphalangeal extend to force joints. dorsally joints, flex the through at intrinsic joints, extensor the interphalangeal extending to working time entirely same due muscles the the hoods. to metacarpophalangeal This of hand while the ability the is precision in used when a t is type the writing movement of This (Fig. upstroke 7.103C).

the of Fig. intrinsic The (described hand muscles on p. the are see brevis 791; palmaris 7.99), and thenar, adductor interossei, (Figs. lumbrical pollicis, muscles hypothenar, 7.104 7.108). to the in muscles with the in the and gripping and and the grip”) function forcefully hand, hand forearm, originate the in grip”) hand, the precision muscles that extrinsic execute thumb. occur (“precision Unlike the (“power insert in movements intrinsic mainly entirely with fingers

by hand of deep the muscles, the the are lateral branch All intrinsic thenar nerve. innervated nerve two innervated lumbrical muscles which the are for median of and of ulnar three except by the the with contribution spinal by cord intrinsic from are C8. segment a The T1 innervated muscles predominantly

and metacarpals between (Figs. attached are to interossei the The muscles 7.104 7.105). and palmar and into into each phalanx and hood of dorsal the They groups, divided interossei. into the proximal two are insert extensor interossei digit the the and interossei the of ulnar are the All the branch by innervated of nerve. deep complex the and adduct digits Collectively, abduct and by to the extension and hoods. interossei the movements flexion generated extensor contribute the

palpated (Fig. can Dorsal are hand situated the most all through the dorsal and the interossei skin muscles the intrinsic the on aspect of of of be dorsally 7.104). four shafts dorsal muscles of attached are and There (Fig. adjacent the between, interosseous metacarpal to, bones bipennate 7.104). digit. into related its base Each the muscle extensor hood inserts of phalanx proximal into of the both and the

tendons pass dorsal transverse interossei to deep The ligaments: of dorsal metacarpal the the

muscle into first finger. is the lateral dorsal side and index largest The the the inserts of interosseous

and insert middle and into interossei third finger. second sides, medial of The dorsal the the respectively, lateral

the finger. medial The fourth dorsal side ring into inserts the interosseous muscle of

extension their the joints metacarpophalangeal through ring are and extensor interossei at major and movements fingers, hoods, to flexion the addition (Table the the index, to In fingers the of generating the dorsal abductors attachments 7.15). of middle,

dorsal the the finger axis side. to has finger each long muscle on and a medially abduct laterally The of respect with interosseous middle middle consequently can and hypothenar and dorsal finger respectively, have therefore little abductors and have The thenar groups, muscle interossei. not own and the in their do thumb

the the aspect first posterolateral deep passes wrist the dorsal on the interosseous palm. of from two snuffbox it anatomical the as muscle between of side The into the artery passes of the radial heads

four) (Fig. interossei, (or dorsal metacarpals three palmar anterior from are digits unipennate of the originating is The the each are associated to which with interossei muscles the and 7.105).

first of is considered the or muscle and either pollicis The part pollicis the interosseous flexor rudimentary brevis. often palmar adductor medial the the extensor of inserts the the originates it the surface the into and hood. of and proximal base of I into thumb When from present, of palmar metacarpal phalanx side both sesamoid to bone in the attached often the base of occurs the phalanx. A tendon

from the The palmar medial the metacarpal II into hood index and second medial the surface of side extensor inserts the of originates muscle of interosseous finger.

lateral of the sides and fourth third the insert hoods. palmar the from The and metacarpals IV originate into of lateral V and respective extensor interossei surfaces

the to the dorsal of the tendons the of ligaments. tendons the metacarpal dorsal Like pass transverse palmar interossei deep interossei,

middle to long finger. with the axis The a respect ring, fingers adduct interossei thumb, index, and little palmar through the occur metacarpophalangeal at The joints. movements the produce insert also of into (Table the hoods, digits Because they extension and 7.15). extensor the the muscles movements flexion complex

large The a the muscle palm triangular (Fig. the adductor that interossei is anterior of pollicis to crosses the plane 7.106). head metacarpal an transverse adjacent capitate as head, and the It III, a from and of oblique from anterior bases shaft originates and metacarpals II heads: the of aspect two the III. of

sesamoid often bone, into to laterally both a the the into proximal contains which a base The thumb two phalanx hood. heads form of of the the converge that tendon, medial extensor and inserts the of side

form muscle palm plane the medially arch. enter the and of to The radial the and anteriorly artery passes the heads between of the deep deep palmar two

the rest adductor digits the in and thumb of powerful pollicis is of The thumb opposes to the the a adductor 7.15). gripping (Table

the movements pollicis with to (the with muscles) abductor brevis fingers associated are three and muscles opponens thenar brevis, The pollicis, thumb thumb the of and pollicis delicate of (Fig. the opposition flexor responsible the the for of the swelling the eminence) side and 7.107) prominent base of (thenar at on lateral the are thumb. palm

nerve. branch the of by thenar muscles median recurrent innervated The are the

opponens (Fig. the is other deep and the largest muscle muscles to of pollicis the two thenar The lies 7.107). the trapezium along retinaculum, the margin length adjacent Originating of metacarpal tubercle lateral adjacent palmar entire the of and flexor it from inserts lateral the of surface I. and the

metacarpal opponens and flexes pollicis rotates The

on position pads bringing I (Table pad into facing a the the of fingers trapezium, the of thumb 7.15). the so the

the pollicis and is brevis abductor (Fig. pollicis the muscle muscle The opponens brevis overlies proximal pollicis to flexor 7.107). the of thumb and the the lateral from and side and base the proximal tubercles It the trapezium the of extensor of retinaculum, originates into flexor the inserts and adjacent scaphoid from of the hood. phalanx into

brevis abducts thumb, joint. principally The metacarpophalangeal the at pollicis the abductor apparent (Table of with long proximal the when out phalanx is line is Its of moved action the bone metacarpal abducted is the the thumb 7.15). and maximally axis most

pollicis is distal The muscle brevis (Fig. brevis to abductor pollicis flexor the 7.107). have attachments the other It associated of and carpal also flexor to may bones and ligaments. it from retinaculum, adjacent but deeper tubercle originates mainly the trapezium of lateral into It side the the the base of thumb. inserts of phalanx proximal the bone. The sesamoid a contains often tendon

the the flexes of The flexor 7.15). brevis thumb joint metacarpophalangeal (Table pollicis

the contribute flexor to side the base The of little digiti of hypothenar eminence) digiti minimi, palm medial abductor at finger swelling (the the muscles opponens (hypothenar and on the (Fig. brevis) digiti minimi, minimi the 7.107). the are to thenar name muscles and muscles The in hypothenar in similar organization.

thenar nerve. branch of muscles, hypothenar by the recurrent ulnar by the deep branch not are the nerve and innervated Unlike the the muscles the median of

lies other opponens The two to muscle deep (Fig. digiti muscles minimi hypothenar the 7.107). the of of by and is penetrated branches Its deep surface inserts metacarpal the medial the and It from base originates it flexor the and from artery. adjacent of hook into the hamate margin palmar and V. retinaculum ulnar ulnar nerve the

head carpometacarpal The simple of the transverse movement minimi the (Table however, metacarpal that the which toward the to attaches joint metacarpal a opponens much and of metacarpal shape rotates the ring the of the deep V because of digiti thumb the V finger, palm; of than less that ligament, dramatic is of 7.15). presence

muscle The the (Fig. digiti minimi abductor opponens overlies digiti minimi 7.107). the the pisiform little It into the bone, ulnaris, finger extensor pisohamate of from side carpi phalanx into the and the and of inserts of flexor base medial the proximal ligament, hood. the originates and of tendon the the

The the the digiti abductor of (Table 7.15). minimi finger little is abductor principal

the (Fig. abductor minimi is brevis digiti flexor digiti The muscle minimi lateral to 7.107). medial flexor the adjacent of hamate minimi finger. base into from of and bone abductor the hook little of and the phalanx proximal side originates the digiti the the inserts It the the with of retinaculum muscle

flexor The brevis metacarpophalangeal joint. flexes digiti the minimi

with is muscles, There of lumbrical which fingers. the associated of (worm-like) each one are four The in the originate profundus muscles the digitorum tendons palm: the from flexor of

with the digitorum respectively. flexor originate and are the lumbricals associated ring the fingers, tendons fingers and little The bipennate and profundus two from ring middle medial and

flexor with index tendons lumbricals the respectively. and are associated The profundus the from originating lateral middle fingers, digitorum muscles, unipennate two

pass of lateral insert the into around and dorsally (Fig. finger, lumbricals The hood each side the extensor 7.108). metacarpal the muscles of to The are tendons anterior transverse deep ligaments. the

link because they tendons. The extensor flexor lumbricals are tendons unique with they insertion extensor hoods, into the and joints extending participate metacarpophalangeal Through in the their flexing interphalangeal the joints.

lateral branches The median nerve; are deep innervated by are by medial innervated the the lumbricals branch digital lumbricals (Table the the two 7.15). of ulnar nerve of two

the palm radial and (superficial which interconnected by form deep) arteries, the (Fig. ulnar vascular The in and supply blood is hand the to two arches 7.109). the arches the digits, joints the arteries: muscles, to originate parent and two Vessels from and

of supply the radial the and the side of lateral The index the finger. contributes to artery thumb substantially

mainly the index are finger the and side artery. the digits by supplied remaining The of ulnar medial

and ulnar the of the wrist side (Fig. ulnar The on enter nerve artery the hand medial 7.110). nerve the between to lateral the retinaculum and palmaris The pisiform and flexor and lies vessel brevis the bone. ulnar is the tendons Distally, and the flexor long forming the which artery to of the then the to across bone the arch, is superficial deep the swings digits to palm, the palmar aponeurosis. ulnar the superficial just of hook medial is hamate palmar and laterally the the arch of artery. palmar a On palm, side lateral branch with radial of communicates the the

One is artery palmar the branch of branch ulnar the hand (Figs. deep in the and just aspect the to of the hypothenar and of medial muscles. the the artery, 7.110), origin penetrates 7.109 the which pisiform, from arises distal ulnar plane to deep and artery. to arch palm the the hook It the the deep around medially with radial the anastomose of derived palmar from of hamate the access curves

the a Branches the ring sides medial the of side of artery the both the ultimately digital the supply finger, of (Fig. arch blood the of the palmar and principal large, side to palmar include: finger, three digital palmar little middle medial which fingers, side and finger superficial arteries, and common lateral the to provide little from index which 7.110); fingers. arteries arteries, arch deep they by the proper joined into the palmar before metacarpal palmar digital the enter are from palmar bifurcating

deep palm plane the passes and artery lateral by of anteriorly the penetrating hand the through snuffbox (Figs. the back radial the over The wrist the of the of floor anatomical curves the side and around into of 7.111). 7.109 and passes plane of form heads palmar the the dorsal the between access of palm interosseous then between pollicis and first deep the It the muscle heads arch. deep to two the the two adductor and of

and palm digits. the deep the bones passes arch long of metacarpal between through flexor the palmar medially The tendons the ulnar medial communicates (Figs. the branch the palmar palm, side the of On deep with it of artery the and 7.111). 7.109

metacarpal dorsal to a arch, passes dorsal enter artery, the which penetrating the small thumb. branch, arteries, three and and fingers; dorsal rise index the the medially divide carpal digital the rise become of which dorsal which metacarpal to first radial gives supplies of two to finger arteries, the adjacent wrist as artery vessels: subsequently back dorsal which carpal the sides gives Before hand, the across and

indicis radial the the from between in vessels, plane first interosseous adductor princeps and artery pollicis. the and arise artery, pollicis the Two artery radialis the dorsal the princeps is the supply the finger. blood supplies and thumb, the the index side The pollicis lateral of to artery major radialis artery indicis

dorsal perforating posteriorly which palmar digital palmar with between of rise of arteries the branches, common palmar metacarpal superficial three arteries, pass carpal the three from from dorsal the dorsal palmar and heads arch to: the origin which arch. anastomose arch; arteries the join metacarpal deep the interossei The gives to

contains in As veins. and limb, found the hand generally deep the upper superficial networks of interconnected veins arteries; follow superficial (Fig. the over The the network on venous bones the metacarpal hand of deep dorsal the back into a veins the drain 7.112).

anatomical snuffbox The the and originates cephalic the of into network dorsal forearm. from venous over vein passes lateral side the the

basilic forearm. and into venous from vein medial network dorsal the side passes the originates the The of dorsomedial of aspect the

the supplied and (Figs. radial median, nerves by hand is ulnar, The 7.113 to 7.115). three All innervation. general nerves to sensory contribute cutaneous or for except lateral the three median the nerve. the muscles muscles hand innervated nerve by two innervates which The ulnar lumbricals, and all thenar are the intrinsic of the hand. dorsolateral nerve skin on the The radial side of only innervates

to the The the and enters the to (Fig. pisiform lateral ulnar nerve ulnar hand posteromedially artery 7.113). superficial motor, pisiform, which mainly to into distal mainly the branch, is Immediately sensory. a branch, which deep a it and is divides

The with ulnar the of branch ulnar deep (Fig. deep the passes the branch of nerve artery 7.113). muscles supplies long lumbricals. reach the and aspect It the palm, of penetrates the and and digits, two deep to pollicis, to palm, the the deep across the interossei, laterally the arches of the adductor the flexors medial supplies hypothenar contributes In articular deep branches joint. the ulnar to the small addition, nerve wrist branch of the

ulnar and tendons. a tunnel of the between in lies flexor the As nerve (Guyon’s canal) the passes fibro-osseous deep palm, the hook it the of across branch the hamate this carpus motor producing and joints Occasionally, nerve symptoms. sensory compress outpouchings small the the of from within synovial canal, the of membrane (ganglia)

branch (Fig. surface the finger little and The the on and continues superficial innervates brevis the ulnar the the across of to palmaris of half skin medial the ring the finger palm palmar muscle nerve supply of 7.113).

and finger because the important nerve The skin median and most side of lateral innervates thumb, is sensory the (Fig. on hand the ring index middle it fingers, the in nerve 7.115). and gathers the about information on The finger. system, skin nervous environment this from particularly area, thumb touch, index the using the from the appropriate from enables the one-half and information using to In three sensory be addition, amount with the precision grip. of lateral fingers when force digits positioned

for the opposition responsible nerve median to of digits. thumb the other innervates The that are thenar muscles the also

palmar and nerve hand into recurrent the median (Fig. the carpal by divides The enters digital and tunnel branch a passing through branches 7.115).

recurrent of nerve muscles. thenar innervates three median branch the The the lateral and Originating margin proximally muscle. retinaculum flexor around pollicis the side flexor of the passes the of margin curves the nerve retinaculum, distal near the brevis over from of median the the it brevis in to pollicis. between and pollicis brevis flexor abductor the passes end branch then The recurrent opponens pollicis the

and digits. palmar palmar palmar palm superficial the arch the digital cross The enter the deep aponeurosis nerves and the to and of three skin cutaneous the regions the digits. over dorsal lateral the surfaces distal aspects phalanges palmar the of beds) one-half of and the digits innervate They (nail on same digital the muscles. lateral two skin, to In nerves supply the lumbrical addition

branch Superficial radial nerve the of

the that only branch The superficial nerve of radial the enters part hand is (Fig. the 7.116). snuffbox hand enters dorsolateral the of the side by the over anatomical the wrist. passing on It the they palpated the branches against “rolled” of pollicis tendon nerve or be of longus snuffbox. as the anatomical Terminal can the cross extensor

joints. and lateral the palm terminal one-half dorsolateral The the three aspect the approximately of the over aspects of superficial digits radial the distally the to branch innervates and nerve of dorsal interphalangeal skin

and in muscles, the locate Tendons, upper veins, arteries, used and major to limb landmarks nerves. bony are neurological their specific ways for Asking in upper is essential to limbs performing examinations. maneuver patients

reflexes cord test spinal are Tendons used specific associated with segments. to

of pressure and Vessels vascular are into collecting (for nutrients), clinically pulses. and pharmaceuticals for entry blood as and blood used administering taking system and points the

pass or to where or become can are in related spaces. Nerves damaged through entrapped bone they be confined regions

region muscles Bony landmarks scapular and the of posterior

of scapula of angle, patient, on border, part and The acromion. lateral palpated a be as the can inferior medial can border and the the spine not scapula and readily superior palpable. are are soft border the of The deep to tissue and angle (Fig. can infraspinatus be above and respectively and supraspinatus the palpated muscles below The spine, 7.117).

contour for the muscle superior smooth the of the of lateral The and is the responsible over of side neck trapezius the shoulder. aspect

The the inferior around joint. eminence acromion the the form glenohumeral and muscles deltoid to muscular deep surgical around the nerve deltoid neck axillary humerus of the to the muscle. posteriorly The passes

skin underlying fold much The latissimus dorsi obliquely mass arm. muscle from to the trunk the extending forms upward the posterior the of axillary muscle the axillary the posterior upper angle inferior skin fold laterally. to major this The the contributes passes and to muscle of teres humerus scapula from

contents axilla and locating and structures related Visualizing the

and using bony (Fig. and inlet can the skin landmarks established axilla be outlet palpable and axillary walls The of folds 7.118).

of entire along the anterior axillary length. margin palpated is clavicle, the can The inlet its which be medial lateral coracoid below is The inlet deltoid process, the the of is the limit the margin by of third to immediately the clavicle axillary the tip which deep of palpable and approximated lateral muscle. of the

the overlies major the fold, The is of wall anterior of muscle. the pectoralis the axillary margin anterior margin which axillary lower skin inferior

overlies and which wall of inferior medially. teres latissimus major margins muscle skin fold, dorsi margin laterally muscle the the of posterior axillary The the axillary the posterior is

thoracic serratus The is the the of part overlying wall the muscle medial axilla the upper of anterior wall. of passes and in nerve the anterior posterior position lateral out muscle down serratus to the just vertically thoracic the anterior The skin axilla the fold. a long of surface axillary

humerus. the lateral of axilla is the boundary The

axillary skin of skin and folds. between dome axilla posterior the of is the the The anterior floor

by and lymphatics vessels, travel through the passing limb axilla. trunk upper nerves, and the between the Major

components to arm axillary plexus traveling the floor. and of the lateral pass axillary that and forms axilla of vein, The skin the by the artery, dome the brachial through into can humerus. laterally This dome the palpated into skin and against placing bundle pressing a hand neurovascular be this of by

triangle and the axillary in travels between the pectoralis the in cephalic to join vein and in the cleft fascia major deep the The fascia clavipectoral superficial penetrates muscle vein. with muscle deltoid

arm in the the artery brachial Locating

brachii brachial medial arm biceps The the cleft triceps side on (Fig. the of and the brachii the between muscles artery is in 7.119). nerve posteriorly whereas nerve artery, the The from brachial in ulnar median courses deviates with the vessel the regions. distal

The triceps the tendon radial nerve of brachii and position

muscle the bony triceps readily mass The humerus, to of soft (Fig. tissue palpable ulna, brachii inserts tendon posterior is “tip” forms the at protuberance the elbow the and the and onto olecranon forms of which the the the 7.120).

also aspect muscular bulge on brachioradialis the arm. lateral visible is as of the a muscle The the pronated, is prominent when It at half the is and viewed elbow particularly resistance, forearm anteriorly. against flexed

the emerges to humerus behind to brachioradialis arm the the deep radial lie The from in nerve muscle. distal

elbow biceps brachial median the and cubital nerve the joint lies contains (Fig. artery, fossa the The the to tendon, and brachii anterior 7.121).

The epicondyles medial line the an is lateral the readily cubital humerus. palpable of base fossa between imaginary and the of pronator are teres medial brachioradialis respectively. formed borders by and and the lateral The muscles, asking resistance. subject the The forearm against margin brachioradialis to of be semipronated flex the a by found can the oblique the the length epicondyle The surface of of the midpoint and by the between can line pronator forearm. along medial the margin an lateral of estimated extending teres be the meets muscle. where the is this of cubital margin apex of the The brachioradialis fossa approximate line

of fossa, brachial tendon nerve. biceps to and artery, the Contents the medial, the brachii, are cubital of from the the median lateral The of easily biceps tendon is brachii the palpable. Often the the cephalic, cubital the subcutaneous median fascia basilic, cubital overlying veins visible are and in fossa.

bone. “rolled” the humerus epicondyle passes medial behind be and here the nerve against can the The ulnar of

brachioradialis the to of muscle the The travels joint. to nerve radial elbow deep margin anterior into forearm the the

the forearm in and vessels major locating Identifying distal nerves and tendons

used forearm are the from that the distal into to readily locate hand the visible and forearm and Tendons as pass nerves. be can in landmarks major vessels

tendons radialis, flexor be palpating the by a wrist carpi asking patient aspect to resistance. easily flexor muscles distal of longus the anterior can by forearm, In the either the and flex carpi or the ulnaris, of located against palmaris

the flexor line distal middle of tendon is junction forearm. approximately of drawn The located and lateral at carpi the imaginary across thirds transversely an the radialis between this immediately and a this used lateral radial site to is for radial taking pulse tendon artery (Fig. is The 7.122A).

inserts the and margin following also to hypothenar easily the the can of medial carpi ulnaris of hand. the pisiform, tendon along the of of eminence palpated be which palpated is flexor base The the by forearm tendon the the on and and under ulnar through hand the lateral pisiform. into the lateral tendon and ulnaris travel to The forearm the lip the artery carpi of distal flexor nerve ulnar the

prominent is tendon to against be is longus may medial palmaris tendon wrist carpi but when radialis flexor particularly present, the resistance. flexed absent, lies and when The the nerve medial is lies flexor the tendon the The median longus radialis also carpi under palmaris tendon. to and

The to deep the the the flexors median digits tendons are hand the nerve of long of wrist. and the long between of extending Their visualized position and medial rapidly fingers from the lateral. flexing by be can and to repeatedly

the the distal and (Fig. digitorum In wrist, extensor of tendons posterior forearm the the middle, ring, midline radiate 7.122B) from are little index, fingers wrist. into the the and and in

radialis carpi longus extensor the of the of ends The tendons the distal and of side (Fig. wrist the muscles brevis are on lateral tight be and fist wrist accentuated a resistance. against extending the and can by making 7.122C)

felt of distal the tendon carpi the medial be between far and wrist. wrist the the ulna the extensor side ulnaris the end can The of of on

Hyperextension of snuffbox the anatomical the (Fig. reveals abduction and thumb 7.122D). the thumb. tubercle swings extensor then medial longus, around of which into margin the of the the radius tendon is dorsal pollicis of this The the travels triangular and area brevis tendons longus. by margin of the the pollicis abductor lateral pollicis formed The extensor and is palm of aspect the access hand. to radial first muscle passes snuffbox the laterally the artery dorsal hand when penetrate wrist the the through the anatomical base and deep the the around reach of back to The of interosseous traveling the of felt the relaxed the the floor The the wrist. of radial can of anatomical artery in in pulse be snuffbox roof the the the crosses tendon radial anatomical The be vein by finger and cutaneous nerve of the along snuffbox, longus moving felt branches and cephalic of a forth extensor of can back pollicis the muscle.

of appearance hand Normal the

the have appearance. position, In palm characteristic a resting the of hand the digits and flexed the finger flexed fingers least most the and the index form flexed finger (Fig. arcade, a the The with little 7.123A). the positioned pad a thumb The to the at of is 90° fingers. angle the of pads

thumb base muscles. underlying occurs and the eminence thenar of A formed thenar by is at the the of along base similar the A the the hypothenar occurs finger. little the medial palm at eminence of margin of the are compromised. when The hypothenar median the thenar fingers change appearance nerves of positions eminences, and ulnar and the the and

(Fig. the venous upper limb superficial Major the begin hand in network from veins dorsal a of the metacarpals. which 7.123B), overlies the cephalic the The vein originates of side. from medial basilic side originates vein the the network lateral from and

recurrent of the Position median branch flexor and the the of retinaculum nerve

two retinaculum determined landmarks. of using the can flexor proximal bony The margin be

flexor the at pisiform The readily carpi the ulnaris palpable end distal of tendon. bone is

at as end the can tubercle the be enters the of (Fig. carpi The palpated distal flexor of it radialis scaphoid wrist tendon the 7.124).

flexor retinaculum. marks between these margin proximal the the two line imaginary points of An deep eminence the hypothenar the eminence The the palm. of the the base thenar meets where of the margin near point of to margin anterior approximately is retinaculum the distal flexor

deep nerve the of fascia thenar skin the palm. of margin branch eminence the recurrent midline anterior the lies and the median to overlying of deep near The the

function the the median Motor ulnar in and of hand nerves

joints ability (Fig. joints intrinsic extending flex while time fingers dependent at The the the the of hand the interphalangeal muscles entirely the same the to is on metacarpophalangeal of 7.125A). by the cord of spinal muscles level (C8)T1. which are ulnar from These innervated the branch nerve, carries mainly fibers deep

placed between them the level spinal cord fingers palmar ulnar Adducting from by is branch fibers object the innervated to (C8)T1. which of interossei the nerve muscles, an carrying deep by caused grasp are the

the C8(T1). of fingers which thenar pad the innervated thumb of cord normal ability muscles, by carrying to an depends the functioning level from of The of fibers recurrent and the the median grasp pad on are the nerve object the spinal of branch between one

the of palmar arches Visualizing and the deep superficial positions

positions muscle (Fig. the and eminences, deep can arches in skin bony superficial hand using be the and The landmarks, visualized palmar creases of 7.126).

the wrist. a to which The pisiform begins arch the the artery, lies continuation palmar at bone lateral as ulnar superficial of hand. to the across curves the laterally flexor tendons in palm the arch The anterior long the high crosses palm distal the The and artery as of in a transverse proximal by forearm. of the reaches crease thenar the the joining radial variable terminates size, laterally vessel as skin arch which eminence from

of flexor palm the and side lateral I deep between tendons palmar ends the II. arch long originates deep proximal The and of the the on metacarpals to passes which medially hook the across deep arches terminates the of and branch of by muscles joining artery, and and ulnar base pisiform between the hamate. the the palm It the of hypothenar through the hand transverse the arch distal of and deep The the palm. crease proximal skin one-half palmar and superficial between approximately the the more than is lies arch distance crease the the wrist in palmar of proximal

(Fig. can locations at six felt be pulses in the upper Peripheral limb 7.127).

Axillary the axilla. of in axilla dome the the floor axillary of to skin pulse: covering lateral apex artery the of the

the brachial pulse the cleft between artery Brachial and brachii triceps midarm: the biceps muscles. arm brachii of on in in the side medial is is This position where blood cuff a pressure placed. the

the the in brachii Brachial of artery to medial cubital biceps tendon brachial pulse fossa: muscle. the reading. pulse when taking is position blood stethoscope a a where This placed to is pressure of hear the vessel the the

artery muscle. the immediately flexor in radialis distal pulse of forearm: carpi the lateral radial to Radial the tendon site is the This for common most pulse.” “taking a

to distal immediately Ulnar flexor pisiform. tendon pulse forearm: ulnar the the under carpi lateral the in the and proximal of ulnaris margin artery

muscle as the the the of of snuffbox: brevis anatomical extensor wrist in muscles. extensor of longus the longus and tendon tendons the between it crosses pollicis the radial and side lateral Radial pulse the artery pollicis pollicis abductor

Fig. 7.1 limb. Upper view of the A. upper limb. Anterior B. the of Superior view shoulder.

process IAxillaScapulaManubriumof vertebra sternumClavicle jointArmElbow of jointForearmWrist Spinous TINeckShoulderGlenohumeral jointHandBAThoracic wallRib IRib

Fig. limb. upper 7.2 the Areas of transition in

Fig. the 7.3 of scapula. Movements Rotation. A. retraction. and Protraction B.

Fig. joint. of glenohumeral 7.4 Movements arm the the at

Fig. Movements 7.5 of forearm. the at and the A. Flexion joint. extension elbow Pronation and B. supination.

Fig. the hand wrist of the Movements joint. 7.6 at

Fig. limb. 7.7 Bones the upper of

Fig. (A) and joints. (B) of interphalangeal the metacarpophalangeal Movements 7.8

Fig. Muscles shoulder. of 7.9 the A. shoulder. Posterior shoulder. Anterior B. cuff muscles. Rotator C.

scapulaeRhomboid majorLatissimus SupraspinatusSubscapularisHumerusAcromionSpine major minorCoracoid of scapulaInfraspinatusTeres minorRhomboid majorTeres dorsiABCTrapeziusLatissimus dorsiLevator processTrapeziusDeltoidPectoralis

Fig. forearm. in arm and 7.10 Muscle the components

Fig. the 7.11 to the Relationship of neck. limb upper

margin scapulaNerves limbLateral margin ofcoracoid processHumerusAxillary veinAxillaMedial of to Axillary rib margin of I arteryAxillary upper inletSuperior

Fig. Muscles 7.12 and back of thoracic wall. the

Fig. 7.13 Breast.

Fig. upper of 7.14 the Innervation limb.

plexus nerve(C5 to C8,T1)Median C8, C8,T1)Ulnar nerve(C5 ramiNervesMusculocutaneous Anterior to C7)Radial T1)C5C6C7C8T1Brachial nerve(C6 nerve(C[7], to

Fig. limb. and Dermatomes myotomes 7.15 in upper the Dermatomes. A. B. Movements produced myotomes. by

and T1T1T1T2T2C6C6C6C5C5C5C4C4C3C3C8C8C8C7C7C7AAbduction digitsC8BC(6)7(8) armC5Flexion digitsT1Flexion elbowC(5)6Adduction of of abduction of of

Fig. Nerves of limb. 7.16 upper A. nerves Major forearm. the arm and in peripheral Anterior and by areas major the B. nerves of arm skin posterior forearm. and in innervated

lateral nerve• carpi nerve• Superior nerve• branchAnteriorT1T2 forearmUlnar cutaneous of Thenar Superficial and in Posterior forearmRadial medial arm• forearmMusculocutaneous cutaneous flexor nerve• nerve cutaneous and in of of Most compartment forearmMusculocutaneous intrinsic cutaneous nerve in in in nerveMedian cutaneous muscles nerve• ulnaris nerve of nerveRadial armMusculocutaneous nerve All lateral half nerve• cutaneous anterior of lateral arm• forearmRadial Lateral nerveRadial of nerve of branchPosteriorT1T2Ulnar handABUlnar muscles armAxillary Radial of nerve• muscles compartment nerve cutaneous nerve• digitorum in • flexors of cutaneous armAxillary nerve Superior lateral nerve Inferior forearm• nerve arm Lateral nerve• Inferior nerve• of armMedian profundus of Posterior nerve• Most nerveMedian hand• Flexor posterior Superficial muscles All

Fig. 7.17 Nerves related to humerus. the

epicondyle of of nerveUlnar nerveRadial groove neck humerusSurgical nerveAxillary humerusMedial Radial

Fig. the Veins limb. superficial in 7.18 of upper fascia is yellow. area cubital shown fossa the in The of

handBasilic of veinCubital cubital veinDorsal network triangleClavicleCephalic veinPectoralis venous Clavipectoral fossaDeltoid majorBasilic veinCephalic brachiiAxillary veinBiceps veinMedian

Fig. C. to thumb. 7.19 Movements the of A

Fig. clavicle. 7.20 Right

viewConoid manubrium cartilageTrapezoid acromionAnterior with tubercle for articulationwith andfirst articulation viewSurface for sternum lineInferior LateralMedialSuperior tubercleConoid costal of viewSurface

Fig. 7.21 Scapula. Posterior of A. scapula. right view Anterior view B. costal of surface. C. view. Lateral

borderSubscapular cavityInfraglenoid for angleLateral borderAnterior surface clavicleCoracoidprocessSuperior view notch)InfraspinousfossaSpine processPosterior surface clavicleCoracoid for viewCMedial fossaAcromionGlenoid notch scapulaSuperior tubercleInferior angleMedial tubercleSuperior borderInfraglenoid angleInferior processGlenoid cavityInfraglenoid tubercleSupraspinousfossaSuprascapular borderSuperior angleAAcromionSupraglenoid of spinoglenoid borderSpinous angleCoracoid of scapular borderSuperior viewAcromionGlenoid tubercleInferior (or angleArticular scapulaB processLateral notchGreater Articular borderLateral cavityLateral

Fig. of right humerus. end 7.22 Proximal

tubercle(subscapularis)Lateral greater and facet(teres on teresmajor, latissimusdorsi, respectively)Deltoid tubercle(supraspinatus)GreatertubercleIntertubercularsulcusIntertubercularsulcusLesser pectoralis lip, tuberosity(deltoid)Deltoid facet lip facet(infraspinatus)Inferior majorAttachment medial tuberosity(deltoid)Anatomical ofintertubercularsulcus viewAnterior HeadSuperior neckLateral (pectoralismajor, viewAttachmentfor neckSurgical floor,and facet(supraspinatus)Middle neckAnatomicalneckPosterior forcoracobrachialisGreatertubercleSuperior minor)Surgical view

Fig. Sternoclavicular 7.23 joint. A. and Bones ligaments.

Volume-rendered multidetector reconstruction computed B. tomography. using

of notchAnteriorsternoclavicularligamentManubrium IIManubriumof CostoclavicularligamentInterclavicularligamentClavicular expose TIILeft clavicleSternalangleRib costalcartilageRib joint)Attachment and IRib anteriorlyto IIFirst angleArticular sternumAB rib ofsternumSternal ligamentsremoved body IVertebral disc(capsule sitefor

Fig. 7.24 Right acromioclavicular joint.

Fig. Glenohumeral joint. 7.25 glenohumeral right joint. Articular A. of surfaces glenohumeral Radiograph B. joint. normal a of

bicepsbrachii labrumTransverse of of cavityABGlenoid humerusHead Tendon cavityHead longhead muscleGlenoid ligamentClavicleAcromionGlenoid of humeral ofhumerus

Fig. and glenohumeral joint. capsule Synovial of right 7.26 joint membrane

head Synovial in synovial of tendonCoracohumeralligamentLong membrane of membraneRedundant biceps head of subscapularisLong sheathSynovial brachii membrane brachiitendonFibrous bursa adductionSubtendinous capsule of joint biceps

Fig. of glenohumeral Capsule right joint. 7.27

ligamentTransversehumeral glenohumeral Superior glenohumeral ligamentSynovialsheathTendon of ligamentInferiorglenohumeralligamentCoracohumeral capsuleAperture for bicepsbrachiiRedundant headof ligamentMiddle subtendinousbursa subscapularis oflong

Fig. surrounding and proximal joint view right removed. glenohumeral 7.28 of with Lateral muscles end humerus of

minorTeres ligamentGlenoid tricepsbrachiiShort subscapularisLong brachii membraneSubtendinous SupraspinatusInfraspinatusTeres head head head majorGlenoid tendonLong biceps coracobrachialisLatissimus cavitySubacromial bursa of Fibrous membraneSubscapularisDeltoidAcromionCoracoid majorSynovial processCoraco-acromial of (subdeltoid) of brachiiand bursaof labrum biceps dorsiPectoralis

Fig. (T1-weighted) in joint resonance image normal the glenohumeral a Magnetic 7.29 sagittal plane. of

humerusCoracoid minorHead of processSubscapularis SupraspinatusInfraspinatusPosteriorAnteriorClavicleAcromionTeres

Fig. middle an third oblique of the 7.30 of right the There clavicle. fracture is

of joint Fracture clavicleAcromioclavicular

Fig. 7.31 of acromioclavicular Radiographs joints. A. acromioclavicular Normal joint. right B. right (shoulder Dislocated separation). joint acromioclavicular

humerusClavicleAcromionHumerusAB Head Acromioclavicular jointAcromionClavicle of

Fig. an dislocation the of Radiograph anteroinferior 7.32 shoulder showing joint.

AcromionGlenoid cavityClavicleHead humerus of

Fig. tubercle the inserts resonance supraspinatus tear the tendon image as the of of it Magnetic 7.33 humerus. onto full-thickness greater a of

Fig. of showing needle placement 7.34 Ultrasound shoulder bursa. into the subdeltoid/subacromial

of bursa humerusNeedleSubacromial-subdeltoid DeltoidHead

Fig. of view deltoid and muscles. trapezius 7.35 Lateral

of of AcromionSpine tuberosity humerusClavicle thescapulaTrapeziusDeltoidDeltoid

Fig. of muscles. and deltoid supply the neurovascular and Attachments trapezius 7.36

scapulaeAxillary attachment circumflex attachment (XI)Levator scapulaTrapeziusDeltoidDeltoid of minorRhomboid arteryLine AcromionSpine deltoid of nuchal processLigamentum trapeziusLine to humeral processes tuberosity of occipitalprotuberanceMastoid nuchaeSpinous ligaments of interspinous humerusRhomboid TXIIAccessory nerve nervePosterior of of majorClavicleSuperior and lineExternal

Fig. posterior scapular 7.37 region. Right

SupraspinatusInfraspinatusCut intervalTriangular edge minorQuadrangular edge head spaceCut intertubercular of of deltoidSurgical lateral of trapeziusCut triceps humerusMedial neck lip sulcusTriangular brachiiTeres triceps of notch edge of majorTeres Suprascapular of (foramen) head brachii spaceOlecranonLong of

Fig. region. and the Arteries associated 7.38 gateways posterior in scapular nerves with

arteryRadial deltoidTo nerveSuprascapular humeral arterySuperior nerveTo lateral scapular Posterior of part on edge of lateral nerveProfunda ligamentSuprascapular arteryCircumflex arteryAxillary triceps scapular brachii of circumflex brachii transverse skin deltoidCut head

Fig. the around 7.39 Arterial anastomoses shoulder.

arterySuprascapular branch arteryProfunda carotid arteryAxillary arteryTransverse of circumflexhumeral common arteryAnterior transversecervical subclavian arterySubscapular arteryRib trunk arteryRight ClaviclePosterior circumflexhumeral arteryDeep scapular IRight cervical brachii arteryThyrocervical arteryCircumflex arteryBrachial

Fig. Axilla. 7.40 A. Walls neck arm. between transition and and

Axilla. B. Boundaries. with C. arm. the Continuity

IA wallAnterior scalene Lateral muscleClavicleLateral processAnterior of wallCoracoid rib margin muscleMiddle wallPosterior scalene wallSkinMedial

and wall• Pectoralis Superior on sheathsurroundingarteries, Lateral armSkin Subclavius teres and wall• scapula fasciaMedial and head Opens Skin lymphaticsApex coracoid of wall• of floor inletInletAxillaSkin Clavicle• laterally Upper axillaPosterior armpit• Intertubercular latissimus margin triceps muscle• muscleLateral thoracic and into • wall of Serratus • margin major, I• major brachii nerves, muscles, muscleFloor armBC minor Axillary to anterior dorsi Subscapularis, of of processAnterior Clavipectoral veins, sulcusInlet• muscles• rib of wall• long of

Fig. 7.41 muscle. major Pectoralis

Fig. muscles and subclavius fascia. and minor Pectoralis clavipectoral 7.42

Pectoralis pectoral of pectoralnervesPectoral thoraco-acromial minorClavipectoral fasciato floor nerveMedial of of arterySubclaviusAttachment fasciaCephalic majorPectoralis veinLateral axilla branch majorPectoralis

Fig. wall 7.43 of the Medial axilla. view. A. Lateral retracted B. Lateral view of lateral scapula posteriorly. with angle C. Anterior view.

IIIIIIIVVVIVIILong ofscapula anteriorSerratus wallIntercostobrachial thoracic pulledposterolaterallyaway thethoracic T2)Serratus angle from cutaneousbranch nerve anteriorABC of nerveLateral nerveLong thoracic (lateral anteriorSerratus

Fig. 7.44 Lateral wall the axilla. of

Fig. Posterior the wall of axilla. 7.45

foramen• majorLatissimus brachiiSubscapularisSuprascapular scapular Teres nerve • dorsiLong artery triceps Radial circumflex Suprascapular Posterior interval of head • vein • Profunda humeral nerveTriangular arteryQuadrangular arteryTriangular nerve • Circumflex • space and brachii Axillary space

Fig. Magnetic or joint 7.46 horizontal the in image resonance of the plane. glenohumeral transverse

labrumTeres in tendon musclesHead Glenoid cavityBiceps of sulcusSubscapularisGlenoid and minor intertubercular humerusAnteriorPosterior infraspinatus

Fig. the of 7.47 Floor axilla.

onfloor of fold of skin axillaryskin axillary Axillary skin sheathArmDome axillaAnterior foldPosterior

Fig. of the Contents muscles. axilla: 7.48

biceps biceps humeral brachiiShort biceps aponeurosisTransverse brachiiTendon brachiiCoracobrachialisBicipital Long of of head ligament of head

Fig. Contents artery. the of axillary 7.49 the axilla:

margin Lower teres arteryAxillary majorPectoralis partBrachial part3rd minorLateral rib artery1st part2nd of border ISubclaviusSubclavian of artery

Fig. artery. the of 7.50 axillary Branches

thoracic arteryLateral dorsiTeres circumflex brachiiThoraco-acromial space)Anterior circumflex humeral Posterior arterySubscapularisSuperior triceps interval)Long artery(triangular thoracic scapular arteryProfunda major arterySubclaviusPectoralis humeral head arteryLatissimus branch(triangular artery(quadrangular brachii space)Thoracodorsal of minorSubscapular arteryCircumflex

Fig. Axillary vein. 7.51

Fig. plexus. Brachial 7.52 A. the and Major components axilla. neck in showing the plexus. brachial B. of Schematic parts

cervical posterior)Cords (anterior (superior, ramuscommunicansRoots (medial, sympathetic middle, rami)C5C6C7C8T1SuperiorMiddleInferiorLateralPosteriorPosteriorPosteriorPosteriorMedialAnteriorAnteriorAnterior sympathetic T1)Trunks lateral, of TerminalnervesCordsDivisionsTrunksRoots(anterior Arrangedaround muscleAnterior scalene scalene inferior)Divisions cervical 2nd (anterior, tendonA of axillary to sympathetic part ganglionMiddle ganglionInferior ganglionGray posterior)C8C7C6C5T1Middle cervical C5 rami arteryBSuperior

Fig. Brachial 7.53 plexus. brachial the of branches plexus. showing A. Schematic B. Relationships to the axillary artery.

thoracic forearmMusculocutaneousMedianRadialUlnarAxillaryLong cutaneous nerveSecond scapular phrenic nerve cutaneous of cutaneous nervesCordsDivisionsTrunksRoots nerveC5C6C7C8T1T2Suprascapular nerve cordLateral pectoral ALateral cutaneous subclaviusB nerveC7 (anterior nerveMedial subscapular to (lateral branch armMedial axillary rami)C5C6C7C8T1SuperiorMiddleInferiorLateralPosteriorPosteriorPosteriorPosteriorMedialAnteriorAnteriorAnterior nerve nerveThoracodorsal cutaneous of cordMedial of thoracicnerveSuprascapular subclaviusSuperiorsubscapular nerveThoracodorsal cordPosterior scapular pectoral nerveNerve of to subscapular nerveMedial to nerve pectoral nerveContribution nerveSuperior nerveMedian Terminal nerveDorsal T2)Nerve subscapular of nerveMedial nerveInferior of nerveDorsal pectoral nerve nerveAxillary nerveMedial part forearmLong arteryMusculocutaneous fibersRadial nerveInferior nerveUlnar nerveIntercostobrachial armMedial nerveLateral

Fig. plexus. Branches 7.54 roots of trunks of the the and brachial

to to muscleAnterior foramenSuprascapular intercostal scalene tendonT1 nervePhrenic arteryLong nerveC5 anteriorSuprascapular Dorsal thoracic nerveMiddle veinNerve branch scapular scalene subclaviusAxillary nerveSubclavian phrenic nerve nerveSerratus

Fig. cords of medial Branches plexus. of 7.55 and lateral the the brachial

cutaneousnerve minorT1 Lateral nerveMedian nerveMedial nerveLateral pectoral nerve nerve pectoral forearmMedial of cutaneous cordPectoralis cordMedial cutaneous nerve arteryMusculocutaneous intercostal of of nerveUlnar armLateral nerveAxillary armMedial

Fig. of the brachial Branches cord 7.56 posterior the of plexus.

nerveThoracodorsal Axillary nerveSuperior nervePosterior subscapular arm nerveInferior nerveRadial subscapular of cutaneousnerve

Fig. 7.57 nodes Lymph in vessels axilla. the and

centrolateral limbSome nodesApical upper nodesAnterior of nodesCentral part nodesSubscapular nodesInfraclavicular subclavian wall and trunkSuperior mammary nodesPectoral body Humeral gland mammary part of of limbAnterolateral of scaleneMost upper glandRight

Fig. of breast. Axillary process the 7.58

Fig. 7.59 Arm. relationships. A. and distal Proximal through section the middle the arm. Transverse B. of

compartmentPosterior (flexor) septumMedial compartmentDeep intermuscular fasciaForearmABArmLine AxillaCubitalfossaLateral section of (extensor) septumHumerusAnterior intermuscular

Fig. Humerus. 7.60 Posterior view.

Fig. Distal end of the humerus. 7.61

Fig. radius. A. end the the view proximal Anterior 7.62 of of elbow (anteroposterior joint Radiograph the of view). B.

epicondyleRadiusHead tuberosityNeckLateralMedialA lineHeadRadial epicondyleMedial of BTrochleaCapitulumLateral radiusHumerusUlnaOblique

Fig. end and views 7.63 Lateral, medial, ulna. posterior the of proximal A. the of anterior,

Radiograph elbow the of joint view). (lateral B.

Fig. biceps muscles. and brachialis brachii, Coracobrachialis, 7.64

head ligamentBrachialis (cut muscleShort ulnaBicipital head aponeurosis tuberosity )Radial bicepsbrachii muscleCoracobrachialis Long of of muscleTransverse muscleTuberosity humeral bicepsbrachii of

Fig. Triceps 7.65 muscle.

brachiiRadial triceps OlecranonLong of brachiiLateral head of of groove head head of humerus triceps brachiiLateral brachiiMedial triceps of head triceps

Fig. artery. Brachial 7.66 A. In context.

artery. Brachial B. Branches.

Fig. of the 7.67 arm. Veins

Axillary veinCoracobrachialisInferior teres veinBiceps superficial veinsBasilic penetratesdeep of veins brachial vein)Basilic majorPaired accompanying (subcutaneous brachii margin veinBrachialisBasilic fasciaDeep vein arteriesCephalic vein

Fig. Musculocutaneous, and in arm. nerves the ulnar median, 7.68

Median intermuscular nerveMedial nerveMedial nerveMedial of cordLateral epicondyleLateral cordRadial forearmMusculocutaneous cutaneous nerve nerveUlnar septum nerveMusculocutaneous

Fig. the arm. nerve in Radial 7.69

radial lateral intervalInferior cutaneous of triceps Ulnar of groove)Medial arteryTriangular cutaneous nerve forearmRadial medial brachii nerve nerveProfunda head to armPosterior nerve brachii epicondyleBranch of (in

Fig. demonstrating humerus the radial disrupt which Radiograph 7.70 nerve. a fracture, may of midshaft the

Fig. Components movements and the 7.71 of joint. elbow A. surfaces. Bones joint and and B. extension. Flexion supination. C. Pronation and elbow view). normal of Radiograph D. a joint (anteroposterior

Fig. joint of 7.72 elbow (anterior membrane view). Synovial

Fig. 7.73 Elbow joint. A. capsule of joint. Joint ligaments and elbow right the B. Magnetic image in resonance coronal the of the plane. elbow joint

ligamentHead of RadialcollateralligamentAUlnarcollateralligamentAnular radiusHumerusMedial collateral epicondyleUlna synovialmembraneBUlnar collateralligamentRadial recessof ligamentof radiusSacciform

Fig. elbow fracture involving showing an Radiograph the and a brachii muscle. the the triceps insertion olecranon of 7.74 of of

Fig. 7.75 elbow of joint Radiographs development. A. age 2 years. At B. 5 At age years. 5–6 At C. years. age age D. At 12 years.

Fig. medial of ulnar swelling epicondyle, the to nerve compression. showing the 7.76 posterior nerve the of in tunnel right MRI consistent with elbow cubital

Fig. 7.77 Cubital fossa. A. Margins. B. Contents. the Position C. of nerve. radial D. structures. Superficial

(median)Ulnar nerveBasilic (brachial)Nerve of brachii)Biceps teres(ulnar extensorsLine nerveSupinatorSuperficial cubitalveinUlnar radial teres flexorsBrachioradialisBrachialisRadial (biceps forearmForearm back nerveRadial nerve nerveRadial head)Pronator nerveCephalic arteryPronator radial fossaMedialepicondyleLateralepicondyleTendon medialepicondylesForearm veinMusculocutaneous branchof teres brachiiABCDPronator nerveMedian veinBasilic of head)Median nerveTendon veinMedial forearmLateral branch Ulnar cutaneousnerve cutaneousnerve (biceps)Artery arteryTriceps arteryUlnar and nerveRadial arteryUlnar betweenlateral )Deep nerveMedian (humeral of Artery(brachial)Nerve(median)BicipitalaponeurosisMedial nerveBrachioradialis(pulled brachiiRadial intermuscularseptumCubital

Fig. Digital radiocephalic subtraction surgically a fistula. 7.78 demonstrating forearm created angiograms of

view. Anteroposterior A. B. Lateral view.

Fig. 7.79 Forearm. of and forearm. relationships A. the Proximal distal of B. middle section the the forearm. through Transverse

jointForearmWrist fasciaBALateral digitsBiceps compartmentInterosseous arteryMedian tunnelUlnaMedian of tendonBrachial nerveLong nerveUlnaRadiusRadiusPosteriorcompartmentDeep intermuscular membraneArmElbow Cubital flexortendons jointHand septumAnterior fossaCarpal

Fig. 7.80 Radius. distal radius. of and Shaft the end right A. the of forearm B. view). (anteroposterior Radiograph

Fig. of right ulna. end distal and Shaft 7.81

of processRougheningfor border(sharp)Anterior borderPosterior attachmentof view surfaceInterosseousborderMedialsurfaceAnterior AnteriorsurfaceAnterior ulnaCoronoidprocessRadial pronator styloid ofarticular border(rounded)Posterior surfaceUlnar notchOlecranonAnterior quadratusAttachment discInterosseousborderTrochlearnotchTuberosity viewDistal

Fig. the interosseous Distal radio-ulnar and 7.82 membrane. joint

Fig. and supination. Pronation 7.83

teresand andbiceps movement pronatorquadratuscontractSupinator brachiicontractPronator of brachiiPronator teresPronator PronatedSupinatedSupinatorBiceps quadratusSupinatedAxis

Fig. of ulna the the end Abduction by pronation. anconeus the distal during of 7.84

Abduction anconeusduring of of movementwith abduction pronationAxis ofulna ulnaAnconeus by

Fig. Superficial layer forearm muscles. of 7.85 (flexor not A. Superficial muscles shown). retinaculum carpi ulnaris muscle. B. Flexor

head nerveUlnar radialisPalmaris teresHumeral head ofpronator Palmar head hamate arteryRadial Median (cut ligamentPisiformUlnar arteryPronator ofpronator carpi teres )Pisohamate offlexor offlexor carpi longusFlexor aponeurosisPisometacarpal nerveBrachial carpi ulnarisUlnar nerveFlexor head ulnaris arteryUlnar ligamentHook carpi of teresUlnar ulnarisABHumeral

Fig. 7.86 forearm Intermediate of layer muscles.

Median digitorumsuperficialisUlnar retinaculumHumero-ulnarhead flexordigitorumsuperficialisMedian arteryRadial arteryFlexor flexordigitorumsuperficialisUlnar nerve of of nerveFlexor head nerve Ulnar

Fig. of layer forearm muscles. 7.87 Deep

Fig. compartment the anterior of Arteries of forearm. 7.88 the

Fig. forearm. of anterior 7.89 Nerves

Fig. the 7.90 in of muscles Superficial layer compartment posterior forearm. the of (anterior Brachioradialis A. muscle view). (posterior B. view). Superficial muscles

Fig. of posterior the in forearm. 7.91 muscles the layer Deep compartment of

Fig. Posterior posterior artery forearm. 7.92 radial nerve and interosseous in compartment of

nerve(continuation membraneSuperficial view ofradial nerve)Commoninterosseous branchRadial branchDeep arteryInterosseous radialis nerveBranch brevisBranch extensorcarpi arteryPosteriorinterosseous viewPosterior extensorcarpi arteryAnterior arteryPosteriorinterosseous to to longusAnteriorinterosseous ofdeep tobrachioradialisBranch branch Posteriorinterosseous radialis arteryAnteriorinterosseous arteryUlnar

Fig. Right hand. 7.93 are in normal The in resting flexed. they which are shown a arcade fingers the position, straight and are anatomical digits adducted. In the

skin creaseMetacarpalsDigits Carpal ofthe handAdductionAdductionAbductionAbductionMiddle creaseDistal bonesThumbLittleRingIndexFingersRadiusWrist skin jointUlnaProximal

Fig. Right and 7.94 hand joint. wrist A. Bones.

hand Right joint. and wrist wrist Radiograph joint normal and of (anteroposterior hand view). B. a a wrist C. plane. the normal coronal of joint in Magnetic image resonance

scaphoidTubercle bonesCapitateCapitateTrapeziumTrapeziumProximalMiddleDistalProximalCarpal of archDistalTubercle archCarpal jointIIIIIIIVVScaphoidTrapezoidLunateUlnaTriquetrumTriquetrumPisiformPisiformHook RadiusWrist of ofhamateHamateHamatePhalangesAMetacarpalsCarpal trapeziumTrapezoidTubercle bonesCarpal

Fig. hand. ligaments, transverse right Deep 7.95 metacarpal

Fig. Wrist radiographs 7.96 (posteroanterior view). A. Normal. Scaphoid B. fracture.

Fig. 7.97 sclerosis disease). the avascular Radiograph lunate consistent of (Kienbock’s necrosis in showing with wrist

Fig. tunnel. 7.98 Carpal A. relations. Structure and B. wrist normal the of resonance in plane. a image axial Magnetic the resonance a plane. in of wrist coronal C. normal image Magnetic

Fig. 7.99 Palmar hand. right aponeurosis,

Fig. left snuffbox, Anatomical hand. 7.100

Fig. of right the and sheaths Fibrous hand. sheaths 7.101 synovial digital

Fig. compartment, MRI with first 7.102 wrist tenosynovitis. De the inflammation with associated the and Quervain’s of showing extensor fluid consistent

Fig. Extensor hood. 7.103 B. A and hand. finger, left Middle hoods Function muscles. of C. intrinsic extensor and

of Extensor jointsFlexion digitorumprofundus fingerFulcrums jointsExtension ofinterphalangeal ligamentMiddle andinterossei muscles)Deep ligamentLumbrical jointABCContraction ofinterphalangeal ofmetacarpophalangeal interosseousmuscleFlexor muscle jointExtendedFlexedUpstrokePalmar tendonDorsal hoodExtensordigitorum (lumbricals ofmetacarpophalangeal transversemetacarpal intrinsicmuscles tendonFulcrum

Fig. view), 7.104 hand. (palmar right Dorsal interossei

Fig. hand. 7.105 (palmar interossei view), right Palmar

or flexorpollicis brevis)Insertion palmarinterosseous(rudimentary: AdductionAdductionFirst adductorpollicis intodorsal ofeither whenpresent part oftenconsidered is expansion

Fig. hand. right Adductor pollicis, 7.106

of pollicisRadial of head arch)Sesamoid head palmar pollicisTransverse artery(deep adductor Oblique adductor bone

Fig. Thenar right hypothenar and 7.107 hand. muscles,

palmarinterosseous pollicis pollicis nerveRecurrent lateral extensor and brevisThree brevis nerveAdductor into Flexor brevis minimiAbductor insert and brevisDeep musclesThree median brevis musclesOpponens minimiFlexor carpi and retinaculumMedian hypothenar artery side digiti pollicis ofulnar branch hoodFlexor hoodFlexor insert of abductorpollicis digiti of first extensor ulnarisOpponens pollicisAbductor nerveFlexor minimi branch hoodExtensor into thenar medialside pollicis digiti of

Fig. hand. 7.108 right muscles, Lumbrical

ligament transversemetacarpal tendon lumbricals(unipennate)Third tendonDeep fourth retinaculumFlexor Flexor digitorumprofundus lumbricals(bipennate)Flexor and second to (cut hoodFirst pollicislongus tendonAttached digitorumsuperficialis )Flexor dorsal and

Fig. supply hand. of the Arterial 7.109 right

Fig. Superficial arch, palmar hand. right 7.110

Fig. 7.111 hand. arch, Deep right palmar

carpiradialis artery snuffboxExtensor ulnarExtensor arteries dorsalinterosseous nerveDeep pollicis Radial indicisarteryPrincepspollicis arteryPerforatingarteryPalmarmetacarpalarteriesDeep pollicis digitalarteriesDorsal arteryFirst branches dorsalmetacarpalarteryDorsal pollicis digital arteryUlnar branchof properpalmar ulnar radial interosseiDorsal retinaculumExtensor arteryPosteriorinterosseousarteryDorsal carpalbranch archDorsaldigitalarteriesDorsalcarpal carpalDorsal viewarcharteryExtensordigitorumtendons(cut)DorsalmetacarpalarteriesFirst dorsalmetacarpalarteryMainly of longusRadial inanatomical longusExtensor carpiradialis carpalnetworkDorsalcarpal branchof muscleFirst palmar archAdductorpollicismuscleRadialis brevisDorsal ulnar brevisAbductor arteryUlnar of arteryDorsalmetacarpalarteriesDorsal longusExtensor

Fig. the venous hand. 7.112 arch Dorsal right of

Fig. 7.113 nerve in Ulnar the right hand.

from branch nerve)Ulnar ulnarnerve artery viewMedial distribution handDorsal forearmUlnar viewDorsal forearmArea from of nerve)Superficial twolumbricalmusclesPalmar ulnarnerve ofsuperficial of branch branch ulnarnerve branch(of of ulnar of branch(of Palmar nerveDeep in ulnar

Fig. the hand” due of 7.114 a ulnar “clawed of nerve. Typical appearance lesion to a

Fig. nerve right Median hand. in the 7.115

brevisPalmar nervesMedian branch pollicis twolumbrical mediannerve musclesPalmar Recurrent branch(of brevisFlexor forearmDigital viewDorsal from median nerve)Lateral nervePalmar branch(of nerve)Abductor pollicis median of view

Fig. nerve hand. the Radial 7.116 in right

Fig. Bony region. of posterior landmarks the scapular and 7.117 muscles shoulder and view back. of Posterior

axillary musclePosterior of minor muscleInfraspinatus muscleTrapezius nerveLatissimus muscleSpine fold muscleAxillary skin muscleTeres Teres muscleDeltoid dorsi major scapulaAcromionSupraspinatus

Fig. and locating axilla the contents Visualizing and 7.118 related structures. its folds shoulder walls showing axilla. A. Anterior of the and

floor outlet showing shoulder B. Anterior and axilla. of the nerve. axillary Anterior the view thoracic and bundle neurovascular C. long showing triangle view the Anterior vein. cephalic the with shoulder showing the clavipectoral D. of

veinClavipectoral thoracic bundleSerratus triangleFloor wallLateral foldPosterioraxillary nerveAxillaDeltoid wallNeurovascular skin ClavicleCoracoid of muscleCephalic skin foldAnterior into wallPosterior musclePectoralis wallMedial axillaOpening axillary armAnterior anteriormuscleLong major axillaryskin processHumerusAnterior ofaxilla foldABCD

Fig. right arm nerve, Locating artery ulnar artery, brachial and (medial nerve). in brachial the 7.119 view arm median with of the

Fig. nerve the and radial Triceps of arm). 7.120 (posterior position right view brachii tendon of

Fig. right fossa view, 7.121 arm). (anterior Cubital A. view. Anterior B. and Boundaries contents. nerves, Showing veins. and and C. ulnar radial

Fig. major the forearm. in and locating right Identifying nerves distal vessels and 7.122 tendons Anterior forearm and A. distal wrist. B. wrist. forearm Posterior and distal Lateral wrist of C. view and posterior forearm. D. Anatomical snuffbox.

Fig. hand. of right the appearances 7.123 Normal view eminences hypothenar Palmar and finger with the thenar A. arcade. and B. network. venous Dorsal with view dorsal

Fig. of the of show left the 7.124 flexor hand of Anterior and nerve. branch recurrent to view retinaculum median position the

Tubercle ofthe nerveFlexor carpiradialis tendonFlexor retinaculumHypothenar eminenceThenar branch eminence of nervePisiform median carpiulnaris Recurrent tendonMedian scaphoidFlexor the

Fig. and hand. in median the 7.125 function of Motor nerves the ulnar joints: metacarpophalangeal interphalangeal “ta-ta” position. the joints extending the A. Flexing the and B. Grasping an between object the fingers. an pad pad of and the between Grasping finger. C. index of object the thumb the

Fig. the Visualizing arches, superficial the 7.126 palmar left and hand. positions deep of wrist the and skin distal crease the of are shown superficial The palm arches and proximal in crease transverse labeled and palmar overlay. deep the position also hook This the of the shows of pisiform the and hamate.

arteryHook palmar of Distal archSuperficial transverseskin hamateDeep crease crease of palmPisiform Distal palmar palmProximalwrist creaseUlnar wrist creaseProximal transverseskin arch of arteryRadial

Fig. Where in to 7.127 peripheral pulses limb. artery the take upper Pulse points. A. B. Placement of blood and pressure stethoscope. cuff

distal in eFig. in cubital in in distal fossaUlnar pulse snuffboxRadial pulse forearmAxillary in midarmBrachial pulse the pulse ABBrachial pulse anatomical forearmRadial pulse the bursa. torn Ultrasound in completely with subacromial fluid a the subdeltoid showing supraspinatus tendon 7.128

eFig. Deltoid supraspinatus of tendonNormal supraspinatus tendonHead in muscleTear of humerus humerusHead the the humeral anteroposterior anteroinferior at an radiograph, head 7.129 dislocation glenohumeral joint. demonstrates The view, of

innervating 7.1 shoulder (spinal segments the Table Muscles major are segments the muscle) of bold the in

posterior bold the segments innervating of scapular Muscles muscle) the in (spinal region Table major 7.2 segments the are

innervating in axilla the wall Muscles the Table bold the segments anterior 7.3 major of are of segments muscle) (spinal the

of the medial major axilla muscle) segment the the 7.4 in wall Table of bold innervating Muscle (spinal the is segment

7.5 and consistently the posterior segments the (spinal in major muscle; axilla segments in Table parentheses muscle) are bold the wall the segments lateral innervate the innervating not Muscles of spinal of do

having bold (spinal the innervating the muscle) segments that axilla pass are parts major Table in through Muscles segments the 7.6

the a brachial present (parentheses Branches inconsistently component nerve 7.7 minor Table indicate plexus of in segment that spinal a or is nerve) is of the

major segments Muscles 7.8 Table the are segments the of of compartment anterior muscle) bold innervating (spinal arm the the in

the Table (spinal muscle) compartment 7.9 the the segment Muscle major in innervating is segment of arm of indicated bold posterior the

muscle) innervating in the forearm compartment are the in of segments anterior the Table layer muscles segments of Superficial 7.10 major (spinal indicated bold the

of the innervating muscles the segment Table Intermediate layer in anterior segment muscle) in of 7.11 (spinal the the is bold forearm major compartment indicated

in 7.12 anterior muscle) major muscles the indicated of of segments Deep segments the the innervating layer (spinal bold compartment Table the are forearm in

of segments major are the the the forearm (spinal of layer bold segments 7.13 muscle) posterior muscles in compartment indicated the Table innervating Superficial in

indicated the (spinal major the layer are in Table innervating the posterior muscle) 7.14 muscles the segments Deep in of forearm of bold compartment segments

muscles in major segments bold innervating segments (spinal are the hand 7.15 of muscle) the the Table indicated Intrinsic

the In clinic

proximal the humerus Fracture of

bone. such anatomical the fracture rare obliquity of across neck the is extremely of thickest humerus to a traverse have for to It fractures region the because of occur would the of surgical fractures occur Typically the the neck humerus. around posterior may artery circumflex be humeral Although the this rarely fracture, this axillary type with and happens. damaged of nerve the It be important sure to a the before nerve deficit. that tested neurological is not the injury the nerve itself damaged that not relocation treatment is does has cause axillary and that

In clinic the

the and of sternoclavicular acromioclavicular dislocations of and joints Fractures clavicle the

between and connection trunk. limb only the the clavicle upper provides bony The the trunk, to upper relative that that not the is Given its it size often is and the it surprising limb forces it potential from transmits fractured. middle fracture of third typical site (Fig. is The the 7.30). The medial lateral fractured. thirds are rarely and

of the with tends clavicle end the at to The joint acromioclavicular (Fig. trauma acromial dislocate 7.31). conoid is ligament. trapezoid third coracoclavicular joined scapula ligaments the the the by the of and The of clavicle to outer

in capsule fibrous resulting acromioclavicular radiograph. the injury tends and ligaments separation tear acromioclavicular joint, on A joint a of plain the minor to coracoclavicular ligaments the the trauma subluxation ligament, trapezoid results disrupt of of in severe will conoid elevation clavicle. and and the which upward More

medial clavicle The sternoclavicular injury the an or the end dislocation posterior the at typical joint. is of anterior of vessels disrupt root of the posterior compress great a the the the of impinge on may in dislocation and neck Importantly, clavicle or them.

clinic In the

Dislocations joint the of glenohumeral

joint The at movement stability. glenohumeral providing the expense a is range extremely wide of mobile, of to susceptible labrum by supplemented robust it the glenoid less the bony make fibrocartilaginous and small dislocation. cavity, relatively support, The ligamentous glenoid

(Fig. dislocation Anterior associated 7.32) an with isolated anterior traumatic usually all dislocations is are occurs incident and (clinically, most frequently anteroinferior). some anteroinferior labrum bony fragment. small a with cases, glenoid In torn the without is or the joint joint are susceptible disrupted, (recurrent) cartilage further Once and capsule the is to dislocations. quadrangular space. an nerve anteroinferior When passes it humeral through the of direct on the be the axillary injured may dislocation head compression inferiorly the as nerve occurs, by “lengthening” radial may the humerus is a which nerve and the the produce nerve, radial radial effect bound Furthermore, within stretch tightly groove, of the paralysis. a an may is with reduction. associated Occasionally, require anteroinferior fracture, dislocation surgical which

focus which vigorous the when contractions, seen, an most muscle the rare; be epileptic common extremely electrocution. is on associated seizure clinician being Posterior with extremely should its by dislocation may caused cause, Treatment instability of challenging. be recurrent can and preventing treatment of to dislocation, range of instability the while of dislocation). aims The are maintain and function (subluxation, movement “feeling” and be can can therapy physical achieved arthroscopically. This of the labrum “re-education.” be through shoulder this capsular If and fails, achieved stabilization tightening of process the at muscular base, continuity divided If problem can coracoid attachments. persists, the the be maintaining the form transferred is a The to a the the of buttress anterior future to to fixed screw border process glenoid inferior and prevent dislocations.

the clinic In

rotator main two and disorders cuff the of The impingement tendinopathy. are commonly acromion passes the involved it acromioclavicular beneath as and muscle The the most supraspinatus ligament. is beneath is the space, tendon dimensions. supraspinatus which fixed passes, of This the subacromial/subdeltoid within produce abducted. muscle, of supraspinatus significant bursa, is may when or impingement arm the the bony spurs subacromial fluid Swelling excessive

blood The poor. tendon is the supraspinatus relatively to supply trauma, susceptible producing result may change, degenerative in certain circumstances, in which deposition, Repeated calcium tendon makes extreme to the pain. under a extracted have and of needle can guidance image through consistency The often be the calcium deposits toothpaste.

undergone degenerative supraspinatus (Fig. full-thickness When tears the partialor has to more is significant may it change, susceptible trauma, develop tendon and 7.33). are in and normal considerable common in hair. result in activities These combing tears living difficulty such as daily older may carrying patients most of out be may complete asymptomatic. However, tears entirely

clinic the In

(subdeltoid) Inflammation subacromial the bursa of

referred is bursa subacromial bursa. muscles and or Between supraspinatus the as the there deltoid acromion and medially, clinically subdeltoid a the to laterally injured become who the shoulder or patients supraspinatus In painful. glenohumeral of the movements may this have bursa have who making joint tendinopathy, inflamed, injection agent anesthetic (Fig. a local be treated changes and by These of corticosteroid inflammatory may 7.34).

the In clinic

the nerve. impinge quadrangular or space of on the fibrosis muscles the may of edges axillary Hypertrophy muscle this Uncommonly, of produces the deltoid weakness muscle. exert teres that Typically muscles control muscle, the minor produces on affect cuff may movement. atrophy the rotator the it of which shoulder

the the scapula of In ”Winging” clinic

nerve surface thoracic anterior damage. passes the fascia, of to deep on Because it wall muscle, down subcutaneous long just to is lateral serratus the the vulnerable external thoracic the skin and “winging” the the of the the arm. with medial characteristic this scapula function causes to away muscle Loss of and wall, pushing inferior forward from in the thoracic on elevate of angle, of scapula, border, resulting particularly the the possible. Furthermore, at elevation arm no longer is normal

clinic the In

blood upper the supply the to Imaging limb

of imaging compromise dialysis), (which the fistula there needed the vascular limb, to assess vessels evidence is for to clinical is vessels. or to is arteriovenous required upper form renal are an necessary When

of of a the assessment limb artery the third arteries. Ultrasound for carrying the from out the part palmar subclavian vessels deep to superficial a tool noninvasive is and useful the of upper and noted. be Blood can can anatomical flow variants be quantified

cases. Angiography is in out carried certain then placed artery the and the is punctured ligament arteries the right catheter femoral brachiocephalic is inguinal The subclavian a of iliac enter or the artery around artery. and either to the aorta and the left through subclavian the trunk below long arch and and contrast the pass into radiographs agents finally as contrast capillaries, are the through vessel Radiopaque then first obtained are the injected arteries, the veins. agents the

In clinic the

limb of the the upper arteries to Trauma

subcutaneous is or trauma is it position. susceptible upper in the to fixed in limb supply to arterial a places relatively particularly The where

rib I of Fracture

fixed the neck subclavian the axilla, As and superior by muscles passes in out the of it I. the is into position of the surface surrounding rib to artery of artery. subclavian which cause rib compromise fracture, axillary significantly first thoracic upper the rapid first or distal the may injury involving artery trauma part A of may the a deceleration the part there rendered artery, ischemic Fortunately, is (ischemia axillary blood poor humerus; the arm of subclavian a the branches limb). vessel connections completely complete even the proximal the or an therefore, rarely scapula to and anastomotic and between supply transection, is around end organ of network with are a form which artery the

humeral dislocation Anterior the of head

axillary humeral dislocation of compress occlusion. artery, may in the the head resulting vessel Anterior surgically the This the upper completely to but necessary function. pain-free obtain to reconstruct it may to be is render ischemic, limb axillary artery unlikely be anterior may to time damaged brachial intimately the of at axillary plexus, which artery is the related dislocation. Importantly, the

clinic In the

of There be obtained. may access number are central through venous a which routes by route” The the are commonly used routes and jugular “subclavian clinicians. misnomer The route subclavian that preferred in remains the is term a clinical practice. first fact, enter axillary the vein. most of clinicians part the In

There patients that are catheterization number undergo of a vein/axillary subclavian the of vein. a straightforward is Entering subclavian vein vein/axillary the relatively technique. in clavicle a region, is aiming and needle The infraclavicular superomedially. sharp placed is the identified is aspirated, When blood access obtained. venous been has access popular route venous is such and lines, shorter-term unit). for access, long-term care This where Hickman are (e.g., intensive as inserted for multiple-lumen catheters

is for wires. preferred the The vein/axillary pacemaker subclavian of also vein insertion site There vein into of preferred prevent point entry a the however, is, to complications. The midclavicular punctured vein this the lateral line in to should line. be or the its this course to site and of vein for structures. is other puncture reason relationship The the it inferior courses the thoracic to toward superior as The passes to first anterior the the artery, rib, inlet. and clavicle the vein to clavicle muscle. subclavius is Beneath the situated the become where muscle puncture vein, the at or wire this to the may the related is kinked the enter of catheter subclavius vein point. the axillary Should will and muscle fracture. may which the relaxation the of Moreover, constant lead this wire, ultimately and to contraction in line fatigue induce have catheter consequences chemotherapy or can wire a pacemaker a the severe A rupture for in patient. fractured

In the clinic

to plexus brachial Injuries the

The structure. an is brachial extremely complex plexus and examination. it When damaged, taking meticulous clinical history requires studies when by contraction the and electromyography, stimulated. is the which nerve functions the nerve nerve conduction can artificially latency of muscle of individual be obtained Assessment assess

trauma are avulsions disruption. plexus injuries of and producing nerve blunt usually result Brachial the and of for These of usually the return. to even dedicated require injuries many function a are upper amount limb function rehabilitation for small months the devastating of

the and cord the cervical of injuries in plexus. pulling roots to tend Spinal the region brachial direct injuries affect the first rib trauma Severe to affects usually trunks. the brachial cords divisions of dislocation and plexus of the The can the glenohumeral by joint. injured be

clinic the In

the breast nodes passes the Lymphatic axilla. lateral through of the part in from drainage axillary out a normal of the disruption may if been surgical mastectomy Significant or occur to limb upper lymphatic breast nodal has drainage the carried cancer. for a clearance destruction metastatic to of the as disease, as of radiotherapy have cancer the some side prevent lymphatics a axilla to of the spread the Furthermore, well this patients tiny effect cells. but is the

the is If edema may upper drainage arm (lymphedema) may limb lymphatic and develop. of swell the pitting the damaged,

In the clinic

biceps of tendon Rupture

limb; unusual the of long muscle. tendon tendons commonly the however, for most It that to head brachii muscles tendon relatively ruptures is of the upper and rupture in is the their biceps the but an contract—the produce little extremely has does its sign. flexing fibers belly characteristic muscle upper the the on “Popeye” bulge there is as deformity—on limb, unrestrained the of In this a isolation, effect relatively prominent elbow, it

also biceps rupture Distal tendon occurs. rupture, approach because the the it’s to is the musculotendinous repair. of the insertion the important It or junction, determine site at determine surgical for midtendon, this at will whether

the clinic In

parameter. an physiological pressure important measurement Blood extremely is long-term High blood treatment stroke. to (hypertension) complications as such prevent requires pressure infection, after pressure may caused by infarction). blood cardiac or myocardial blood be (e.g., poor extreme loss, Low output widespread blood of Accurate essential. pressure measurement is

and a stethoscope. Most sphygmomanometer clinicians a use the the device artery a against The is around a arm compress the sphygmomanometer to of the inflates that brachial humerus. midportion cuff the mm is (greater than Hg). 120 so The cuff it inflated systolic exceeds blood pressure listens the the for stethoscope artery places pulse. and The cubital clinician the brachial fossa (auscultates) in over a a pressure of reduced of as cuff is level pulse audible thumping the arm just regular sphygmomanometer blood sound. systolic in below the becomes As pressure, the the the the the clearer. the pressure in continues sphygmomanometer thumping regular to drop, sound As becomes the sphygmomanometer sound less the pressure, is in than audible that pressure When diastolic of becomes blood the inaudible. the the thumping blood can sphygmomanometer, Using the scale simple determined. pressure be patient’s on the the mm Hg is blood pressure/diastolic normal range blood 90–120/60–80 The (systolic pressure).

clinic the In

the in nerve arm injury Radial

brachii artery is The tightly the the radial of and triceps bound nerve brachii heads between with in the groove. profunda radial muscle medial the lateral may the become transected loss of fractured, stretched is humerus region, damage in this function. If leading or to the and radial nerve permanent typical This injury is (Fig. should fracture 7.70) is always tested the midshaft nerve humerus be suspected. when a the of of and the sensory of include changes over (due drop patient’s extensor muscles) of the to and hand. the denervation dorsum wrist symptoms usually the The

clinic In the

in Median the arm nerve injury

of by position. deep its In the arm is and the median usually not forearm relatively injured because nerve trauma the nerve compression commonest median (carpal syndrome). flexor The is the associated at retinaculum problem the tunnel beneath neurological with wrist

On humerus very may of a band occasions, rare the nerve aspect the passes. from beneath median the fibrous arise anterior which of is of occasionally, calcify. ligament the the called embryological Struthers; and remnant is an muscle This sometimes it coracobrachialis may flexor forearm of the This band muscles weakness in in compress median can the the the nerve, thenar resulting muscles. and demonstrate Nerve the conduction site compression. studies will nerve of

In clinic the

fracture Supracondylar of the humerus

of end of injuries the transverse a the may the Elbow in epicondyles. above fracture result level the humerus, children in of distal fracture supracondylar is fracture. a This termed and muscle. by tissues are the soft fragment triceps its posteriorly The distal pulled brachial posterior irregular the This displacement over “bowstrings” proximal fragment. the fracture effectively artery the children, a forearm this and injury: the significantly ischemic is severe and relatively the devastating contracture). flexor contractions, of anterior compartment (Volkmann’s muscles rendered muscles In the function of anterior reducing the of ischemic form compartment are

clinic the In

occurs in typically 5 under that children is disorder a years age. elbow Pulled of hand, is pulled a child up is of pull usually It a the commonly by curb. the child’s caused when sharp radius the the of and head this allow the to tissue. sublux from laxity the of not-yet-developed radius the ligament anular of head cuff The of elbow but is by compression and clinician. extremely the supination easily painful, can the elbow be of by treated joint simple Pulled normal can subsides immediately pain activity. radial and with the the is continue the head When child relocated

clinic In the

Fracture olecranon of the

the the olecranon onto (Fig. olecranon outstretched a of fall Fractures an a blow direct from or can hand to result from 7.74). the inserts of triceps injuries into olecranon The muscle. cause the can avulsion and

clinic the In

in elbow the changes joint Developmental

ways; in the types The dependent. can age elbow injuries injured be many joint are of a obtained. is lateral anteroposterior trauma soft suspected, are plain tissue and a fracture or radiograph When an require to interpret adult it In children usually difficult not radiograph, is additional but in interpretation. the factors an

in before elbow As and puberty. around numerous develops ossification secondary children, centers appear the It these easy mistakenly fractures. to interpret as is epiphyses the or “pulled addition, to be is off” possible apophyses In for it disrupted. also and the radiograph the must a elbow, child’s know of the physician interpreting Therefore, age (Fig. child’s when 7.75). puberty. Fusion the occurs time of at around the epiphyses to correct and apophyses secure bones normal a will their normal diagnosis. An relationship and the understanding of years, of medial years, ages the The around elbow olecranon—12 epicondyle—13 centers years, radius)—5 approximate capitulum—1 appearance ossification are: and (of secondary head of trochlea—11 the years, years. joint lateral year, epicondyle—5

clinic In the

head Fracture of the radius of the

head common morbidity. appreciable is a of can radius cause and injury the fracture the of A It the injuries typical occur with fall one that on the is hand. outstretched a of to head, the radial falling, force is fractures. which transmitted On the extension, a in of may full the movement of long These to and obtain reconstruction of loss result joint. typically fractures potential periods require at elbow physiotherapy full surgical range

of fracture injury. radiograph typically of secondary radius A head this the the of a phenomenon demonstrates the of lateral fossae. the the fills small synovial elevating When olecranon coronoid cavity, pad bone fractured, within the the fluid and of fat is lucency the areas on pads “fat appear as pad” These sign. fat lateral of radiograph—the of visible. is the This fracture head because the of is radiological useful radius finding clearly always not the positive a inferred can be even and around can be is fracture treatment pad no a appropriate fracture tenderness and fat radiograph, head identified on the be clinical appropriate of history, there an sign, radius, if can the If instituted. clinically

In clinic the

the are overuse who of is It strain tennis flexor involved golf people to sports extensor for not muscles uncommon origins of develop the in forearm. and an such as of the and epicondyles therapy. typically pain and The after resolves is and the rest around physical usually rich healing platelets, tendon to the the It repair. treated into plasma, injection also own with of patient’s tendon be and may in promote may and persist, from the the origin inflammation pain or flexor division be bone extensor necessary. surgical If of tennis it Typically, the in and epicondyle on occurs on pain occurs lateral flexor in elbow), origin origin. golfers this epicondyle (tennis and whereas common the medial extensor common players

the In clinic

is usually and common extremely in most is severe Osteoarthritis dominant the limb. such may cavity. in that appear arthritic degenerative an change time the bone time to undergo small From fragments elbow articular in flexion appreciable small joint reduction coronoid relatively these fossae. in Given and lodge typically space, the the and fragments extension, within result olecranon an and can

the In clinic

Ulnar elbow the injury nerve at

retinaculum. medial tunnel) the in (the humerus the bound ulnar a to of epicondyle by a Posterior the cubital tunnel fibro-osseous is nerve this compresses when within ulnar patients nerve which Older changes the tunnel, may flexed. degenerative develop nerve. the of and flexion function cause extension The elbow of the resulting impaired nerve in damage, of ulnar local may repeated action to nerve damage in muscles (Fig. Accessory localized direct produce also secondary this ulnar may and neuritis region trauma 7.76).

the clinic In

dialysis fistula Construction of a

dialysis world for throughout patients Many require renal failure. the kidney is and filtered blood the cleaned The patient’s by machine. dialysis to the to from them. into taken be and device then therefore Blood patients has returned filtering per mL and rates occurs of 250–500 hours requires process many of This over dialysis considerable minute. flow flow. large enable high to volumes and from To such blood is from the taken have vessels body, the that a of blood to returned removed be surgical have is necessary create system. veins in such the limbs flow, procedure a no such high peripheral to As a is radial (joined) most anastomosed (Fig. artery patients, In the cephalic vein to the brachial or artery elbow. at cephalic the vein the the is anastomosed wrist, to at 7.78) the surgeons place Some graft between arterial vessels. these an

dialysis. veins flow their the to After blood increase six weeks, or to size amenable in response direct in arterial and are cannulation

the clinic In

Fractures and of ulna radius the

radius the complex series The and proximally are and ulna distally bones humerus carpal of attached to by ligaments. the a behave the are one. they bones separate, as Although bones of a dislocation the occurs more both of to in resulting involves it and either injury both fracture of bones, fracture one forearm commonly severe the usually a When a other. bone or of Commonly, to these age injury patient determine which occur. the likely mechanism the are of the of and

three There ulna: injuries classic and to the radius are

dislocation proximal the of the an the anterior of head Monteggia’s the fracture at and fracture a elbow. of the third of radius ulna is

fracture associated a Galeazzi’s at third of of joint. ulna subluxation the fracture is of of distal (partial the wrist radius head the the dislocation) with the

distal posterior a is Colles’ the of fracture end fracture, the and radius. displacement, of

or the and radius the radiographically, is be Whenever a dislocations. wrist to should elbow demonstrated images of obtained ulna of further exclude fracture

the clinic In

or artery of the ulnar Transection radial

patients artery radial ulnar or these may Adult the are transect relatively subcutaneous. vessels because plate the window. A a through when method is glass is forced hand injury of typical either without consequence. to the enables significant the artery, Fortunately, hand the dual supply the usually or to surgeon radial off tie ulnar the

In the clinic

of and avascular Fracture scaphoid of the necrosis the proximal scaphoid

is waist injury bone of a the across scaphoid the commonest carpal The fracture (Fig. 7.96). uncommon other is It see to injuries. which approximately the portion. supply a radial the to of individuals, of supply In through blood the the bone has portion artery, scaphoid distal sole enters the from proximal bone 10% waist undergoes portion therefore the a the When scaphoid, the occurs proximal avascular fracture of across necrosis. this predict impossible have is which blood to supply. patients It

the In clinic

the Kienbock’s the known can lunate, the to of avascular to of lunate (Fig. as Interruption supply lead disease necrosis blood 7.97). longer in and can term. and pain cause This arthritis stiffness the

clinic In the

the tunnel. in runs some forearms alongside in artery nerve large median or the a individuals, both A median found is carpal and persistent through variant anatomical one an artery where risk cuts heavy the to from Individuals are at deep wrist. from bleeding

the clinic In

syndrome the syndrome on the nerve pressure tunnel. entrapment within an is caused median carpal Carpal by tunnel obscure, of carpal instances (e.g., tendon a is be from the on the may effect rheumatoid nerve the arising arthritis), overuse, The cysts pressure joints. sheaths some increased the direct often etiology this tendons in and condition median and caused of of though swelling injury nerve by the thought of nerve that itself. nerve damage tunnel the median cause pressure carpal is Increased and to congestion capillary the in to venous anoxic edema produces endothelium

the sensations median nerve. distribution pain typically Patients and the report in of pins-and-needles occur. may of Weakness and loss of muscles the bulk muscle also thenar nerve region the sign). over the of the retinaculum) symptoms (in flexor produces median these readily tapping Gently (Tinel’s

removing treatment symptoms. aimed and reducing at Initial produce that inflammation insults is the repetitive the any necessary improvement, nerve which the to be studies this require does decompression not retinaculum. to lead nerve of surgical may will entrapment, flexor If conduction confirm

the In clinic

The causing thickened the to can develop individuals, a progressively in position. fixed flexion fingers certain abnormally palmar fascia become requires results in and and loss dexterity function, of abnormal surgical the cases tissue. severe of removal This in

the In clinic

an region. snuffbox The is clinical anatomical important the When is the palpable within becomes scaphoid hand in the deviation, snuffbox. ulnar fracture. position to for bone enables This assess to physician the the palpate a pulse in artery be also the of radial felt snuffbox. the can The

clinic In the

within dorsal the and longus Quervain’s disorder tendon (Fig. pollicis and common an De that involves occurs extensor pollicis syndrome inflammatory first is and extensor brevis tendon tendon abductor the their compartment sheath 7.102). Patients with preventing present thumb. wrist pain abduction significant typically appropriate and of the flexion/extension this cause disorder is of overuse. often The in young who mothers example, For is constantly young lifting common are the syndrome children. include as causes rheumatoid arthritis. disorders Other inflammatory such

clinic In the

a inflammation is tendon and Tenosynovitis its of sheath. be The rheumatoid however, with by may other be connective tissue caused disorders it and also condition as associated can such pathologies. arthritis overuse; tendon will flex, becomes within and severe within fully require occurs, stick the sheath, “triggering” tendon a the and run phenomenon. typically fingers smoothly tendon producing and inflammation the the excess may force extend or to not the If ensuing fibrosis

clinic In the

is is the in tendon(s) snapping hand. flexor and or the occasionally of catching a adulthood common late disorder finger by and of childhood locking Trigger and typically characterized dysfunction pain. and finger with Trigger associated can significant be is the triggering of at flexor sheath the tightening tendon related metacarpophalangeal level fibrosis The joint. the to of and usually

clinic In the

wrist, both at hand. filling radial the the between radial or and anastomoses pressure and for determine other, ulnar the the compress one arteries, from pattern of test arteries To the the ulnar and adequate then release and there lateral with the blood little palmar index between released. connection and is red) thumb pressure superficial finger alone of (become the is If only arteries, artery the side radial deep when the fill will on

clinic In the

venous for fluid is testing necessary many laboratory obtaining for and drugs. access intravenous In blood administering and patients, the in cephalic adjacent cubital ideal vein snuffbox. The typically access the are for anatomical in and venous sites fossa to the of use simply by veins a tourniquet. distended The are veins become enough to A the applied allow should to be tourniquet prominent. is not be site, usually vein antecubital the is it blood and the it preferred straightforward may although palpated. always easily tests visible, For a preferred cannula. site the short-term The for cephalic generally vein intravenous is

clinic In the

injured at most the two is ulnar nerve wrist. the commonly elbow and sites: The

the lies epicondyle. posterior elbow, At the to nerve the medial

passes the At to and nerve retinaculum pisiform lateral superficial flexor bone. the ulnar the the lies wrist, to

the the of most of because flexed function by are in of fingers interphalangeal characterized joints the hand lost joints Ulnar nerve hand, lesions the are intrinsic is the the (Fig. muscles of are metacarpophalangeal “clawing” which of and the hyperextended 7.114).

the fingers lumbricals all the lost intrinsic while nerve. is the median medial because in by function innervated the most two these in Clawing is the are muscles digits, lateral of digits of pronounced also adductor muscle lost. pollicis of the Function is

as muscle the and the function elbow, at flexor digits ulnaris of profundus is well. lost nerve two ulnar In medial carpi digitorum of the the lesions flexor to fingers, ulnar the of ulnar lack of than and the the at the lesions is hand, Clawing the to because leads fingers. with little interruption of the the flexor at nerve the the of of joints elbow nerve flexion distal paralyzes in half worse at wrist elbow ring at these profundus, particularly of interphalangeal which the digitorum

elbow and the at and result medial impaired of one-half the innervation lesions Ulnar in nerve sensory digits. the one on aspect wrist palmar

branch function of of a or dorsal the at at evaluating wrist which by the in Damage to the forearm. originates of of the ulnar regions the (cutaneous) site the ulnar can nerve, wrist nerve distinguished proximal to the be status distal the of on over the medial dorsal surface This skin branch side. the innervates hand

clinic the In

branch terminal the branch. the branches—the elbow the divides joint into radial deep its nerve superficial and Around two

the muscles The of common injury radial a humerus, most is produces the groove which the damage paralysis nerve compartment, in drop. of wrist the the nerve radial resulting of in global posterior to humerus the groove. Radial of can in radial spirals shaft nerve the radial the the from fracture result of nerve as around damage the injury over hand. in of The predominantly of sensation produces the typical posterior reduction the aspect cutaneous distribution, supply interosseous forearm, the branch radial may compartment the Severing paralyze the of posterior the nerve) nerve (continuation the of nerve of is posterior but variable. muscles deep of fingers. may not be Typically, to the able patient extend the

“cords” the tendon readily The branches passing snuffbox. of nerve the the pollicis the palpated the extensor branch of distal radial anatomical be over superficial longus in can as of is small Damage consequence because branches a little these skin. only to of supply area they of

for underwent a woman breast A mastectomy 57-year-old cancer. right a breast of been The had including process. note tissue that surgical axillary reported the removed, the all axilla surrounding In dissected their lymph nodes surgeon all addition, the within fat. had the with patient The made recovery. uneventful an

the told the husband surgeon on At follow-up that first developed appointment, now bony had back. a the she patient’s “spike” her asked the and was to spike. patient The intrigued surgeon this reveal out appeared which the scapula, (“winged”). spike of examination, the inferior angle the At be was posteriorly sticking to accentuated Raising structure. this the arms

the was tip the there scapula. of scapula The was the muscle, noted accentuated which loss of was the of to attaches serratus some it medial bulk and border that of anterior

muscle this to damaged. The nerve was

the down anterior, wall it and the deep nerve thoracic the the long to the surface skin as the During external surgery fascia. serratus the lateral subcutaneous just axilla, damaged thoracic on on was of passed

the unlikely happy patient nerve Because she an the will but had the explanation was spike. she adequate transected, for that it was is improve, that

thrown motorcycle. accident and 25-year-old a in motor from her woman vehicle A was involved admitted she to was When was the she room, unconscious. emergency chest one radiography. investigations of and series included A which performed, tests of were noted fracture first rib the physician attending a The of complex the on left.

rib pass the Many limb important structures supply that over I. upper

arm is important that an the patient. extremely in this test to and nerves do It is although to supply the difficult hand, unconscious However, reflexes using a hammer. muscle tendon can be some determined test to may Also, with be patients possible for altered consciousness in it levels. reflexes pain necessary the Palpation can artery, artery, because which of denude first artery, passes radial rib ulnar pulses subclavian over is artery brachial the sever fracture a artery, axillary it. the and and of

the immediately drain chest inserted lung collapsed. because had A was pleural air into The to parietal a rib first torn the from and fractured allowing visceral escape pleurae, had cavity. lung the damaged The pleural collapsed, with air, the impaired filled which and lung lung cavity function.

sucked was the and A was re-inflate out between to ribs, tube lung. inserted air the the

is The deep the rib first the a at of neck. base structure is not to broken injuries, minor including for It ribs be after uncommon sports injuries. is protection. surrounded However, base neck, rib which it the of provide by soft I, muscles the and with tissues that lies at considerable a injury. deceleration rib with Therefore first undoubtedly occurs of a considerable patient usually a to the been fracture in which force, a has subjected of injuries neck Other a patient should be high with concern for be the sought level managed injuries. deep and and always mediastinal should

of clinical carry out resident was A assessment a patient’s to hand. asked a He examined following: the

the tendons. joints, musculoskeletal system includes The muscles, and bones, abnormalities muscle for The and resident wasting. looked areas Knowing are wasted which them. identifies the that supplies nerve wrist bones palpated with individual scaphoid ulnar the the She palpated the in deviation. and because of examined may by or inability joints joint contraction. She be they muscular the restricted disease movement of

and of Palpation both necessary. is pulses radial ulnar the to how return for looked hand perfused. resident The capillary was well assess

Examination the nerves of

the hand should be tested. nerves to main three The

middle side lateral the three aspect hand. of phalanx, of and palmar one-half dorsal The the the variable skin median innervates the aspect on radial of the distal phalanges palm the of of nerve digits, the amount the same and of half on a fingers, the the absence eminence, of wasting the Median opposition abduction thumb, results thenar damage of of of thumb. of in nerve the the and absence

ulnar skin posterior the similar The and of ulnar of posteriorly. little eminence, finger the skin anterior a hypothenar and nerve skin of ring innervates side strip finger, the the the surfaces the and over of the ring and ulnar of the skin finger. side of nerve finger innervates Sometimes the ulnar the middle the the all

in little palsy of eminence, wasting nerve of distal and the results An ring the and abduction interphalangeal ulnar joints absent the the of flexion of fingers, hypothenar absent and fingers. adduction also thumb is of Adduction affected. the

of web area aspect I nerve innervates skin of of The lateral radial and first the the small over metacarpal back space. a the

of joints interphalangeal and and extension extension radial The produces the of metacarpophalangeal the of also digits. the wrist nerve and

for ulnar feeling for by of nerve adduction and extension fingers include space. examination A the opposition and nerve and wrist on the very radial back for web digits, of nerve of of the the abduction by would and by simple the the the thumb, first the median tests

to right man his his of 45-year-old A and complaining came in pain physician weakness shoulder. on fall after months a began pain The his previously. outstretched hand approximately 6 minor other but some no symptoms. patient The tenderness shoulder recalled specific having well. and was otherwise fit He

the wasting On supraspinous the of and in of shoulder, there examination infraspinous marked muscles fossae. was the found of humerus. of a rotation and patient weakness there difficult was abduction lateral the initiation of The

and were muscles wasted supraspinatus The infraspinatus. the The wasting of muscle was cause the disuse.

variety through (wasting) of occurs Muscle atrophy a disorders. common most Disuse atrophy causes. the is one of plaster cast. bulk of Examples the immobilization disuse atrophy in muscle include after of a loss fracture (hypertrophy). bulkier they become can muscles overused are be The demonstrated—when also opposite effect

The from trunk of plexus. supraspinatus suprascapular which originates by infraspinatus (C5, nerve the superior the and muscles the brachial C6), are supplied involved, is only atrophy these that were likely denervation. muscle caused is that highly Given muscles it the by pharmacological on effect may a nerve compression, the nerve. a transection, nerve Denervation direct result from or

suprascapular notch (foramen) is of scapula. nerve the the typical the margin compression for The on the suprascapular site of superior

of labrum, suprascapular notch border the superior the injury to allowed cyst which damaged to glenoid and the the The apparently fibrocartilaginous (foramen), pass the the along a suprascapular compressed minor patient’s form where nerve. scapula cyst

and patient’s removal damaged Surgical excision labrum glenoid of the cyst improved symptoms. the the of

be numbed surgeon anesthesiologist patient whole whether complex A out to the procedure the a wished patient’s could carry wrist, and while awake. was asked the on arm a 10 carried the 20 anesthetic minutes of out the injecting into local had mL procedure the anesthesiologist Within after axilla. went a and did with feel the ahead the thing. The operation surgeon not patient

injected The anesthetic sheath. into axillary the was

radial placed ulnar, because nerves. median, be local would to anesthetize almost have anesthetic forearm to the would around the and wrist impossible in be It accurately the a the individually, and be of Furthermore, forearm take branches which cutaneous anesthetized to would time the considerable of subtotal all also would produce probably have anesthesia. of amount

axillary limb from the which the The nerves brachial surrounds within the of upper plexus, axilla. artery the originate lie axillary of artery, sheath. the within brachial fascia vein, plexus Importantly, the axillary covering axillary sleeve-like the and termed the space were anesthetic the nerves paralyzed. axillary By the the into sheath, of injecting all brachial plexus of enclosed the by

axillary position the to a and possible It the behind externally and palpate abducted artery the with head) sheath. rotated of axillary therefore easily is patient’s arm locate the (palm axillary be injected it. identified, the small vessel a and beside of has on the be sides needle both local can placed anesthetic can been Once artery tracks along sheath local the region. in anesthetic this The axillary plexus and the anesthetized “block” surrounding artery The achieved. local effective axillary completely brachial therefore an is is anesthetic

complications?” there the patient. “Could asks any be

arterial to artery, inadvertent plexus, axillary the local branches the are needle Potential the complications a direct of and injection brachial the of of anesthetic. spike damage rare these are skilled in Fortunately, hands.

first, of and fingertips her tingling numbness the and A complaining middle second, in of physician the digits third and comes index, 35-year-old woman to (thumb, fingers). extension. were provoked symptoms The arm by present thenar was of also base the eminence. the around anesthesia Local

as was The problem median compression. nerve diagnosed

to brachial of artery. median brachial into the and anterior to the The lateral and the cords medial is axillary passes nerve formed the anterior arm from plexus the artery both the of brachial the to medial the the to which of At it of medial tendon sits joint level are the biceps. artery, elbow to nerve flexor deep forearm courses the the passes retinaculum. anterior In the and compartment through the of wrist. muscles and the muscles, of two the palm digits middle the of It and the most and the forearm, palmar over of three lateral the the the of lateral and the over surface the skin lumbricals, thenar side innervates one-half the lateral

flexor retinaculum patient, nerve below the the median to trapped this tunnel was be (carpal initially syndrome). In believed

patients. syndrome tunnel middle-aged to young common problem is Carpal a in tunnel. Typically within carpal nerve compressed becomes the the associated as thyroid number of pregnancy. such with disease syndrome may and conditions, This a medical be a carpal situated the ganglion can also tumor or the within compress tunnel Occasionally a nerve. small possibilities Other tenosynovitis arthritis. with patients rheumatoid include in

to studies performed Nerve conduction clinical findings. the were confirm which a small the speed conduction along conducts the series variety pulses. studies that nerves are in at length measure nerve the of send impulses to tests of of these electrical order a Nerve the speed is measured can pulse as be latency. of nerve the referred The to and joint; was below the patient latency that it elbow elbow normal increased was there latency. our however, nerve In to noted had joint the the

elbow nerve The was studies compression indicated the joint. at site that the conduction

consistent not tunnel carpal syndrome. findings with are clinical The given of hand. to been The that eminence patient this should have over alerted thenar problem numbness experienced the clinician the the clue This an indicates understanding the of anatomy. region retinaculum. is within that Compression carpal does proximal flexor branch nerve the produce cutaneous supplies this to the of small numbness, tunnel not the this because the

ligament an The embryological Struthers, the is of was muscle. coracobrachialis of which by the remnant compromise caused nerve It extremely an finding. is rare arm to Occasionally artery, in vein and compression produce the and it ossify extension. may nerve, cross the Although of rare this complex very median it and unusual, nerve. the course is illustrates

for a decided medical meet students two to hard After day’s studying, coffee. he more finger. that would senior matchbook him not a freshman could with The a bet the lift that $50 he to said student the placed $50 on. on freshman was the table and bet The senior palm-downward it in told fingers in phalanges direct to the The of bar a with student the so that counter. were place freshman middle contact a fist the and the position, medical make while then that bar stuck it to his extend finger, of the the the and finger phalanges ring middle on He told forward little maintaining the surface. finger, index was finger middle the so

he and on placed freshman’s flip it. middle fingernail to the A was matchbook of top told was couldn’t. He He $50. lost the

fingers index, the digitorum middle, is the extensor muscle. by ring, performed of Extension little and

and the a table extensor position onto Placing phalanges palm-down table immobilizes the pressing digitorum. the the on middle the the fist action in effectively of unable elevate therefore was freshman out). (which to middle sticking finger was his The this is out move, they is index finger the to if little to do. remember carried procedure that same leaving free important or It (index but and two only This indicis digitorum by muscle digiti digits because are is by minimi extensor these extensor the the also finger) finger). muscle extensor muscle not (little extended

woman right 70-year-old an initiate failure pain abduction the came A shoulder. surgeon with and to to of orthopedic shoulder supraspinous of fossa. revealed Further bulk muscle in loss examination the was supraspinatus muscle The damaged.

glenohumeral of by joint humerus initiated at the is the the muscle. supraspinatus Abduction continues abducted shoulder to deltoid been movement. 10°–15°, the the the has muscle After the by to The and obtain inferiorly lowering its deltoid was patient to her arm joint abduct enable to glenohumeral tilting advantage. able mechanical the

the of muscle suggested loss muscle in atrophy. supraspinous The fossa bulk

is a when muscle occurs Muscle not used. atrophy the supraspinatus surgeon tear beneath tendon there The a was orthopedic thought that of acromion. the If muscle atrophy. would this was so, the

confirmed The diagnosis scan. ultrasound was by

and was stool uncovered. seated was right The on patient a her shoulder hand extend the over scan acts to rotate right a position externally placed for her buttock, supraspinatus tendon exposing patient’s that The the shoulder, and examination. ultrasound was ultrasound with fluid in tendon a subacromial revealed the torn (eFig. bursa subdeltoid completely The 7.128). patient recovery. a a underwent repair made good The and surgical

to (eFig. history the clinic shoulder dislocation with came a a pitcher baseball the of recurrent 35-year-old of A 7.129). An treatment. to any assess prior the performed to was joint MRI shoulder scan

the to an the been multiple may that repair. overview demonstrates structures MRI of damaged shoulder anatomical planes, or surgical have physician in obtain any require intraarticular and The and structures the allowing extraarticular assess to

a divot and head MRI a small demonstrated the in fragment cavity. the aspect of anteroinferior of and glenoid posterosuperior in the The glenoid separated humeral the of aspect become labrum had that bone

may as recurrent. or and be may with “once-off” not problem an repetitive Shoulder a is dislocation occur uncommon injury bilateral is aid born “torn memory (a or be loose may loose”). symmetrical Recurrent and dislocations

dislocation. an is typical of time dislocation, common demonstrates MRI injuries the at the moreover joint for are findings The occur that MRI anteroinferior the most the within the type; which the anteroinferior injuries aspect posterosuperior the abutment include the cavity. of of aspect on the of These glenoid the humeral head when Bankart to may may (the type recurrent, of the small and of attach labrum, This a avulse lesion). bone small glenoid in a cases fragment injury, some this of fragment prone somewhat further been making is the the anteroinferiorly potentially relocated, has shoulder When shoulder attachment dislocation. of capsular to the the disrupted, integrity

repair was An performed. arthroscopic

shoulder the the Arthroscopy is of method shoulder joint. assessing established for an percutaneously. of made are are posterior and entry Portals holes in small the and anterior capsule joint The joint the move around distends surfaces, to arthroscope filled the is including with allowing inspect joint saline, it, labrum. the the and which shoulder its sutures bony anchor The staples). using similar were and sutured and (somewhat to labrum reattached fragment also the The was capsule aspect anterior of tightened.

The uneventful made recovery. patient an

and adducted. held arm After remained in the procedure was internal the rotation and Gentle the exercise returned to patient baseball. playing physiotherapy performed and were

821.e2 821.e1

Overview to Other • Conceptual Relationship Regions

Fig. cont’d 7.40,

is nerve)—cont’d plexus component 7.7 or segment is that the (parentheses of nerve brachial the Table a spinal present of indicate minor in Branches a inconsistently

Fig. cont’d 7.63,

Fig. cont’d 7.66,

• of the Compartment Anatomy Anterior Forearm Regional

Forearm Anatomy the Compartment Anterior of • Regional

Forearm Compartment Anatomy Anterior • of the Regional

• Regional Anterior Anatomy the Forearm Compartment of

of Regional Posterior Compartment Anatomy • the Forearm

• Compartment the of Forearm Posterior Anatomy Regional

Compartment Regional the Posterior Forearm of • Anatomy

Regional Compartment Posterior Forearm of • Anatomy the

Fig. cont’d 7.94,

the Visualizing • and Structures Contents Anatomy Axilla Locating Related and Surface

Forearm • Anatomy Locating Nerves Tendons Identifying Distal and Surface Major and the in Vessels

• Hand Surface and Nerves the of Motor Median the Anatomy in Function Ulnar

meninges 865 Arrangement spaces of and

of neck Anterior triangle the 995

Posterior triangle of 1012 the neck

Root of 1019 neck the

structures Gaps them 1035 the wall pharyngeal in and through passing

of 1048 larynx the Cavity

of the 1053 Function larynx

roof floor, and 1065 Walls,

1077 oral nerves the Multiple innervate cavity

1080 cheeks Walls: the

head the Anatomical landmarks of major position 1110 and

CVI and levels vertebral CIII/CIV 1111 Visualizing structures the at

the How and neck triangles to outline the posterior of anterior 1112

the cricothyroid ligament to locate 1113 How

How thyroid gland to the find 1114

the meningeal middle 1114 the position Estimating of artery

the of Major face 1115 features

apparatus 1116 lacrimal eye and The

are and the complex anatomically head areas The neck of body.

composed a head by formed of is tissues. which and compartments, The of soft series are bone oral nasal an the are: two They cavities, cavity cranial ears, cavity, orbits, two and (Fig. two 8.1).

The and cranial the largest contains membranes the is cavity brain and associated compartment (meninges).

Most one cranial of floor ear forming the contained side of each within bones on the cavity. is the the apparatus of ears of these from extend regions. parts external The laterally the

The the two orbits eyes. contain cranial chambers the is the They cone-shaped are apex the of aspect inferior posteromedially. directed of cone to immediately and cavity, anterior each The can conical opened of eyelids. of walls orbits closed whereas the the each are chamber base by and bone, be the

the upper parts are cavities tract of the the between nasal The are orbits. and respiratory cartilage. of walls, which ceilings, They have predominantly bone floors, are and composed and nasal choanae (posterior cavities the anterior nares openings are nasal the are posterior The (nostrils), apertures). to and openings

are superiorly, bones. and nasal which posteriorly sinuses), cavities air-filled with into extensions the Continuous laterally, (paranasal project surrounding

The to largest, the are maxillary orbits. inferior the sinuses,

palates. hard cavity the and inferior the to by The them cavities, nasal separated from and is soft oral the floor is cavity oral formed The of of tissues. entirely soft

the and is oropharyngeal posterior The (mouth), opening the to the cavity isthmus. opening fissure the anterior oral is oral and which the nares opened and tissues. surrounding oral both are can continuously Unlike soft fissure open, isthmus be the choanae, and oropharyngeal by closed

head of pterygopalatine are on of side head, defined each of one other anatomically the to fossa (Fig. head (infratemporal another compartments the In regions fossa) transition from two of addition the and areas the major compartment to 8.2). head and face defined the scalp are The anatomically are related of surfaces. areas external and to also

process) region bone of (ramus) and of the pterygoid The just the the upper posterior a of (maxilla). posterior fossa between mandible an area infratemporal the (lateral aspect flat jaw is plate to trigeminal the between This oral is of fossa, the one and cavities. by of cranial conduit [V3]), nerves—the tissues, major the cranial mandibular soft for nerve mandibular division a which (the and bounded passes nerve bone

is just each on side to jaw. the posterior upper The fossa pterygopalatine the nasal communicates the cranial orbit, the fossa, fossa oral with cavity. cavity, and the small This the infratemporal cavity, nerve through is the A nerve trigeminal the [V2]). division fossa (the structure maxillary maxillary the of passing pterygopalatine major

relative move a face openings that and and oral underlying group muscles bone cavity (Fig. is the orbits head to aspect to The and anterior of skin control unique the the of the contains the anterior 8.3).

of scalp covers posterior, superior, head The regions and the (Fig. the lateral 8.3).

thorax The to neck extends shoulders below and (Fig. from the the above head 8.4). bone the inferior margins along mandible boundary the of skull. Its superior is of posterior the and on aspect features the cavities. the neck than to openings posterior is posterior of anterior with nasal neck connect The cervical the the and oral higher viscera

and onto extends acromion, from clavicle, top the the scapula. the of a inferior sternum, neck of adjacent of boundary the projection The the the bony along approximated is prominent process and acromion well which neck defined, of Posteriorly, is the the palpable. limit and spinous can line easily vertebra a less the the by inferior CVII, of but be between of neck. The the border base neck of the inferior the encloses

The neck major has compartments four (Fig. musculofascial by outer enclosed are collar: which 8.5), an

the vertebral vertebrae compartment associated The cervical postural muscles. contains and

head and between visceral thymus), The respiratory and and contains and the parathyroid, digestive tracts glands of thorax. compartment that pass parts (thyroid, the important

vascular and vagus on nerve. contain blood vessels two one the the major each side, compartments, The

tracts—the The the specialized pharynx. neck and and two contains structures digestive with larynx associated respiratory

The larynx (Fig. trachea and and in the a turn is top cavity. of to bone, of part airway floor attached to attached below 8.6) is the flexible the membrane, to above, the by upper hyoid oral the of lower which is the the cartilages form channel. which A a a of supportive the hollow framework number for central larynx, has can be structures of soft the laryngeal adjusted with dimensions The central associated by tissue this wall. channel of these folds, other most laryngeal two adjacent toward are sides lateral each project cavity. of The the important vocal which from upper the (laryngeal and continuous opening larynx The the with tilted is inlet) of is pharynx. posteriorly,

pharynx (Fig. The with by of 8.6) a half-cylinder chamber walls muscles and fascia. a in shape the formed is the to walls are of Above, margins attached of skull, the base to below esophagus. the and the the the cavity, On walls side, lateral the the to nasal are of the the attached margins oral each larynx. cavities, and open pharynx, cavities, the the and aspect larynx nasal oral two esophagus the The cavity, therefore opens anterior and into the the inferiorly. of

to part nasopharynx. cavities the posterior nasal pharynx the the of is The respectively. and oral are the parts laryngopharynx, larynx and Those oropharynx posterior the cavity to

associated and vision, and receptor with the senses—the The with cavities taste. with smell, the nasal the the systems associated and with head the special houses all hearing brain protects oral and orbits balance, with cavity ears the

Contains respiratory of parts upper

and or of systems—the digestive nasal contains modifying respiratory system. features structural the and cavities—which the oral The each have food parts upper into the passing for air head

in head are neck The and involved communication. are oral and produced pharynx the Sounds modified in by larynx produce cavity speech. the to adjust face signals. the the muscles the of In addition, of relay expression to contours facial nonverbal

the Positioning head

The neck the supports head. and positions entire the individual enables to systems environmental relative in sensory cues it an moving Importantly, head position without the to body.

tracts lower upper Connects and respiratory digestive and the

and trachea, into the which larynx) contains head, neck and esophagus of begin the in and with (nasal and cavities) relatively in the (pharynx specialized connect low the oral thorax. respiratory upper the structures digestive tracts the parts that neck pass and The

The many the the bones collectively form head skull (Fig. of 8.7A). immovable which fibrous (Fig. interconnected are these are bones of by joints sutures, Most 8.7B).

(Fig. the between In gaps the cavity the fetus membranous of the large the top unossified that bones skull, cranial cover (fontanelles) and flat of and between particularly newborn, the bones large during allow: the passage the head canal, through postnatal deform 8.7C), to birth and growth. its

of the during close first of life. the Most year fontanelles and completed fifth lines separating connective Full thin twenties, the the is of life. in tissue decade ligaments begins the at in bones the ossification late of the normally suture

There head. pairs synovial three the each joints on only in of are side between temporomandibular the joints temporal are the (mandible) largest bone. The jaw and lower the between are joints the and stapes. The malleus, middle in other incus, two synovial the three tiny ear, bones the

the of the framework seven vertebrae bony form cervical neck. The

(Fig. vertebrae Cervical small that and characterized foramen spinous transversarium). by: processes, 8.8A) transverse contain are bodies, bifid a processes (foramen

base vertebral the the transversaria the column for (vertebral between cranial passing of on and passage the neck cavity. veins) each side artery cervical longitudinal vessels Together of and blood foramina the a form

and a muscle anterior also The vertebra tubercles for process attachment. transverse has typical posterior of cervical The derived the from embryological anterior elements in the rise give thoracic ribs tubercles are same region. that to with in from particularly vertebrae. Occasionally, these lower elements, develop cervical the cervical ribs association

upper CII) and (Fig. vertebrae are the for modified The two cervical moving (CI head also see 8.8B–E;

Chapter 2).

(Fig. hyoid The a bone small U-shaped is bone larynx, be side it where from can side. 8.9A) horizontal oriented the superior to moved and the palpated just plane to in

base of U. of and the forms The hyoid the body bone is anterior the

ends project The posteriorly the (greater U from horns) of the two body. of lateral the arms

does neck. head and directly skeletal elements with articulate any hyoid the The other bone in not

number a and for and tissue hyoid head strong a highly anchor The neck. bone structures is in the and of bony movable muscles soft three interface at Significantly, between it dynamic compartments: is the

the oral of the floor is attached it cavity. Superiorly, to

larynx. to the attached is Inferiorly, it

Posteriorly, is attached the pharynx to (Fig. it 8.9B).

soft soft the structure “hinged” of to palate hard tissue The is flap-like (Fig. palate back the a posterior free with a margin. 8.10A) can by depressed muscles be It (Fig. elevated and 8.10B).

associated palate soft be and can through clearly mouth. seen open structures an The

head function, grouped embryological of derivation. on muscles the skeletal can The of and basis the neck innervation, and be

head In the

and of jaw—temporo- mastication and the muscles palate), extra-ocular eyelid), of muscles open the tongue (move the of head upper (move of ear depress the palate muscles of change face), facial of bones), the (adjust in movement the soft The tongue). eyeball (move the muscles the the joint), of include: and expression ear muscle (elevate the mandibular muscles muscles groups the middle middle contour the the and the (move

In the neck

in the and neck, the pathway), hyoid of head). muscle muscles strap and and the pharynx), cervical major limb), groups the and the of In neck), of the of larynx the (position (constrict in and (adjust elevate muscles the compartment outer neck collar head muscular pharynx upper muscles the postural include: muscles the of air the bone (move neck the dimensions (position larynx muscles the

opens superior the directly (Fig. The neck thoracic into base aperture of (thoracic the inlet) 8.11). neck. down through the up Structures thorax of passing the and pass superior visceral and and aperture compartment between the the thoracic head the immediately anterior of base directly the is to neck, is which trachea vertebral column. At esophagus, to the the the anterior trachea. to and lateral veins, There the nerves and anterior arteries, are major

limb) (gateway axillary each of There superior of upper the is the side (Fig. on base thoracic an inlet neck the the to aperture at 8.11):

I vessels such between over passing the when thorax. and Structures rib axillary blood pass inlet as

of the plexus neck pass directly the to upper inlets through Cervical enter the axillary from limb. brachial components the

the (Fig. important neck, In the levels two vertebral

the the and approximately thyroid can palpated) and the between bifurcates CV the internal the between into carotid tracheal the can CIII ring of of larynx neck side between pharynx cartilage arteries; marks limit superior and larynx, and lower each larynx the on the palpated. (the the which first artery cricoid and 8.12) be are: CVI, of the indentation and CIV, and the and of at and border major the carotid cartilage common be of artery) esophagus—the superior (which external of limit where trachea

brain. carotid the internal branches of The much into the neck has no in artery and skull supply to ascends the also It supplies orbit. the and eye are artery. external of head and of the regions branches supplied the carotid Other by neck

neck Airway in the

The larynx (Fig. the tract neck, and upper to the system directly blocked. digestive of the the anterior be when and are can parts are trachea accessed 8.13) in and makes between the through access of thyroid A cartilages route cricoid larynx. membrane) (cricovocal the easiest use cricothyrotomy the of cricothyroid cricothyroid of membrane, the ligament midline, be gland—pyramidal skin lobe the (though overlying usually lobe) palpated vessels, The in connective are there blood only thyroid ligament small of it. a the can and small tissue, and occasionally, be a accessed trachea of surgically wall can airway At lower anterior the tracheostomy. by the level, through the part route region. and gland this thyroid large of entry is This complicated veins of overlie the because

fissures. and are through cranial they the that cranial is of There twelve their defining pairs foramina exit feature cavity nerves or

in structures or neck. head All cranial innervate the nerves neck and abdomen the through descends vagus into and it where the nerve innervates addition, [X] In viscera. thorax the

vagus nerve nerves—the facial part are and glossopharyngeal nerve brain four the nerve as out the (Fig. the [X] [III], cranial carried nerve fibers the of [IX], oculomotor of the [VII], head Parasympathetic in 8.14). glossopharyngeal [V]. the trigeminal tissues and of Parasympathetic leave are nerve oculomotor and target with the distributed nerves, in [III], in nerve facial the destined nerve [VII], these fibers head the the for branches nerve [IX]

to [X] thoracic viscera. head leaves vagus to and deliver and the nerve neck parasympathetic the The fibers abdominal

C8): eight (C1 to nerves cervical are There

C7 emerge vertebrae. above from the vertebral C1 their canal respective to

(Fig. CVII between TI emerges vertebrae and C8 8.15A).

rami to form plexus. C1 The the anterior C4 cervical of muscles, the branches wall, of major (Fig. lateral skin this anterior anterior the supply The the upper strap diaphragm from on parts head skin (phrenic and the inferior on nerve), skin thoracic plexus the parts neck, the of the and on 8.15B).

of anterior a upper rami the C5 the component together innervates to with The anterior form of large limb. which plexus, the C8, T1, of brachial ramus

of Functional the digestive separation

tracts. pharynx chamber a and digestive for common The the is respiratory cavity can from either take nose, well oral the larynx. as through as the the enter the Consequently, place the esophagus and potentially can or through mouth breathing material Importantly:

accessed cavity be the oral by airway The through lower can intubation.

tract by feeding The nasal cavity tubes. be through the accessed (esophagus) digestive can

tract act prevent respiratory structures as food the valves larynx the entering lower of and parts from soft within (Fig. soft the palate, tissue and epiglottis, to Normally, liquid 8.16A).

cavities larynx, passes breathing, nasal open trachea freely pharynx, (or During and the is airway (Fig. and air the cavity), oral normal through 8.16A). support to skeletal open. normally the because, it closed lumen no of airway, The the it esophagus hold structures is unlike has

of the thereby down (Fig. close oral food, When cavity the isthmus, cavity oropharyngeal breathing in while or swung the palate soft (depressed) to oral liquid the is is full and manipulation allowing fluid food of 8.16C).

to from ensure the esophagus and act movement of proper (Fig. cavity swallowing, palate the larynx soft the oral valves When into as of parts food the 8.16D).

the of the isthmus part. the pharynx the The at oropharyngeal palate part off elevates open from the sealing soft same time while to nasal oral food fluid cavities. upward nasal This nasopharynx moving prevents and from the into and

tissue epiglottis and of folds The of vocal by laryngeal becomes and occluded the inlet soft folds of much larynx them. laryngeal cavity closes to the the superior opposition the and larynx closed forward up and of the is addition, the to fluid esophagus. larynx the over and food pulled and the In facilitate into around moving

high above the in In is larynx soft newborns, is neck (Fig. the of the the epiglottis palate and the level 8.16E). suckle Babies time. the same at and can breathe therefore airway. the Liquid any danger around larynx without the entering of flows characteristic the of life, of into the adults. position larynx During year the descends second cervical low

neck of the Triangles

collar (trapezius each The the posterior of (Fig. that and muscles form sternocleidomastoid) neck cervical on triangles part two anterior the side into and outer divide 8.17).

each the of the boundaries line the of the triangle The anterior neck, sternocleidomastoid inferior and of mandible, of the anterior median the vertical muscle. are: margin margin

the bounded margin by: the of of is one-third margin the clavicle, the The the middle trapezius, of triangle posterior sternocleidomastoid. the posterior anterior and

pass through Major the thorax and triangle. that structures anterior head between be accessed the can

The pass (nerves axillary the and into and in over that of and is out lies the posterior part associated with vessels) inlet, limb. triangle structures upper

bones, 22 excluding ear. ossicles the The the of has skull form are and Except by of which mandible, cranium. the sutures, forms for to the the attached each jaw, the skull lower the other are immobile, bones

of can The brain, the subdivided lower base part—the the (the the cranial an containing and a part upper be consists facial skeleton calvaria), the anterior covers cranium into: cranial of which cavity that a (viscerocranium). domed floor cavity,

and mainly unpaired the parietal the calvaria bones temporal occipital are forming sphenoid, the The paired parts and bones, of frontal, bones. and

sphenoid, base mainly of the occipital the temporal, of forming bones parts the cranium The and bones. are

and nasal are the paired bones, and bones, the conchae skeleton bones nasal unpaired bones, palatine facial inferior forming The lacrimal vomer. zygomatic the bones, maxillae

of the facial cranium mandible skeleton. nor The of not is the part part

inferiorly, orbits, the of The the (Fig. anterior jaw, jaw the forehead nasal lower the superiorly, skull region, the the and the upper includes the jaw, of part face orbit the between the upper view and and, 8.18).

The orbit bone, of each forehead consists also frontal the rim the of part the superior of which forms (Fig. 8.18).

Just rim are arches. the side raised each of orbit the superior superciliary on the to more in women. are than These in men pronounced glabella). a (the is depression arches Between small these

of in part is the foramen rim supra-orbital Table the superior 8.1). orbit (supra-orbital the each medial Clearly notch; visible of

the of rim projects inferiorly Medially, the a orbit. medial forming bone frontal part of the

of zygomatic inferiorly the bone lateral upper Laterally, rim orbit. the process of the frontal forming projects the frontal zygomatic with process process This of articulates the bone. the

lateral The formed the cheekbone). of inferior zygomatic well the orbit rim of lower the as by lateral (the bone rim orbit, of is part the as the

in nasal each nasal midline, the the superiorly. with with and other Superiorly, in bones the frontal bone articulate region paired the bones the of the of is nasal suture bone by the The articulation and frontonasal frontal the nasion. center formed the

with frontal Laterally, the articulates of process maxilla. each nasal each bone

nasal Inferiorly, and the aperture opening the in anterior nasal region is of the piriform the large cavity. opening the each is and by and by laterally maxilla. It superiorly the nasal inferiorly bounded bones

spine, anterior part septum piriform forming the nasal conchae. crests, the the of the are aperture nasal through and nasal as the fused Visible paired and the inferior lower anteriorly bony ending nasal

each is and jaw The between the part the of the upper the by paired orbit face maxillae. formed teeth upper and

inferior maxilla medial and orbit. the contributes rims of each Superiorly, to the

each medially, and with of bone process each maxilla the process of articulates the zygomatic frontal bone. with Laterally, zygomatic maxilla the frontal the articulates

nasal opening of the the cavity, the the part maxilla. body Inferiorly, to the is maxilla, of of lateral each

the the inferior infra-orbital maxilla, the the the is 8.1). the below rim of On (Table surface just anterior foramen of of orbit, body

Inferiorly, the maxilla as and the ends process, jaw. alveolar which each the forms upper contains teeth

skull. view lower the (mandible) most in The structure of the is anterior inferior jaw the consists posteriorly. mandible anteriorly of ramus the the It the the body and mandible of of the angle These mandible. at of the meet posteriorly in are of parts the to these mandible anterior extent, visible, view. some All the

two body parts: mandible of into The arbitrarily is divided the

part is the base of the mandible. lower The

mandible. the alveolar is The the upper part part of

the when removed. alveolar the of resorbed the are contains teeth part The mandible teeth is and a has where The two base swelling of the sides anterior the surface (the midline come protuberance) mental mandible its together. of on mandible the (mental to side, tubercles). slightly protuberance, pronounced are bumps the mental more Just lateral on either

of of the visible mental alveolar (Table 8.1) upper and base mandible. the part Laterally, the of border a foramen the the of between lower mandible is the halfway border this mandible. (the the Continuing from line) ridge onto foramen of the a past front ramus is the passing oblique body of the depress is line lower lip. muscles of that for The a attachment the oblique point

portions of calvaria of of the the the the view of lower includes skull cranium, lateral half wall skeleton, and facial (Fig. the and which consists lateral lateral jaw The of the 8.19):

the of parietal, Bones portion sphenoid, the calvaria and the frontal, include occipital, forming bones. temporal lateral

include forming visible part facial the bones. Bones the of nasal, zygomatic maxilla, the skeleton and

visible of mandible the lower jaw. part the forms The

Lateral of calvaria the portion

anteriorly calvaria begins the the of portion with The bone. lateral frontal the the articulates coronal regions, upper with at frontal In bone parietal bone suture. the suture. bone parietal lambdoid then at bone occipital articulates the The the with

the bone of the parts lower In the (Fig. sphenoid lateral frontal the wing bone calvaria, the portion of of with greater articulates at anterior suture. and the bone then sphenoparietal the bone sphenosquamous with 8.19), the which parietal the suture, of temporal the with edge at articulates

proximity pterion. frontal, in where and close the sphenoid, temporal junction the The are bones is parietal, very clinical serious. fracture skull consequences a in of The be this can area by the hematoma. area in fracture can in particularly bone is of be area, artery, resulting an anterior meningeal this middle the a skull in The which extradural and torn division overlies thin this

the of between and is occipital the part suture. across of calvaria the at bone the final The lower lateral occipitomastoid temporal the the bone portion articulation

portion the lateral bone of lower (Fig. A to temporal the cranium wall the major the of is contributor of which several parts: consists 8.19),

the cranium, the and with with lateral the superiorly at large squamous a part sphenosquamous suture. of wing flat temporal articulates greater has the squamous contributes the parietal the The of suture, the and bone forms superior bone the bone, of anterior and anteriorly the appearance the plate, of at wall sphenoid parts to

zygomatic that bony the part anterior articulate of the surface and lower is bone The arch. from curves to initially form the the of projection bone zygomatic then projects temporal an with of the the process anteriorly zygomatic to squamous temporal laterally process

part to meatus acoustic and of below visible the temporal the the part Immediately the of external (ear is of acoustic part from squamous surface canal). this tympanic clearly is bone, the the the on leading temporal bone the the of process origin external zygomatic opening

and for part, is descriptive petrous part mastoid purposes. usually The into a part a which separated petromastoid

the of posterior is is on lateral part bone and temporal a skull. of the the part the the the seen part temporal only The of petromastoid part of view most mastoid bone, the the anteriorly, the the continuous and with superiorly It squamous at suture, and at articulates with bone parietal the posteriorly occipitomastoid with parietomastoid part temporal is suture. bone bone of occipital the two squamous suture other, the is parietomastoid with These each and with the continuous sutures continuous suture. are

of a projects of mastoid prominence the from bone. part bony inferior border mastoid large the process) Inferiorly, the (the temporal several muscles. attachment This for of is a point

Medial of projects the process, bone. lower styloid mastoid the the the process temporal from to border

the Visible facial part of skeleton

of the and include bones skull viscerocranium zygomatic a lateral visible nasal, view (Fig. the in of bones maxilla, the The 8.19) follows: as

nasal anteriorly. bone A

the the articulates teeth process bone. it its the with to The and zygomatic inferior the bone; frontal its superiorly, upper maxilla it nasal orbit; alveolar formation containing with forming with the medially, the the of jaw; its articulates borders bone; process medial zygomatic anteriorly, laterally, frontal with process articulates contributes of

assists with an the medially, bone zygomatic in through maxilla; rim the irregularly bone form horizontal articulates zygomatic process lateral of the prominently of that shaped with cheek, articulate the bone bone in this rounded of projects the process zygomatic rim of process its a view inferior this the process arch. of frontal process orbit; superiorly, the with the to laterally, The bone, the view— frontal forms of in zygomatic seen in the a visual of zygomatic is the the temporal prominence surface with and centerpiece of articulation of temporal formation lateral the the formation zygomatic skull, orbit assisting its backward of the it so the the the

is 8.1) (the Usually zygomaticofacial a foramen; the Table visible lateral zygomatic of foramen the small bone. surface on medial deep bone. is on zygomaticotemporal present A the surface of the foramen

skull structure the view of in lateral bony the visible mandible. The a final is and the the of the margin the the a anterior posterior mandible of mandible, inferior view, consists (Fig. of of it the where ramus meets Inferiorly of ramus angle the anterior the body mandible, posterior of part in the of mandible margin this the 8.19).

the mandible mental in The are protuberance teeth the of visible body part is the and view. alveolar this in of the

body, the superior surface and part lateral mental coronoid the and of The foramen the processes on the upward. condylar ramus of is on extend

the coronoid is process attachment temporalis articulation the bone, for of process point The of the temporal mandible condylar the is the and in with involved muscle.

are occipital, of skull. the posterior in bones temporal The parietal, view seen and the

of of structure flat view the bone squamous (Fig. main Centrally in is part skull the the occipital or this the 8.20). articulates the with sutures. paired with bone laterally It superiorly at parietal lambdoid the suture and at temporal each bones occipitomastoid the bones may small be of islands or the wormian observed. Along bone suture lambdoid (sutural bones)

the are bone. on bony Several occipital visible landmarks protuberance) laterally curved lines external (superior There is from a with nuchal (the lines). occipital it projection midline extending is most occipital prominent inion. external the The of protuberance point the below cm) additional About inch lines the 1 (2.5 lines two inferior (the laterally. curve nuchal lines) nuchal superior external external crest. occipital protuberance is the the occipital from downward Extending

skull, being the the of bones Laterally, processes with (Fig. posterior the temporal the the are in prominent visible view feature mastoid 8.20). mastoid is attachment each posterior the notch belly point of a border the of the digastric notch), a is which muscle. inferomedial for (the of process On mastoid

seen the bones, frontal of in a view superior (Fig. occipital parietal skull and bone, The bone are 8.21). part of These the up the (skullcap). calvaria the bones or calva superior make

to In an anterior posterior direction:

paired the frontal coronal suture. The articulates parietal bone bones at the with unpaired

suture. with sagittal articulate in two bones at the midline other The parietal each the

the occipital unpaired the The at bones suture. with lambdoid bone parietal articulate

junction lambda. coronal and sutures and of lambdoid the junction sagittal bregma, sagittal of and The the sutures the is the the is

on paired be this lateral in the only view posteriorly, one just foramina (Fig. skull the the to of sagittal may parietal visible suture The foramina, each bone parietal 8.21).

The the bones (Fig. making calvaria up bone and in tables diploë). spongy structure, 8.22) of internal (the their a of external dense of separated are compact unique consisting bone by layer

of mastoid inferior extends view base the anteriorly teeth The incisor is nuchal and in to to zygomatic the from and processes (Fig. superior lines middle the arches posteriorly skull laterally the seen the and 8.23).

the palate foramen anterior anterior purposes the the magnum, margin middle and behind the edge part, of lines. from superior part, an teeth is of which from extends a For extends magnum anterior the a which of which descriptive base the nuchal posterior hard skull the includes and the into: foramen divided to the often palate, to the part, hard

the the main skull part the anterior are of the the of and base of The teeth features hard palate.

the project of two processes the The from maxillae. teeth alveolar U-shaped are in together sides that a (Fig. These alveolar arranged arch processes borders three palate on hard the 8.23).

of the palatine of bone each anteriorly each maxilla posteriorly. processes palatine is the composed horizontal The and of plates hard palate

in paired the meet the maxillae suture. interpalatine the midline suture, processes palatomaxillary palatine the bone The intermaxillary palatine at the and bones meet and at paired of meet horizontal of paired paired the the each at the each palatine midline maxilla in suture, plates

each of process pyramidal anterior the the to the is to the immediately the palatine foramina (the a also posterior the of canals; are posterior which the lead nasal the pointed hard (the the to features posterior palate posterolateral posterior canals; greater palate incisive midline nasal palatine are free just palate. palatine incisive visible each to in border greater which examined: palatine and fossa greater the foramina, lead in in the palatine of canals, incisive which which side, cavity); midline contain hard the of hard spine) projection teeth, the lesser the foramina passageways on when palate between foramina of bone, Several palatine border near hard the lesser openings walls additional

of the part of is The the middle complex: skull base

vomer Forming half are the anterior bones. and the sphenoid

half the the temporal occipital bones. are paired Forming posterior and

is (Fig. in the Anteriorly, the midline, on resting sphenoid small vomer bone the 8.23). It choanae. contributes formation to the the nasal two of bony separating the septum

part the of of base of Most the of sphenoid skull consists the the anterior middle of bone. part the

and projecting greater laterally downward sphenoid placed paired two is body, each choana. lateral lesser made centrally to the The up and immediately body, pterygoid from of bone a projecting processes wings

bone, wings, (Fig. skull the the and Three view the the sphenoid of processes, seen body, inferior greater are pterygoid in parts of 8.23). the in lesser the seen is of wing inferior The not sphenoid view.

separated of two The body a sphenoid large placed septum. a air bone cube containing is of sinuses by the centrally

bone. with articulates with and bones, with palatine occipital posterolaterally and the vomer, temporal posteriorly the the bones, It anteriorly ethmoid,

from greater the of and are downward junction the (Fig. body Extending the pterygoid processes wings the 8.23). a of and of these lateral fossa. consists Each medial separated plate pterygoid broader plate the processes by narrow

a and of medial the Each to the ends shallow projection, pterygoid form hook-like small, process the pterygoid scaphoid with inferiorly superiorly plate hamulus, divides fossa.

near process the passes to scaphoid from the superior the the of fossa, Just lacerum. pterygoid pterygoid of foramen root of the the medial which margin plate the forward canal, the at of opening is anterior

lateral is Lateral to the sphenoid (Fig. greater the the the plate process pterygoid of of wing the wall the but forms lateral continues which of a laterally of to part part skull base not form 8.23), the also of only skull. of the articulates It with temporal posteriorly laterally the of and bone. parts

greater wing the process. plate foramen the inferior surface and from the posterolateral of Important view ovale in extending pterygoid the the foramen on the border the an of lateral visible upper of outward spinosum the the are end skull of features on

(Fig. the half the are base the of and the posterior the middle of occipital the bones skull In paired part of bone temporal 8.23).

specifically in basilar posterior or the bone, The to part, sphenoid. immediately is midline the of body more occipital its the the temporal extends laterally and posteriorly is magnum to the by foramen bounded It bones.

part for the occipital bony skull of is the protuberance Prominent the of on attachment the bone basilar the the to pharynx of pharyngeal parts (Fig. a of the base tubercle, 8.23).

of to is petromastoid of lateral bone. occipital Immediately the basilar part bone the temporal part of the the each petrous part

bone Wedge-shaped anteriorly anteromedial, sphenoid part part bone petrous posteriorly. with appearance, greater is temporal of apex the the the in of the of the and the wing basilar its its occipital between forms an lacerum, with irregular apex opening life one filled of The (Fig. cartilage the the in boundaries of foramen 8.23).

part the foramen occipital The medially body the the basilar of the boundaries other of lacerum and bone the of sphenoid anteriorly. are

carotid the Posterolateral opening of is foramen the the along lacerum the bone from large circular for petrous canal. the temporal part

the the temporal bone pharyngotympanic of and groove part tube the wing for sphenoid of the the the (auditory tube). Between part greater cartilaginous petrous a is of of bony the temporal canal part in a posterolaterally bone into the petrous pharyngotympanic the This groove continues tube. for

the greater participates sphenoid Just squamous in temporomandibular the which part of bone, of is the wing temporal to joint. the lateral the articulates is of the with the concavity a mandible It fossa, of where head base which mandibular contains skull. the the the articulation border is the tubercle, downward projection An anterior of articular of prominent is which important feature the this the of the fossa mandibular (Fig. 8.23).

magnum The the to anterior of the the of extends from edge the superior (Fig. posterior nuchal of the base posteriorly skull part foramen lines 8.23). consists centrally temporal bone the It and of of bones parts occipital the laterally.

the bony of this the the of skull part The of element is bone occipital major (Fig. base 8.23). around has continuous. cord the are through a spinal of the and the the of brain this which magnum, part four of It and organized skull parts base is foramen prominent feature which

the the magnum, the is The (Fig. squamous occipital lateral which foramen bone is magnum which part, part, to the are basilar parts, the parts of foramen lateral posterior to are foramen anterior magnum, and which the to the 8.23).

The squamous posterior lateral of of the components part base skull. and are of the parts the

the skull occipital from crest), magnum. external examining bone external which bone squamous foramen feature of downward extends inferior is of protuberance a the the part view the when visible toward of The occipital the the occipital most of (the ridge from laterally lines the crest. arc of inferior the The midpoint nuchal

Immediately the numerous bones, structural are lateral foramen parts of the contain the features. magnum important which lateral occipital to

(Fig. the magnum anterolateral each are condyles occipital On of border rounded foramen the 8.23). atlas the These with articulate structures paired CI). (vertebra large canal. superior is each condylar a condylar and to (the is canal, and the condyle fossa) depression each hypoglossal a containing condyle anterior to Posterior bone. large, hypoglossal a the foramen jugular temporal occipital the by and the bone canal notch notch Lateral irregular jugular of to opposition of formed is each of jugular

is the the part base the skull posterior bone. of of Laterally temporal the in and of bone styloid location petromastoid of The temporal in the the the mastoid are this (Fig. process the part part parts seen 8.23).

from of the surface. The inferior projecting part edge mastoid is the large mastoid identified by cone-shaped its lateral process for of This muscles. attachment bony structure several point is prominent the medial mastoid attachment muscle. which for also process the the the deep an aspect is mastoid notch, of On a point is

the from projecting styloid mastoid to border the the bone. of needle-shaped the lower process is Anteromedial process temporal muscles and point process attachment numerous of The for ligaments. is styloid also a

foramen. process is between the Finally, and styloid process stylomastoid mastoid the the

contains the is cranial within brain, blood space vessels, sinuses. the cranial of nerves, and that the cranium meninges, parts The the cavity proximal venous cranial

that the the superior calvaria brain. The dome-shaped aspect protects of is roof the bone consists frontal the the occipital mainly (Fig. posteriorly in of the bone It middle, bones anteriorly, and parietal paired the 8.24).

the and parietal visible bones, sagittal include: between bones. paired lambdoid coronal and frontal the the parietal and between the parietal occipital bones, the suture, suture, the between internally suture, Sutures

sutures are bregma, lambdoid where these sagittal the where sutures sutures lambda, and the of meet, the meet. coronal and the junctions and Visible sagittal

Other bony calva of ridges grooves and internal and the numerous include markings surface the on pits.

arachnoid attachment of position which the the its the the From of venous separates extending smaller pits of a number are examined; a the of either of features point the specialization bony identifiable cavity, for partially when that of location of the small beginning structures the intradural frontal reabsorption vessels. the is crest at foveolae), various widens by meningeal sagittal of the the the a the to frontal granulations the of on lateral brain involved termination anterior a for (the cerebral seen groove created grooves mater superior side arachnoid cerebrospinal posteriorly course, posterior, throughout readily the and granulations mark of midline are: ridge its the and sagittal structure); of deepens roof (a from sinus superior the sinus which which dura sagittal on granular hemispheres); of the with falx in marks groove surface cranial cerebri depressions (an fluid); the bone cranial roof point and superior of frontal is crest), the for two the of on cavity and superior sinus, (prominent meningeal bone (the coverings the of the aspects

into middle, cavity is cranial the fossae. divided posterior of anterior, and The floor cranial

Parts (Fig. bones form fossa frontal, anterior the sphenoid ethmoid, and of cranial the 8.25). wings (midline) midline, the and in direction, posteriorly, is the ethmoid and two lesser bone frontal body the parts in (laterally). lateral anterior bone Its composed the bone of the and of: floor sphenoid

of hemispheres. the and above nasal fossa and the cavity the cerebral the filled lobes The by orbits, anterior is it frontal is cranial

crest frontal Anteriorly, frontal of a crest) midline (the bone the projects bone. small from wedge-shaped This of cerebri. attachment is for point a falx the is foramen the crest (Table to the posterior Immediately cecum frontal 8.2). and nasal frontal the This superior emissary transmit may sagittal between the the connecting foramen veins sinus. ethmoid cavity bones with

of ethmoid (the crest is a the bone to prominent wedge projecting from Posterior superiorly the crista galli). frontal of extension the another is partially separating point This the cerebri, for two attachment vertical is mater which dura the falx hemispheres. cerebral of

the bone is galli Lateral of crista the plate cribriform the (Fig. ethmoid to 8.25). nasal a structure, pass to fibers olfactory from through its allows bulb. nerve foramina which the This to sieve-like mucosa the small olfactory is The as [I]. referred are to nerve nerves olfactory commonly the olfactory collectively

each anterior the formed orbit which plates of relatively roof side the the of is also of below. forms orbital thin frontal (the the cranial fossa the bone), part floor of ethmoid, frontal by the On of bone the cranial bones, wings and frontal the anterior of fossa the both of sphenoid. is Posterior lesser and body formed by the the rest of floor to ethmoid the anteriorly the the parts into fossa. In orbital it bone body between bone reach ethmoid middle cranial of the and posteriorly extends the the extends to midline, frontal the

the the the fossae boundary the between and anterior optic of the sphenoid. stretching of cranial canals smooth prechiasmatic a in midline sulcus, the middle edge anterior the body The groove between is across

the of wings sphenoid Lesser

the between two project of the the of from middle of boundary wings distinct parts fossae. the cranial and form body sphenoid laterally the a lateral sphenoid lesser The anterior and

the cranial Overhanging frontal at near junction of that greater of the and sphenoid of middle laterally the the of greater superior edge orbital lesser fissure wings. wing part as point sharp is each lesser bone the a the the between and the lateral the anterior formed wing fossae, upper ends

a process widens, clinoid lesser anterior wing and as each (Fig. posteriorly, rounded curves ends Medially 8.25). for processes cerebral part dura These of that sheet serve the cerebelli, posterior point from the attachment which as the of the a cerebellum. is of separates tentorium anterior the hemispheres enter to anterior anterior to cranial ophthalmic and process (the of cavity they nerve lesser is orbit. the the optic a the artery the which exit wing opening circular the as in Just canal), [II] each optic through pass clinoid sphenoid middle fossa. cranial usually in canals The optic included the are

cranial The (Fig. bones fossa of of consists the sphenoid and temporal middle parts 8.26).

the sphenoid. is a anterior groove the middle anterior the body of across is between canals and of the fossae the between stretching prechiasmatic which the sulcus, midline smooth edge boundary The optic in cranial the

petromastoid the surface, cranial boundaries part the are bone. part formed The fossa petrous by middle as the of posterior the as superior border, temporal high the of the of of anterior

sphenoid. formed the The middle the and the is midline fossa the of of by floor in body elevated cranial squamous the greater and large the Lateral formed side wing part are depressions by this of either the sphenoid the to temporal of bone. on lobes contain the temporal brain. the of depressions These

(the bone chiasmatic posterior to body hypophyseal uniquely area the deep the anterior which consists sulcus sella fossa) with containing turcica), of of of pituitary (the (Fig. walls posterior the is remainder gland vertical the modified of and Just the central a sphenoid 8.26).

a slight the in anterior superior at extent as tuberculum sella sellae) position with the of wall is chiasmatic of posterior elevation the The vertical visible sulcus. its (the edge

processes) Lateral the evident. tuberculum from corners projections (the sellae the are of sometimes middle clinoid

and of wall sellae, sella posterior large a the dorsum bone upward turcica The forward. of is ridge projecting the edges the are processes, points which clinoid cerebelli. the the posterior attachment, this bony lateral of like anterior tentorium (the contain projections top rounded of processes), At ridge clinoid the for

on of greater of cranial Lateral side the to by fossa sphenoid floor side each the of middle (Fig. either the body the wing the is sphenoid, formed the of 8.26).

lesser major fissure, is of fossa gap, separates wing between the from wing orbit. superior passageway A middle and greater the the the and the a diagonal sphenoid orbital cranial the nerve trochlear the nerve the the nerve are the nerve fissure abducent oculomotor veins. [IV], [VI], through Passing [III], ophthalmic and ophthalmic the [V1],

pterygopalatine fossa on medial Posterior projecting direction orbital to maxillary fossa. the anterior floor a nerve end the the fossa is cranial fissure through middle the the of cranial rotundum), to an middle in [V2] superior from foramen the of rounded which (the the foramen passes

(the foramen structures which the the is large between extracranial and infratemporal cranial middle rotundum fossa opening Posterolateral a to oval allows pass foramen the to ovale), fossa. the mandibular foramen. occasionally, (the small that a nerve [V3], vessel came originally [IX]) this plexus glossopharyngeal nerve artery), through the from pass lesser The meningeal tympanic (carrying from middle petrosal nerve and, fibers accessory

ovale spinosum from (Fig. foramen foramen small the Posterolateral is the 8.26). middle This infratemporal fossa. fossa with the connects the also cranial opening pass floor associated the once through cranial this middle across and the groove artery wall meningeal for of lateral inside, fossa and meningeal clearly marks its The artery middle path. middle foramen and, veins their the the

Posteromedial to canal. opening is intracranial the the foramen the ovale of carotid rounded is (Fig. inferior opening Directly (the an foramen irregular to lacerum) foramen this 8.26). a the life lacerum completely. Clearly the no in closed structures in foramen and inferior pass skull, it observed by cartilaginous is the through view of plug,

The is of part middle of fossa the formed posterior of part bone. cranial anterior the surface the petrous petromastoid temporal boundary the of the by

(Fig. is a there depression in Medially, part bone of the anterior slight of temporal impression) petrous the (trigeminal surface the marks the trigeminal 8.26), sensory which nerve ganglion the for location of [V]. the

of the nerve). direction hiatus petrosal groove for bone the and greater of part that and a Lateral anterior to surface passes linear small trigeminal petrous ends temporal is on a foramen impression superolateral a the the the groove and (the in in is petrosal facial nerve The of nerve a the greater [VII]. branch

the came the the second, hiatus Anterolateral [IX] a carrying the to nerve petrosal a greater branch plexus and fibers the is lesser groove smaller (Fig. nerve from for groove glossopharyngeal nerve, originally tympanic that for from petrosal 8.26).

the produced temporal lateral Above near nerves, a of the lesser of anterior to greater bone, ridge openings semicircular and (the and petrous the inner ear. petrosal small bone of of superior underlying the protrusion arcuate the eminence) is canal rounded the part for by the

slightly of lateral depressed. is surface the anterior the bone anterior petrous arcuate temporal Just the to and eminence the of part marks region middle cavity. This is ear bony thin the and the roof tympani, of tegmen the

contributions The mostly the fossa consists bones, and bones temporal with cranial occipital of parietal parts from small and of (Fig. posterior sphenoid the 8.27). the deepest the It contains brainstem the and of largest cranial fossae is and three cerebellum. and the and pons, medulla) (midbrain,

cranial in clivus boundaries fossa the and the the of sellae are The dorsum the (Fig. midline posterior anterior 8.27). that extends from foramen bone is a clivus The slope magnum. upward the of formed is the contributions the the of basilar by It body occipital from sphenoid the and bone. from part of

Laterally the bone. superior boundaries petrous temporal petromastoid part the fossa part the cranial the border of anterior of posterior the of the of are

laterally the of parietal temporal major the the part fossa. the the of bone part the of and occipital border groove petromastoid level of to Posteriorly bone boundary, small transverse while parts squamous the occipital the the bones and is

the the skull, posterior fossa, in magnum. the largest cranial Centrally, the in deepest foramen the part foramen of is basilar occipital side, either part is occipital It of the the the surrounded lateral part anteriorly, the squamous occipital bone bone of parts bone on of by the the and posteriorly.

the through superiorly passes magnum cord brainstem. foramen the to continue The spinal as

meninges, the of accessory the foramen [XI]. are the through arteries, passing Also magnum roots the and nerve vertebral the spinal

clivus from The magnum. foramen upward the slopes clivus sinus petrosal of to the the the of a the Lateral is bone the part petrous part part of occipital the the groove basilar temporal for petromastoid (Fig. inferior and between bone 8.27).

the part the the of is petrous temporal an meatus). foramen upper internal (the Laterally, bone, across of acoustic of the surface posterior oval half [VIII] artery through pass it. and facial The vestibulocochlear [VII] labyrinthine the nerves, and

the bone internal to temporal large (Fig. is jugular the bone the the foramen Inferior occipital from acoustic separated by meatus 8.27). is side the inferior for from Leading medial sinus. the the groove lateral groove this from for to the the foramen and side sinus, the sigmoid petrosal

sigmoid and is internal area sinus vein petrosal the with the internal empties jugular foramen. continuous the passes vein, foramen, jugular the the sinus in inferior the jugular while of into into The jugular

foramen glossopharyngeal vagus [XI]. passing the jugular nerve nerve nerve the and through Also are [X], [IX], the accessory the

jugular the of mound foramen is large a bone to rounded (the the Medial jugular occipital tubercle). the the [XII] enters hypoglossal to a pharyngeal the through magnum, nerve Just inferior and fossa. artery fossa, the which and to posterior superior foramen canal, this, of is cranial the the hypoglossal branch cranial leaves ascending posterior meningeal

vein. the small to an present, transmits is hypoglossal Just posterolateral condylar emissary when the that, canal canal

of bone Squamous part occipital the

the has squamous several occipital bone part The prominent (Fig. features of 8.27):

the the the magnum Running internal occipital midline crest. from foramen in upward is

side to floor is accommodate posterior internal the the the crest, hemispheres. the cerebellar of fossa either concave occipital On cranial of

(the superiorly protuberance). internal prominence The crest in ends bony internal a occipital occipital

transverse occipital toward foramina. for then Extending sinuses, are eventually by produced a each internal sinus—each inferiorly the laterally these grooves grooves which jugular of laterally, joining turns the the continue groove from sigmoid protuberance

sinuses. sinuses sigmoid venous and intradural transverse are The

the structures and cavity enter cranial through and major leave fissures which Foramina

structures in and through and regions other Foramina cranial cavity pass the which fissures major Fig. are summarized between 8.28.

meninges, three cord, by of Fig. spinal is as The membranes layers the surrounded well as brain, (the mater), the and layer brain (the the pia (the surface layer (the 8.31A)—a of an layer middle dura mater). mater), firmly arachnoid attached to tough, inner outer delicate, a

the through foramen cranial these the (Fig. mater of The one through is are magnum meninges continuous similar magnum, important with foramen layers, meninges only consists two continuous of spinal cranial to, and one dura and distinction—the with, the 8.31B).

outer a the thick, is covering dura mater of brain. tough, cranial The layer inner an outer meningeal (Fig. and layer of periosteal an It consists 8.31A):

outer foramina meningeal is to The firmly continuous the cavity, (Fig. surface skull, attached the foramen is the skull of the on arteries, layer periosteum of at and contains periosteal with periosteum cranial the the the is outer and the intracranial other magnum 8.31B).

The foramen in inner the and meningeal mater mater is contact arachnoid the the layer through dura close with with magnum. continuous spinal is

of of types unique separate two dura The (Fig. each numerous to form at other two layers from structures locations dural partitions, the which brain, venous 8.31A): intracranial of parts project inward separate and and incompletely structures.

and cavity. partitions subdivide the dural The into cranial cranial project partially cavity the cerebelli, the and diaphragma falx cerebelli, sellae. include cerebri, falx They tentorium

(Fig. The falx cerebri two mater of the dura 8.32) from that the hemispheres. between the passes lining projection crescent-shaped calva meningeal a is downward dura cerebral and is frontal bone ethmoid to bone. the It galli crest attached the anteriorly frontal crista of the of tentorium it cerebelli. attached blends Posteriorly with is to the and

The tentorium cerebelli (Fig. cranial hemispheres. 8.32) a cerebral the of is in the the horizontal mater projection that posterior of fossa and cerebellum dura covers separates the parts posterior from meningeal the attached the posteriorly bone along occipital for sinuses. the is It grooves the transverse to superior the the processes. Laterally, petrous it ending attached anteriorly the and border of clinoid bone, of is posterior anterior the at to temporal part

free, an medial through in anterior passes. notch), opening cerebelli borders (the forming which the the midbrain The are oval the and tentorium tentorial of midline

(Fig. cerebelli The falx small posterior is cranial projection 8.32) fossa. the a meningeal mater dura in midline of attached superiorly to the crest is It and bone cerebelli. tentorium to of the posteriorly occipital the occipital internal between and Its is anterior hemispheres. free is two edge the cerebellar

dural sellae is (Fig. the final diaphragma projection The 8.32). shelf the in of hypophyseal of meningeal bone. small the dura mater horizontal sella fossa the covers turcica This sphenoid of the pituitary through in gland center the sellae opening with brain, of infundibulum, which the blood the vessels. an and connecting the passes base There diaphragma the accompanying any is

mater the The arterial supply (Fig. to dura the consists the meningeal meningeal and cranial arteries and of: periosteal cranial middle in accessory the and other in artery the anterior posterior fossa, and the middle meningeal outer in posterior travels layer branches fossa. cranial meningeal in arteries anterior the of the 8.33) dura fossa,

much All for greatest the small meningeal dura. larger except arteries which of part is middle the supplies the and artery, are

of arteries. meningeal branches the arteries anterior ethmoidal The are

branch is The a middle artery maxillary of artery. the meningeal and fossa divides middle spinosum through and It into foramen branches: anterior posterior the enters cranial the

the during of in passes branch the the The vertical to anterior crossing almost its an pterion direction skull, reach vertex course.

posterior fossa. The branch this middle region direction, supplying a posterosuperior the of cranial passes in

The foramen enters the small foramen. this maxillary areas the a branch supplies is of accessory through usually the that artery medial middle ovale and fossa artery to cranial meningeal

from meningeal and (Fig. fossa mater cranial posterior come sources other in posterior The several artery branches the the dura meningeal supplying 8.33):

the posterior fossa the The enters posterior artery, ascending artery, of foramen. pharyngeal branch meningeal terminal jugular the cranial the through

enters posterior the pharyngeal cranial from canal. the through fossa A meningeal the branch ascending artery hypoglossal

from artery cranial and foramen. branches posterior Meningeal occipital the mastoid enter foramen through jugular fossa the the the

artery cranial branch artery through the posterior as from vertebral A vertebral fossa meningeal arises foramen the magnum. the enters the

the Innervation of (Fig. dura mater and V2, vagus small nerve third and, nerve the first, trigeminal 8.34) sometimes, the three and divisions of nerves. of branches cervical is V3], the meningeal all by second, [V1, [X], has cranial the the hypoglossal (Possible nerves posterior of been glossopharyngeal also in reported.) fossa [XII] involvement and [IX]

which floor ethmoidal In the the cerebri. from anterior anterior are the part nerves, of [V1], cranial and the the branches nerve supply falx the meningeal fossa of ophthalmic branches

cerebri. runs of posterior meningeal cerebelli posteriorly, tentorium ophthalmic and [V1] nerve branch the Additionally, part of the the supplying the a falx turns and

of nerve meningeal nerve branches is by meningeal along the middle distribution [V2] middle mandibular laterally, medially meningeal [V3]. from from cranial the the the artery, and fossa branches supplied maxillary by The

second, nerves, and fossa the supplied the branches sometimes, through enter fossa is by canal, cranial meningeal cervical which third first, foramen and, from the magnum, the posterior foramen. jugular the hypoglossal The been of Meningeal described. vagus have also [X] branches nerve the [XII] nerves also have from [IX] been contributions reported.) the hypoglossal (Possible and glossopharyngeal

lines, of not that the the thin, a membrane arachnoid mater adherent mater The avascular dura is (Fig. but inner to, surface is 8.35). processes extend and subarachnoid become thin or trabeculae cross the surface downward, with space, the mater. its inner continuous pia From

does the brain, for the fissures enter between the fissure arachnoid except not or cerebral the grooves Unlike of the the pia, longitudinal hemispheres. two

surface pia (Fig. membrane the is invests thin, of brain that closely mater a the The delicate 8.35). nerves applied on at roots surface, of follows their contours It and the closely origins. grooves cranial and the the brain, is fissures of to the the entering its

Arrangement meninges spaces of and

arrangement with a cavity coupled (Fig. the is potential of spaces meninges cranial within and real There unique 8.35).

pia dura is while mater, space space the real mater. a arachnoid A potential related to the and mater between exists the

the (Fig. bone extradural is The space space mater between potential and dura 8.35). cavity. of dura bones is attached the surrounding periosteal mater layer the or Normally, firmly to the cranial outer

traumatic can in potential space dura fluid-filled space This and become actual vascular when between event a results a bone hemorrhage. a torn of due dural Bleeding or to a results often into hematoma. artery space rupture meningeal extradural a the primarily sinus extradural venous in an from less

subdural not a exist. true does space Anatomically, collecting cell region in border represents this the layer, due a Blood injury meningeal the is (subdural of innermost dural hematoma) which dissection dura. to lining the of spaces surrounded with border material. by are amorphous cells flattened extracellular cells filled Dural may arachnoid underlying an these and While cells layer. very occasional seen junction between the cell be infrequent, vein subdural the to cerebral sinus can a dura hematoma. the tearing dural a it enter as a result Bleeding venous in crosses due to of through

normally the meninges, space associated Deep with occurring is the the only to fluid-filled arachnoid the space mater subarachnoid (Fig. 8.35). brain, brain. on inner arachnoid the and follow mater, the the clings brain, occurs pia against the being fissures grooves the does of follows of the dura surface of while contour It mater closely the not surface to surface of and because the the mater the the (Fig. two between therefore membranes subarachnoid The space narrow created these is 8.35).

into cord surrounds cisterns). and areas brain certain and it (subarachnoid spinal the enlarges space locations expanded subarachnoid The in It vessels. fluid blood cerebrospinal and contains (CSF)

in choroid by of the produced the plexus, primarily ventricles is the Cerebrospinal brain. fluid spinal that clear, the circulates surrounding cell-free subarachnoid It and cord. fluid colorless, brain a space through the is

returns venous arachnoid The to system villi. through CSF the These sinus, dural extensions, lateral venous as clumps which and its lacunae is a lateral (Fig. (arachnoid project into sinus, the the granulations) superior sagittal 8.35).

is brain nervous component the a system. The central of

be divided continuous brain can five into the During parts development (Figs. and 8.37). 8.36 caudal rostral cranial) are: they (or to From

cerebral the hemispheres. telencephalon large The (cerebrum) becomes of and a separated elevations surface hemispheres depressions fissure. hemispheres partially by (sulci), The longitudinal deep of consists (gyri) and are the these subdivided and on cerebrum position. into The based the fills cerebelli cavity the of cranial area the is tentorium lobes above

the to other thalamus, the by hemispheres, of the is and be is brainstem. considered which part and consists view most hypothalamus, diencephalon, brain rostral the The adult in classically related from cerebral the structures, hidden of midbrain, today, common usually the and brainstem in term the medulla.) pons, (However, refers usage to

seen between spans examined, middle is (midbrain), is brain adult fossae. cranial the brainstem intact part the which The posterior mesencephalon and the of junction first an when the

in (anterior of anterior part part which to the pons posterior cerebellum cerebellum, hemispheres of gives cerebelli) of fossa bulging metencephalon, the sellae). two in the tentorium the clivus is cranial posterior midline to most the (consisting the dorsum a the fossa below and The rise part and the brainstem and a the cranial lateral against and

the XII foramen cranial myelencephalon of the the uppermost cervical first (medulla to or VI part the rootlets at oblongata), attached. the and of nerve The nerves caudalmost to are ends magnum brainstem, which

two the of (Fig. arteries internal its pairs brain vertebral supply The carotid arterial and receives vessels, from to (of which produce interconnected 8.38), cerebral arterial a cranial are cavity circle in the Willis).

the enter fuse vertebral to pons arteries basilar the through artery. cavity magnum two just the foramen cranial form and the to inferior The

the either carotid canals internal two arteries on The cavity the side. carotid enter through cranial

arises Each artery subclavian from the (Fig. each vertebral of artery first part the of in the the 8.38) cervical through upper six and lower foramen superiorly of neck, part transversarium passes the vertebrae. small branch. each vertebral the foramen entering cavity through meningeal off artery a cranial magnum On the gives

the before three artery Continuing rise forward, additional companion artery to joining basilar (Figs. form with vessel branches gives to its the vertebral 8.38 and 8.39):

is inferior The first a posterior cerebellar artery.

side posterior posterior can of posterior of in inferior arteries, arteries from originate the attachment posterior two cord the descends spinal artery, around each from (although the branch passes one posterior the spinal on on the surface the then the posteriorly which arteries, spinal cerebellar of commonly and second A medulla the roots—there posterior spinal area the directly branch is more they vertebral the arteries). are

side single artery, anterior branch to companion third in other the the descends spinal form spinal cord. from its of then joins with anterior A which fissure the median the

in the travels rostral The artery direction aspect basilar along (Fig. of the pons anterior a 8.39). branches anterior the superior pontine several arteries. inferior direction cerebellar the cerebellar to rostral and arteries, in arteries, a Its include small caudal The ends as two posterior rise bifurcation, arteries. a basilar giving cerebral to artery

carotid two two branches internal arise as arteries carotid one (Fig. of the common the terminal arteries The of 8.38). skull base the they to carotid the superiorly proceed canal. They of enter where the

Entering ophthalmic middle artery, artery artery, carotid internal cerebral and the posterior cavity each the (Fig. cerebral communicating cranial the gives artery, the the artery anterior off 8.39).

of vertebrobasilar at circle the (Fig. interconnecting vessels The and formed internal the is of arterial Willis) (of cerebral by systems carotid brain the base 8.38). accomplished is This artery to on side, internal and and carotid connecting cerebral posterior by: right communicating arteries, interconnection anterior communicating with an each two one artery the the arteries (Figs. cerebral connecting left artery anastomotic anterior the posterior each other, 8.39). 8.38 and

brain into veins veins, empty and which Venous the cerebellar sinuses. venous internally eventually the to brainstem, of draining as cerebral venous lead begins small veins, dural drainage larger networks channels of jugular eventually and the dura sinuses and the inner the outer layers are endothelial-lined veins. dural internal periosteal the to meningeal mater, of lead spaces between The venous

tables dural of the cavity cranial the veins, emptying to which between bone sinuses of diploic in Also veins, emissary roof dural from into and external and compact the run sinuses the venous (Fig. the pass the which are cranial outside internal cavity, venous 8.43).

infections emissary veins can a enter valves. no they The have clinically conduit are the be through important because cranial they can which cavity because

petrosal, sinuses sigmoid, basilar and dural transverse, and (Fig. superior cavernous, sagittal, straight, superior petrosal, sinuses confluence venous sinuses, inferior and the sinuses, of include sagittal, occipital The the sphenoparietal, inferior the Table 8.44, 8.3).

of the (Fig. The cerebri in falx is superior sagittal superior the sinus border 8.44). usually receive the the cecum, nasal vein posteriorly It where confluence anteriorly emissary from of ends cavity, sinuses, in the the a it transverse sinus. and empty the small begins foramen to to into bending may at right right numerous (lateral extensions communicates with arachnoid sinus The lacunae) granulations. the sagittal of lateral superior containing sinus

sagittal from receives superior the veins cerebral cerebral usually and diploic the from falx superior the cerebri. of veins, emissary veins and sinus The surface hemispheres,

The inferior falx margin of sagittal sinus (Fig. the is the cerebri inferior in 8.44). cerebral vein at the cerebral veins few is the posteriorly the and and a cerebri, straight cerebral where anterior tentorium the joined vein it veins great great receives cerebelli, sinus the and of (Fig. by with together It the ends from edge falx forms 8.44).

to the cerebelli posteriorly to of left and sinus. ends junction tentorium sinus cerebri straight the the into bending the transverse left usually falx of The the and confluence the continues in along empty sinuses,

posterior cerebellar of deep the from superior falx veins, from (draining sagittal the (from the sinus straight blood cerebral cerebral hemispheres), the cerebri. cerebral hemispheres), usually The the part inferior areas sinus, cerebral vein veins the veins and great receives of

transverse of and Confluence sinuses,

superior is protuberance the into sinuses, sinus confluence a which the and at straight sinuses, (Fig. cerebelli) internal empty dilated (in The falx and of sagittal the the occipital space occipital the left drained right transverse is 8.44) and sinuses. by and

confluence extend in the cavity. walls the cerebelli cranial sinuses joins directions tentorium posterior lateral horizontal the transverse The sinuses where and of the of paired from

blood blood sinus sinus. receives the straight and usually transverse right the usually left from sinus The the receives sinus sagittal from transverse superior

and sinuses petrosal diploic and hemispheres veins emissary parts the transverse the The superior from the and veins. of receive from cerebral inferior cerebellum, blood the also sinus,

(Fig. surface sinuses As of sinuses they become occipital the sigmoid bone, the the transverse the leave which the temporal, of jugular internal bones, the grooving veins. turn occipital before ending at and 8.44), beginning the parietal, inferiorly, cerebellar, diploic, from sigmoid veins. cerebral, also and emissary receive blood The sinuses

(Figs. cavernous lateral sphenoid paired are against sella the The of the the side body of the turcica aspect either of on sinuses bone 8.46). 8.45 and clinical pass of through of their and them. structures the because importance They that great are connections

but orbit) of not the (from veins the fossa). and veins also plexus from ophthalmic veins sinuses veins blood The only (from in cerebral pterygoid the infratemporal receive the cavernous emissary from sites connections into for from intracranial extracranial pass infections pathways These locations. to provide to are In vulnerable these injury due through sinuses located addition, in structures of to the they pass inflammation. sinuses the are cavernous because and walls

each the are: and artery, nerve internal carotid the [VI]. through abducent cavernous Structures sinus passing

cavernous lateral trochlear are, Structures [III], each oculomotor in the nerve to [V1], [IV], sinus maxillary nerve ophthalmic from [V2]. of the the superior nerve the wall the inferior: and nerve

the left and posterior of sinuses are sides anterior (Fig. the the pituitary intercavernous cavernous Connecting sinuses stalk on and right the 8.44).

cavernous into of each sinus. drain anterior Sphenoparietal the sinuses ends of of the and the and are receive wings along the blood diploic meningeal small veins. These surface from the sphenoid inferior sinuses lesser

into sinuses sinuses. cavernous superior petrosal the transverse the sinuses drain The begins of cavernous the along to petrosal transverse and superior petrous the the the end of part the passes connects (Fig. temporal sinus margin at posterior bone, each superior Each posterolaterally sinus sinus, of 8.44). petrosal veins. The and cerebellar receive superior sinuses cerebral also

also petrosal the sinuses. posterior cavernous at begin the inferior ends of sinuses The in of bone of the posteroinferiorly bone, the petrous part between and the the occipital temporal pass veins. jugular a ending basal part the groove in bilateral These internal sinuses brainstem. internal draining receive also in from ear cavernous the and and blood the from cerebellar They veins and assist veins sinuses

to the Basilar inferior sinuses of each and other vertebral petrosal connect to plexus sinuses veins. the They to bone of the just posterior (Fig. the sella turcica the on sphenoid clivus, are 8.44).

peripheral nerves nervous pass of fissures cranial the the or of pairs cranial (PNS) are cavity. part in The through 12 foramina and system All [XI], except brain. the nerves the nerve accessory from originate one,

nerves those sensory having similar components motor addition components In of (Tables cranial to and some 8.4 spinal nerves, and visceral and also somatic contain to 8.5). special

associated are with tasting. balancing, smelling, components hearing, and The seeing, special sensory

pharyngeal from skeletal innervate derived include that embryologically motor arches somites. components muscles those the from and not Special

embryology, never pharyngeal pharyngeal are arch designated, six arches the In develops. fifth but human of is pharyngeal the develop arches nerve that Each with or a cranial branches. developing one its does of associated derived carry arch. pharyngeal from that These fibers innervate musculature cranial efferent nerves the the

posterior the do follows: nerve nerve fourth nerve nerve [VII], the arch—recurrent develop as of the arches [IX], of five [XI]. sixth arch—facial pharyngeal second of [V3], arch—glossopharyngeal Innervation branch that musculature arches—accessory nerve [X], branch derived laryngeal nerve the vagus from vagus laryngeal third first arch—superior [X], arch—trigeminal is

nerve sense special fibers olfactory [I] the for smell. carries (SA) of afferent The brain. nasal sensory processes that return neurons the act in as to have: that mucosa, processes and receptors central peripheral Its information the

(Fig. nasal in parts roof the upper passing cavity, into the processes, central ethmoid plate the small and bundles, receptors after and of cribriform of cranial cavity are joining enter bone through by the the the The 8.53). with neurons synapsing the (Fig. They olfactory secondary bulbs terminate in by 8.54).

[II] The for fibers vision. nerve carries SA optic from to photoreceptors brain These the retina. return in fibers the information brain. in leave other to retinal processes optic carried by bundles, the the of and nerves into are Neuronal the system visual components the receptors, join small cavity The cranial nerves through enter optic (Fig. optic the canals the 8.53).

The types carries nerve two of [III] oculomotor fibers:

somatic the of muscles. efferent (GSE) General fibers most extra-ocular innervate

part General the the PNS. part of fibers (GVE) efferent of parasympathetic of are visceral division autonomic the

The (Fig. the nerve the surface anterior pons the between oculomotor the [III] leaves brainstem midbrain of and 8.54). anterior wall enters an of lateral (Figs. the anterior It cavernous the the in edge cerebelli, continues direction sinus the tentorium of in Fig. 8.53 see and 8.54; the orbital 8.45), through fissure. and cranial the superior cavity leaves

in orbit, the and rectus, nerve fibers inferior rectus, palpebrae superioris, medial rectus, innervate the In levator the oblique muscles. inferior superior GSE oculomotor

ciliary near the and innervate and muscles, ganglion constriction, the for in fibers accommodation the responsible the that ciliary for preganglionic muscle, responsible of sphincter parasympathetic are fibers lens pupillae ultimately synapse The vision. for GVE pupillary

trochlear is orbit. innervate a fibers muscle nerve carries in to an superior [IV] GSE muscle, nerve that The cranial extra-ocular the oblique the nerve is It the the surface and to brainstem only exit the the cranial posterior (Fig. midbrain of from in arises 8.54). sinus an tentorium the direction (Figs. enters of the of the in it in midbrain, of anterior surface inferior curving After free the cavernous edge the around the wall cerebelli, continues lateral 8.54; see Fig. 8.53 and enters superior and orbital fissure. through the orbit 8.45), the

lower nerve trigeminal muscles is jaw. [V] that major innervates move also general and head The the sensory the of nerve the efferent (BE) and fibers: (GSA) carries branchial afferent It somatic general

tympanic part one-half provide the and of in mater membranes cranial the membrane, the and oral the anterior fossae. sensory and GSA face, sinuses, the middle the and of scalp, dura from the conjunctiva, part external of fibers and of nasal anterior orbital and the paranasal mucous input acoustic the cavities contents meatus, The ear nasopharynx, the

muscles tympani, mastication; muscles; anterior mylohyoid palatini, BE digastric belly the and tensor veli muscle. the The of fibers and tensor the the of innervate

the from surface trigeminal and nerve the (Fig. motor exits root anterolateral a root of small a as pons large sensory The 8.54). bone of the out the middle fossa fossa of cranial into and tip by passing petrous roots These of part the continue the posterior forward temporal cranial over medial the (Fig. 8.53).

the root trigeminal middle the ganglion the sensory expands (Fig. fossa into cranial In cell and contains comparable in for a the sensory spinal nerve neurons is to trigeminal which 8.53), the bodies ganglion. trigeminal of a of trigeminal in a is in depression) the cave). the ganglion temporal The on the dural (the cave anterior part depression surface bone, (the petrous is The the completely sensory root motor root from and separate below at this point.

border [V1]). three the nerve trigeminal which anterior (ophthalmic ganglion the the terminal are divisions from in of the trigeminal order are: division the Arising ophthalmic nerve, of descending

mandibular the (mandibular division division [V3]). nerve and maxillary [V2]), (maxillary nerve the

dura of sinus [V1] the Fig. nerve in passes ophthalmic cavernous of the The forward wall (see lateral the and orbit the 8.45), cranial cavity, fissure leaves (Fig. the enters orbital the through superior 8.53).

[V1] including lacrimal from conjunctiva, The gland. carries nerve ophthalmic branches orbital and sensory the eyes, the contents, also of cells, anterior ethmoidal from the the superior cavity, parts sensory cerebri, the anterior cranial part of branches and scalp. eyelid, the It nasal nose, fossa dura cerebelli, frontal receives sinus, and tentorium the of falx dorsum upper in the

the maxillary nerve cavernous just Fig. ophthalmic wall mater the the passes [V1] inferior to nerve in of lateral of [V2] sinus The (see dura the forward 8.45), the leaves (Fig. cavity cranial rotundum through the foramen pterygopalatine the and 8.53), enters fossa.

lower the cheek, teeth the side branches the of lip. nerve dura skin and receives the in sensory upper upper from the [V2] covering the the maxillary palate, nose, eyelid, The of cranial cavity, the jaw, the the nasal and fossa, sinus, the middle nasopharynx, maxillary

nerve leaves the margin inferior (Fig. ovale mandibular [V3] the foramen The leaves the through ganglion of trigeminal and the skull infratemporal enters and fossa. 8.53), the

the unites mandibular motor sensory nerve of nerve and of skull. [V3] trigeminal the passes component through The the also the the outside with ovale root foramen [V3] contains nerve the of the Thus the a only is nerve division that mandibular trigeminal component. motor

skull the (temporalis, as palatini fibers digastric tensor well innervate the tympani muscle. belly and pterygoids), tensor the and Outside of muscle, the the as muscles of four anterior mastication and the veli lateral motor the muscle, muscle, the mylohyoid medial masseter,

lower lip, mandible, external The jaw, tongue, mucous region, of dura the fossa. the from mastoid external the and temporal the the acoustic the the air teeth in membranes of lower of ear, nerve the of receives of cheek, the part mandibular also cells, part of the and cheek, sensory anterior the middle branches the the meatus the face, anterior skin cranial two-thirds lower [V3]

rectus to carries orbit. the the [VI] innervate The abducent GSE muscle nerve fibers lateral in between the brainstem clivus and It (Figs. covering medulla the pons arises forward, piercing the and dura passes the from 8.53 and 8.54). Continuing part upward the temporal edge cavernous of the petrous superior the the dural Fig. it bone, a canal, sinus crosses (see and enters crosses of in inferolateral and the fissure. 8.45) artery, enters through carotid the the superior to orbital just orbit internal

The nerve carries BE facial and SA, GSA, GVE, fibers: [VII]

deeper part acoustic fibers parts auricle. the of sensory of and external provide input meatus The the from GSA

anterior The tongue. the are of fibers SA two-thirds for the taste from

and stimulate in glands, division and hard autonomic lacrimal parasympathetic activity of mucous of gland, the fibers glands and of submandibular and the sublingual GVE nasal secretomotor the of PNS membranes the soft the and the part are The salivary part in palates. cavity,

facial The of the pharyngeal digastric fibers and the muscles (muscles the derived face the muscle, expression) the and arch, the of and BE innervate muscle. second belly posterior scalp muscle, stylohyoid of stapedius the from

brainstem, medulla [VII] the lateral nerve surface attaches between oblongata of the and The pons (Fig. the facial to 8.54). and nerve): sensory root intermediate root It large a consists a motor (the of smaller

GVE for parasympathetic fibers, fibers nerve the and GSA contains the SA fibers. taste, The intermediate the

motor BE root larger fibers. The contains the

internal cranial The cranial posterior acoustic through sensory and cavity the meatus motor and (Fig. fossa the cross leave the roots 8.53). and of bone, nerve temporal roots the the two the the petrous [VII]. canal entering the in facial After form facial part fuse is containing enlarges sensory as similar Near which neurons. point nerve ganglion, for bodies spinal the ganglion cell the geniculate to a this

At off preganglionic [VII] which fibers ganglion nerve, nerve greater (Table the (GVE) petrosal 8.6). gives turns facial parasympathetic the and geniculate carries mainly the

to [VII] the off along The chorda the exiting stapedius through skull foramen. facial and the bony the nerve canal, tympani, continues the before the stylomastoid giving nerve

from parasympathetic the two-thirds (Table tympani (GVE) carries fibers preganglionic fibers the of destined ganglion and (SA) taste anterior submandibular chorda the 8.6). for tongue The

cochlear and SA balance, carries nerve for of two hearing. fibers [VIII] for hearing and for vestibular divisions: consists balance, vestibulocochlear a The and component component a

pons emerging the surface to cranial and [VIII] acoustic brainstem, The the internal attaches fossa the the after (Figs. medulla, lateral from and crossing meatus nerve vestibulocochlear between of the posterior 8.53 8.54). and two seen The cranial petrous temporal the part single fossa substance the the in of the within divisions combine into the bone. nerve of posterior

BE SA, GVE, GVA, glossopharyngeal and fibers: GSA, [IX] carries The nerve

from sinus. carotid the The input GVA sensory provide and body fibers

of and the mastoid tongue, posterior input from ear, cells. mucosa oropharynx, and fibers palatine one-third GSA tonsils, air of the tube, middle sensory pharyngotympanic The provide the

the taste the posterior tongue. for SA The are from of one-third fibers

PNS part the of are gland. part stimulate the parotid salivary GVE of The parasympathetic the activity the in secretomotor fibers and of autonomic division

muscle BE innervate fibers the from stylopharyngeus (the derived The arch pharyngeal third muscle). the

medulla of on anterolateral The several rootlets nerve glossopharyngeal upper the arises surface as (Fig. [IX] oblongata the 8.54). posterior (Fig. the foramen and The enter cross cranial rootlets the jugular fossa 8.53). form jugular nerve. merge the exiting the the rootlets before to Within from it, and foramen, glossopharyngeal

neurons foramen immediately in which the of sensory contain nerve two bodies [IX]. jugular Within glossopharyngeal cell are (the or the ganglia superior the inferior outside and ganglia), the

tympanic immediately glossopharyngeal from jugular or is nerve either the the foramen within nerve. Branching [IX] outside the reenters tympanic bone, of This the temporal enters middle the formation participates the plexus. branch the in and ear cavity, to of tube, pharyngotympanic the mastoid middle and innervation sensory air cells. Within cavity ear mucosa it provides cavity, the the

nerve the the descends middle exits contributes GVE the small ovale carrying the otic to cranial fossa, which cavity leave the fibers petrosal also 8.6). cranial through exit temporal tympanic preganglionic fibers, The the the parasympathetic nerve that lesser tympanic to and plexus nerve—a in enters ganglion bone, foramen (Table

SA, vagus nerve GVE, GVA, carries and [X] GSA, The

fibers: BE

of deeper from auricle, the input acoustic provide larynx, sensory and the cranial the of in laryngopharynx, posterior mater the GSA meatus, The parts fossa. external the part dura fibers

the the body aortic from midgut. input esophagus, foregut fibers heart, bronchi, viscera arch and and chemoreceptors the and baroreceptors, abdominal The lungs, in and provide GVA aortic sensory

fibers around SA for pharynx. epiglottis the taste are and The

The abdominal are of the autonomic of the and pharynx, division PNS glands foregut of parasympathetic the smooth and thoracic of fibers midgut. part in muscle and stimulate part the viscera, larynx, the viscera and GVE

stylopharyngeus), the (palatoglossus), palatini), muscle (except fibers BE innervate one veli tensor soft the the larynx. and the The tongue palate muscles (except of of the pharynx

surface oblongata the the on arises inferior glossopharyngeal rootlets anterolateral to form of the rootlets (Fig. nerve just as a of vagus arising to The nerve [IX] group the medulla 8.54). enter cranial the and The rootlets the posterior fossa cross foramen jugular (Fig. 8.53). form merge the rootlets vagus the this from before [X]. Within nerve and to it, exiting foramen, ganglia, jugular of bodies inferior immediately are neurons the outside which (jugular) ganglia, the sensory two and vagus foramen [X]. contain nerve cell the (nodose) the superior or the in Within

accessory R et the a carries innervate and that is al. BE sternocleidomastoid muscles Diogo fibers (see trapezius nerve [XI] nerve to The cranial Nature 2015;520:466–473). of from cord. nerve cervical segments the neurons because unique its five the cranial It motor a in is roots arise upper spinal cord spinal surface through joining cavity of magnum they as These the the (Fig. the and, fibers the leave ascend, lateral cranial foramen enter together 8.54). fossa [XI] cranial nerve accessory the continues and through (Fig. the The exits through foramen posterior jugular 8.53). sternocleidomastoid It the innervate to their neck from deep and surfaces. the then muscles in descends trapezius

the Cranial accessory of root nerve

of as arising rootlets the a the caudal accessory “cranial” [X] the Some refer of anterolateral the to from part of (Fig. to the nerve the nerve on vagus accessory inferior [XI] rootlets oblongata to surface root nerve the few descriptions form medulla the arising just 8.54). Leaving “spinal” nerve [XI] the which the roots nerve medulla, roots the [X]. vagus foramen, cranial the roots into cranial of accessory the the join point at course with jugular the the described of therefore vagus as are musculature of by distributed to being As nerve [X]. the vagus are innervated part vagus part they the and the nerve [X] [X], pharyngeal nerve

the most carries tongue. the intrinsic fibers [XII] and hypoglossal all muscles nerve innervate The of extrinsic GSE muscles to of medulla the rootlets as anterior surface (Fig. several from the of It arises (Fig. 8.54), passes through fossa, posterior the laterally hypoglossal canal cranial across and the exits 8.53). hyoglossus, muscles the tongue. and styloglossus, muscles innervates intrinsic genioglossus This of nerve the and all

meeting between individuals. an face-to-face is important A contact initial of of facial use expressions is emotions. this convey exchange Part to the individual’s information observing a physician can health fact, gain In by a face. an patient’s general important about

face, and side, organization the between the unique the lower the area Thus edge understanding an as arches various structures on as the ears far particularly mandible practice either of in the of the the back inferiorly, medicine. useful of of defined is superciliary the superiorly, as

The the (Fig. face of muscles innervated facial 8.56) second are arch from develop branches [VII]. of nerve pharyngeal and the by the or skin. into origins superficial with fascia, are bone from and insertions the They fascia, the in either

mouth). act also face muscles orifices of control these they of and the are orbits, of face, sphincters dilators the expressions and Because muscles referred nose, “facial expression.” They of the to as sometimes the as (i.e., to functional muscles these organizational (Table groups understanding arrangement logical approach This provides into a 8.7).

and oculi supercilii. orbital associated the are orbicularis group—the Two with corrugator muscles the

and each muscle eyelid into (Fig. a oculi that orifice orbicularis is The large surrounds orbital extends each completely 8.57). eyelids. It closes the major It has two parts:

a orbital is part The rim. ring outer orbital orifice beyond the that broad outward and encircles orbital extends the

is part the corner the eye that and fibers laterally. to arch of eyelids across palpebral inner in lid muscle each medial attach consists originating the in of The

palpebral closure. eyelid roles and specific to parts The during play have orbital the gently, the on the wrinkling closes forehead. whereas forcefully the more part eye orbital produces some The palpebral closes eye part and

orbit. the is of medial in additional An small lacrimal apparatus muscle bone sac lacrimal the and oculi orbicularis position, to of to lacrimal the part posterior in deep, the attaches

corrugator the smaller much is second in The (Fig. muscle orbital supercilii the group orbicularis deep active eyebrows and oculi the frowning. 8.57), the when is to is muscle which and end and superciliary It laterally passing of medial the the eyebrow. to arises skin half upward the of of into arch, medial insert from the the the causing wrinkles It nose. the midline, draws the toward eyebrows above vertical

depressor procerus, Three (Fig. the nasi associated are and septi the the muscles group—the with nasalis, nasal 8.58).

of nares the which developed nasalis, The are is muscles nasal of is best active largest and group the the (Fig. when flared the 8.58). alar (the dilator (the and transverse It of part a part naris): compressor consists naris) an

into the medially fibers fibers the transverse to aponeurosis across from upward opposite same of along pass nasalis insert, part on from the the side, the compresses and originates nares—it muscle with its dorsum of and The the maxilla nose. an the

the and transverse maxilla, inserts below part, the alar the so laterally, part medial draws cartilages and the alar nasalis cartilage. alar and originates opening The of downward to from the nares—it into the

small nasal active The to muscle an a procerus when frowns the superficial is and is (Fig. individual bone 8.58). skin upper forehead the the nasal the part into and lower the the It of arises nasal part over between bone and of cartilage from the the eyebrows. inserts lateral the continuous It of frontal with muscle the belly of be scalp. the occipitofrontalis may

wrinkles eyebrows the The border medial produce nose. transverse draws to the the of the of over bridge downward procerus

in depressor final assists nares (Fig. widening the The septi another muscle that muscle nasal nasi, group the in is the 8.58). central the part into maxilla lower insert to the the from tooth above of the and arise fibers nasal septum. ascend Its incisor

the nasalis the assisting the The depressor nose so alar nares. part of nasi pulls septi inferiorly, opening in the

lips oral cheek. the the The muscles group in move and of and and a group upper oris include buccinator muscles, and (Fig. orbicularis lower the muscles They 8.59). the at the on just lateral to corner each termed muscles of of Many modiolus. mouth side the intersect these structure a

The is that orbicularis (Fig. fibers consisting oris the muscle completely a encircle mouth of complex 8.59). pursing during apparent lips, function is as occurs whistling. when the Its originate and both fibers on its the Some buccinator, muscles near mandible lips. acting the are from midline in the the inferiorly, maxilla the whereas the other numerous derived from fibers the of other and cheek, superiorly into the lips, membrane mucous It of the skin inserts into itself. and and

and the of closes the mouth oris Contraction lips. the orbicularis narrows

the and cheeks forcefully expanding buccinator air is cheek The the forms (Figs. of the expelled is every muscular time used component 8.60). and 8.59 deep the mandible the the is in the the and It area. between maxilla, other facial in muscles space to

is inferiorly is buccinator the muscles. constrictor part between buccinator point of attachment the a and tendinous and and raphe, and posterior teeth the a pterygoid superiorly hamulus the of The for molar band which the mandible pterygomandibular the arises from the pharyngeal opposite maxilla mandible and superior

mouth the toward lips, insert pass the oris fibers unique to the buccinator fashion. from blending of of in the fibers orbicularis into corner the The with a lower (Fig. lip so upper enter of upper and that lip the fibers enter lower the buccinator cross fibers fibers Central the 8.60). cross do of and the not lower upper respectively. fibers and highest enter The lips, buccinator and the lowest

buccinator of Contraction presses the cheek the teeth. the against preventing by mastication cheek. cheek accumulating and between from teeth aids taut the in food keeps and This the the from the The of muscle the air assists cheeks. in forceful also expulsion

oral Lower group of muscles

muscles depressor the in the labii inferioris. The oris, consist depressor lower anguli of group (Fig. mentalis and 8.59).

active frowning. The is depressor anguli during oris

of the near premolar, the side along and mouth. of mandible It below skin orbicularis inserts into the the and the upper molar part teeth corner of and the arises oris the canine, first the corner It the depresses of mouth.

from arises inferioris of depressor front deep depressor the the to labii the oris. anguli The mandible, fibers fibers Its and opposite and orbicularis lip. the superiorly same fibers medially, side the muscle oris from from inserting some the into the on merging before with lower move lower it moves and depresses the laterally. lip It

or The lip when helps from cup mentalis drinking position a pouting. when the to It the insert lower with teeth, of the its muscle arising deepest from of and the skin to fibers the incisor the just mandible inferior passing the chin. into medially group downward is lower It it the wrinkles of the protrudes the skin raises lip chin. as and

of Upper group muscles oral

risorius, superioris, nasi, labii levator muscles group alaeque upper minor, anguli the levator levator the labii of superioris of major, of and oris oral muscles (Fig. zygomaticus zygomaticus The consist 8.59).

a (Fig. helps produce grin The risorius 8.59). superficial in from of It that direction. a upward a is slightly the corner thin, the laterally mouth extends muscle laterally the of mouth fibers corner the and its pulls upward. of Contraction

major The a (Fig. help zygomaticus smile minor zygomaticus produce and 8.59). zygomaticus corner with major downward a and the inserting lateral zygomatic along at the the and muscle orbicularis superficial deep the arises posterior that and the oris the oculi blending of bone, part the mouth. orbicularis is skin surface of to of passes The into forward, of the origin corner upper the anterior The of zygomatic the and from zygomaticus the medial major, the parallels zygomaticus major, zygomaticus to to arises the inserts the lip into the of mouth. path bone minor laterally. raise the Both move the corner of it zygomaticus mouth muscles and

superioris during The sadness (Fig. nose corner labii the furrow levator the between deepens of and the mouth the 8.59). fibers and with medially skin insert into the foramen, to downward oris its superior just the It from orbicularis arises the the and to the and lip. blend of upper infra-orbital maxilla pass

arises nose nasi superioris is the labii the of upper of into to skin (Fig. alar alaeque to nose, next both the inserts cartilage from superioris, The the medial and maxilla levator levator the labii lip the and 8.59). may assist nares. in flaring It the

the zygomaticus more levators by is deeply two oris and other anguli the and muscles (Fig. The placed levator covered 8.59). just and infra-orbital into the inferior foramen at skin the to arises the of the It the maxilla, corner mouth. inserts from sadness. of between and of elevates furrow the during the mouth It the mouth and corner help may nose the the deepen corner the

nerve muscles second facial as [VII], muscles area the or the in considered by face, and Several innervated pharyngeal the the muscles groups arch of of defined expression. but derived facial from are additional not Fig. (see include and They the muscles platysma, occipitofrontalis auricular, 8.56).

superficial the of is neck. fascia large, thin in sheet The a of the muscle platysma the the to through It the in clavicle part and of the ascends below mandible. upper the thorax arises neck insert more this the the fibers the muscles join lateral fibers whereas around the on At mandible, point, mouth. with medial

lower tenses and down. move of of and neck the skin the platysma corners can lip the mouth the The

muscles, of (Fig. auricular the with facial and muscles Three expression,” “other are anterior, muscles ear—the posterior associated of superior, these 8.61):

forward. and and pulls is anterior The anterolateral ear upward muscle the

The muscle and ear. superior superior is elevates the

the muscle and is posterior and ear. retracts elevates The posterior

Fig. the (see of with in scalp of and category final occipitofrontalis is muscles “other the is The facial muscle expression” this associated 8.56). posteriorly. anteriorly frontal belly an occipital It consists of and belly a the connects two: An tendon aponeurotic

skin the frontal is the eyebrows. The covers of attached and belly the to forehead

the and belly. smaller aspect than frontal skull of the arises is from occipital The posterior the belly

wrinkle muscles The forehead. the scalp and occipitofrontalis move the

them. head structures the parotid largest salivary the and the glands in through numerous are pass pairs of The main glands three of half the are lower below ear, mandible the the the anterior (Fig. to to They posterior, superficial, of of and deep ramus and 8.62). arch. down zygomatic They lower the extend of to border and the up the mandible to sternocleidomastoid they halfway masseter muscle. cover to anterior muscle continue anteriorly the part the Posteriorly and across the of

the edge the and parotid of parotid (Fig. anterior arch gland midway corner the duct between mouth The leaves of the zygomatic the 8.62). face and, medial the turns into border fat It the the in the and the deeply after pad of buccinator a masseter muscle, crosses pierces crossing direction buccal muscle. transverse into molar the second cavity upper opens near the oral It tooth.

pass parotid to just gland. deep the [VII], the and (Fig. external tributaries carotid branches, and its vein These the retromandibular and include the nerve facial its artery 8.62).

upper gland, divides and nerve through foramen the trunks. [VII] it into usually the stylomastoid passes skull and The then into the facial exits where parotid lower These nerves. the parotid and of where the anastomosing pass substance further the may branching there gland, of through be

zygomatic, mandibular, anterior, the branches—emerge lower of borders facial nerve temporal, groups upper, terminal [VII]—the gland marginal cervical and buccal, from (Fig. branches the parotid the of of and Five 8.62).

between difficult of of parotid removal The is parotid nerve all the spared. relationships [VII] intimate facial the gland mean are branches that to if facial [VII] dissection the surgical be and a the nerve gland

passes (Fig. enters gland to artery external into inferior or the carotid of the The parotid deep border 8.62). its near the continues posterior superior superficial it ear: border into of terminal direction, artery the and lower gives off arteries) two (the a maxillary it temporal auricular the before in branches dividing As

passes artery horizontally, The maxillary the mandible. deep to

of the after the off in direction upper giving superficial transverse facial and a artery. artery from The emerges superior border the temporal gland continues

parotid veins temporal together (Fig. the formed when the the The maxillary and substance is gland in retromandibular of vein superficial join and gland. 8.62), the substance inferiorly of passes the parotid in posterior usually the the border divides branches into anterior It of just gland. below inferior and

parotid The supply the numerous from its receives through arteries pass its gland substance. that arterial

gland of the [V3]. parotid Sensory innervation of auriculotemporal the is a the which mandibular branch provided is nerve nerve, by foramen ovale. the the trigeminal the through skull This of division exits nerve

also the nerve The carries parotid secretomotor auriculotemporal fibers to gland. the nerve ganglion their foramen associated just origin and parasympathetic [V3] to the the otic These are with postganglionic in have mandibular ovale. fibers inferior from to the [IX]. parasympathetic otic the Preganglionic glossopharyngeal come nerve fibers ganglion

associated nerve During pharyngeal development arches. with the of each a cranial becomes Because as from innervation arches, neighboring first facial face pharyngeal is is second of and structures derived the the primarily follows:

The nerve structures first [V] facial innervates trigeminal the derived arch. from

facial innervates nerve derived second the structures arch. from The facial [VII]

pharyngeal from the cutaneous trigeminal of the derived of branches face a is is [V]. Because number the originating innervation structures from developmentally arch, nerve the of by face first

[V3]—before major divisions— the (Fig. maxillary mandibular ophthalmic [V] fossa into leaving three nerve middle The [V2], cranial divides [V1], trigeminal and the 8.64). most cranial skin face the the [V]. branches part solely passes covering of innervated these nerve of of out of cavity innervate the is face, Each to trigeminal the divisions by the so a of of to covering ear, innervation. a parts the of and facial the vagus the the lower contribute small of nerves mandible ramus The the border exception cervical [VII], and [X], where angle area and is the

The superior through skull enters [V1] the nerve orbital exits the ophthalmic fissure the orbit. and Its (Fig. branches angle, the the angle the the exits upper of the orbit skin the half medial of the to 8.64) innervate and supratrochlear nerves, that face side the to orbit which lacrimal the nerve, of supplies of in area include: the half which medial the infratrochlear nasal superiorly nose; leave which forehead, skin external part the the upper and anterior orbit in and (Fig. angle exits the of eyelid, area the the medial the and the the eyelid nose which in in angle; and the lateral nerve, of the eyelid, innervate lateral the the the nerve, innervate supra-orbital lateral upper and scalp; innervate the 8.65).

the nerve through maxillary rotundum. the exits [V2] skull The foramen Branches (Fig. cheek, into face over the infra-orbital (Fig. maxilla upper supplies nerve, large small and which the zygomatic which zygomaticofacial the zygomatic zygomaticotemporal through skin supplies the immediately to foramen infra-orbital and lower exits zygomatic supply side a which and nose, 8.64) zygomatic the the above small that bone include: bone; area arch; area bone temple anterior the branch, and branches branch, a exits a divides lip exits small small and innervate of of multiple the the the eyelid, the a of 8.65).

ovale. through the exits nerve skull [V3] mandibular foramen the The Branches (Fig. branches the large the through lip the tympanic on the surface and chin the face temporomandibular membrane buccinator 8.65) joint, the skin meatus, lower parotid mucous of is buccal the immediately the skin exits supply surface mandible ascends acoustic the the include: the (Fig. to into mental membrane cheek; enters muscle auriculotemporal the the of just multiple and of to of ear and area which anterior to of the foramen gland, the to and through which divides which external nerve, the nerve, supplying the supply face and the mental the passes innervating posterior and (eardrum), temple; the just nerve, a 8.65).

the derived those external with The pharyngeal the the arch. as associated of the well second and muscles are from as ear face, scalp, therefore this facial of with [VII] and facial is arch all associated nerve cranial [VII] nerve nerve innervate the The these muscles. branches the

exits internal facial acoustic the posterior nerve The the through cranial [VII] fossa meatus. base the from through the through stylomastoid It branches, and foramen passes the emerges of off skull (Fig. several the giving bone, temporal 8.66). auricular off point posterior this it gives nerve. the At scalp of ear, occipitofrontalis of ear. upward, auricular behind the the the passes supply muscle posterior the muscle belly branch the of the This occipital to and

posterior gives the of which of facial the another the branch, then [VII] the nerve off muscle. stylohyoid belly and digastric The stem main muscle innervates gland surface the (Fig. At deep this point, the the parotid facial nerve enters of [VII] 8.66B).

in into (temporofacial) divides lower and gland, the parotid facial branches. the nerve Once usually upper [VII] (cervicofacial) of the stem main the pass anastomotic they these branch of take the gland network further part in parotid substance may (the an branches or As plexus). parotid through

facial mandibular, zygomatic, groups from the [VII]—the (Fig. parotid marginal of interconnections buccal, types temporal, five gland of of the branches—emerge nerve terminal and cervical Whatever occur, branches 8.66A).

variations of pattern of is in terminal Although are the the groups as five pattern distribution follows: branches, of there the basic

supply from gland in muscles area of of supra-orbital superior the the area. and border the to parotid exit forehead, the temple, Temporal branches

the the gland area, Zygomatic border lip. supply the parotid upper muscles the in to area, lateral nasal from branches emerge the and infra-orbital of anterosuperior

emerge the gland anterior of border the the from the corner mouth. of and in to supply branches the muscles cheek, lip, Buccal upper the parotid

the lower of mandibular emerge parotid Marginal chin. to gland the the lip muscles and supply of border branches from anteroinferior

supply emerge border the branches Cervical inferior of platysma. from the gland to the parotid

is branches carotid artery, the there primarily from though artery. supply a of to some The limited external branch carotid of supply from arterial internal the is face the

important cavernous a in connections is result through venous most though return vein, sinus. back clinically Similarly, face involving the of to venous pathway some jugular internal the the from the intracranial relevant return

the vessel is facial supplying The the face major artery (Fig. 8.67). the It neck, border deep after passes from gland. appears through of to surface the the the of at mandible lower the carotid external structures artery, anterior the the posterior branches submandibular up passing and of masseter, to the its the the just border felt, Curving can artery pulse anterior be of mandible where the inferior face. enters around facial the then course. From artery in upward point medially a facial tortuous this the and runs It passes and angular at nose along side the as corner the the the medial artery eye. of terminates the of

and to Along risorius, the superficial its the and major levator to minor, superioris. is or pass to deep zygomaticus facial path through oris, labii buccinator may anguli superficially levator platysma, and artery the and the

facial branches labial the Branches and of and the artery branch (Fig. inferior the lateral superior include nasal 8.67).

corner the the arise labial branches The of mouth: near

supplies labial inferior lower the lip. The branch

provides branch a supplies superior labial septum. the nasal also to lip, and The branch upper the

and the the side of the superior their midline, the inferior arteries Near face. with from anastomose companion labial branches opposite between the carotid facial connection the and This opposite an external important of provides arteries sides. arteries

the artery of passes the a The small arising from along branch is the branch it lateral side nasal as nose. facial supplies It the of nose. the lateral surface dorsum and

contributor artery vascular the supply Another is transverse of face to (Fig. the the facial of the branch which artery). 8.67), of superficial a temporal branches (the artery carotid smaller of terminal the the is external two

the temporal superficial gland, transverse and through in direction. within artery of passes the substance a crosses the arises the facial face The from artery parotid the gland, transverse the Lying the and on parotid the is duct. zygomatic superficial of it between surface the arch masseter muscle,

artery of Branches the maxillary

terminal The contribute which arterial small several branches two to larger of external off to branches artery, the supply the the of maxillary the the face: artery, gives carotid

artery eyelid, these enters through and the structures. the lip, between area upper foramen face lower infra-orbital the the The supplies and infra-orbital

muscle area. face enters on in of buccinator the The the artery structures supplies buccal surface superficial the and this

and The through the mental foramen the the supplies artery enters face chin. mental

of artery Branches the ophthalmic

small of internal arteries carotid the artery supply face. also arterial to from Three the the contribute ophthalmic the These orbit: the artery, ophthalmic arise of a the from artery enters branch artery, the internal vessels carotid after

branch (Fig. artery ophthalmic lacrimal the zygomaticotemporal The zygomaticofacial arteries and come from the of face supply the foramina, the through area of and zygomaticofacial face the the bone. zygomatic over the 8.67), and zygomaticotemporal enter

dorsal dorsum a the ophthalmic in and terminal supplies exits the The orbit the medial of artery, artery, the the nasal corner, nose. of branch

the The and scalp. arteries anterior supratrochlear supraorbital supply

draining the facial (Fig. major The vein is face the vein 8.67). the medial supratrochlear supra-orbital and near Its veins as orbit corner the the angular come the of is together point form origin to of vein. a the it posterior to becomes vein and just facial This inferiorly the assumes proceeds artery. position facial vein as inferior vein the artery until with the reaches The of facial the facial descends face border it the across mandible. internal vein enter vein and company the the to the passes part gland the superficial and vein. jugular to artery Here facial submandibular

draining nose, eyelids, of and Throughout that vein cheek, receives various its facial the lips, accompany from course the veins external artery. chin branches tributaries the facial the

in accompanies vein The transverse across artery small (Fig. facial is a transverse its that facial the journey the vein face 8.67). empties of gland. within the the temporal superficial It substance vein parotid into the

the facial head numerous venous connections has passing the with channels vein into regions deeper it the face, of crosses (Fig. As it face (i.e., into into with the it foramen; corner veins communicates ophthalmic area facial of cheek of medial vein passing the the connecting the orbit, the veins; communicates veins). of near plexus also the it with the regions communicates with passing infra-orbital of veins in 8.68): pterygoid deeper deep with the

veins. cavernous veins sinus these venous with the All extracranial intracranial through with emissary channels have connect interconnections intracranial that so valves There blood direction. the or in are channels in head, other move in no facial venous any can any the vein care Because between primarily prevent handled should the the be dissemination with direction. of the infections to infectious of the intracranial an (i.e., of veins, “danger above face, in area”) interconnections the great mouth material the

Lymphatic groups nodes moves primarily the lymph (Fig. toward face three of drainage from nodes part corner 8.69): lower the of the lateral facial of part the follows of the nodes lip, the lateral inferior lymphatics mandible, bilaterally; of lip from to anterior the the of parotid medial and drain orbit, nose, which of nodes the the ear, the of the the the and and a chin, course which to that the the and upper the part medial body eyelids, the inferior drain nose the of which to the most to lower superficial medial the posterior external the and submandibular chin most submental the of part artery; lip lymphatics gland of from drain pre-auricular and cheek. submandibular from lymphatics cheek, external part

the superior head occipital anteriorly the is superciliary from lines arches and to the of scalp nuchal protuberance external part posteriorly. that the extends The Laterally the to continues arch. zygomatic it inferiorly

defined itself: that word The a be layers the structure is with multilayered scalp can by

S—skin,

(dense), tissue C—connective

layer, A—aponeurotic

and L—loose tissue, connective

(Fig. P—pericranium 8.70).

scalp together, single unit. reveals layers Examining of first a tightly the three forming that layers are the the held proper injuries. tissue scalp is “scalping” referred to during This and the is torn serious sometimes away as unit the

scalp the layer the skin outer is (Figs. of The 8.71). and 8.70 a it. the to with that amount It body skin is throughout on exception the is present structurally of hair similar large

tissue. dense skin is Deep the to connective the arteries, the scalp. This supplying nerves contains layer and the veins, the and to third skin anchors layer dense When vessels the cut, the open. surrounding tends to connective cut vessels tissue is hold scalp the in This profuse results bleeding.

layers the aponeurotic deepest three The is the first of layer. layer connective epicranial the attached consists which (galea a frontal layer dense aponeurotic muscle, has of the tissue an (Fig. the layer, occipital two tendon— the an belly second to this occipitofrontalis by aponeurotica)—connecting and the posteriorly, belly the aponeurosis of Firmly anteriorly, skin 8.72).

frontal skin of the it of where attached the belly begins is occipitofrontalis anteriorly eyebrows. to The the the passes continuous across upward, the It with aponeurotic to become tendon. forehead,

from occipital of the bone the the and the superior the mastoid of occipitofrontalis nuchal bone. part occipital Posteriorly, temporal of lateral belly the of process each line arises the It passes tendon. also aponeurotic to attach to superiorly

eyebrows. raise scalp, the and the muscles occipitofrontalis move forehead, the wrinkle The the posterior innervated auricular the belly and facial nerve frontal branch. is [VII] by by the belly temporal branches The posterior of

A from the movement separates facilitates aponeurotic layer the the over pericranium layer (Figs. proper calvaria the of connective loose of scalp and tissue 8.70 and 8.72). the of loose tissue (also consistency, infections p. through clinic” its see “In 878). connective spread on the Because localize and to tend

outer the of deepest the the The layer is on the is of pericranium and calvaria. the surface periosteum scalp attached removable, of is area the calvaria is the the the to sutures. in It except of bones but

the or innervation cranial Sensory of or to and head is cervical (Fig. ears the vertex posterior scalp of two major is from the nerves, whether nerves on it sources, the anterior depending occipitofrontalis 8.73), branches innervated by the The facial of nerve [VII]. is muscle

ears the the Anterior to and vertex

ears the and of nerve trigeminal the vertex the scalp the to the (Fig. supply anterior Branches [V] of head 8.73). These supratrochlear, auriculotemporal branches nerves: and zygomaticotemporal, are supra-orbital, the

supplies orbit, superiorly frontalis near continues across nerve the the forehead the front the of and the muscle, of midline. the The front through the exits passes forehead, supratrochlear

and the passes exits across the supra-orbital the muscle, as the or back far the foramen, vertex head. scalp The frontalis notch of continues through superiorly as through the orbit supra-orbital nerve

over zygomaticotemporal of the foramen nerve temple. in area a the a exits scalp through the the skull and bone supplies The small zygomatic anterior

to vertex. to the skull, the until superiorly head, ear passes the deep auriculotemporal scalp the of reaching ear anterior and The supplies nearly parotid exits the anterior the to the gland, ear, just the region over to near from nerve the and to anterior the temporal continues vertex

Posterior and ears the to vertex the

C3 the by to vertex, ears cord the sensory specifically is C2 levels from and scalp innervation branches nerves, and (Fig. cervical spinal of Posterior 8.73). third are the the and These occipital nerves: occipital, branches great lesser the greater auricular, occipital, the

The of nerves, surface the rami of muscle, ascends C3 arises C2 great the plexus, and innervates area of cervical a to scalp anterior from the posterior auricular nerve ear. the the is branch the sternocleidomastoid a the on and small of just spinal

the occipital posterior sternocleidomastoid supplies the also border nerve, ear. area ramus cervical nerve C2 of on from muscle, an and anterior the lesser the ascends of of of to The a spinal the superior and the scalp is posterior the arises plexus, branch

the supply emerges The as ramus to muscle, triangle, greater then C2 of inferior as the ascends scalp superiorly to nerve occipital of is spinal the the obliquus superficial large and the capitis just out branch the part capitis inferior far pierces suboccipital muscles, a trapezius and spreads a nerve, vertex. posterior of to the posterior semispinalis

trapezius The of area a a C3 scalp. small occipital the capitis posterior pierces and lower muscles, branch and of the of of the nerve, nerve semispinalis supplies the is third part the ramus spinal

scalp (Fig. the Arteries supplying are ophthalmic of internal a either of artery. artery, carotid which carotid external the branches the is branch 8.74) artery the or

the artery Branches ophthalmic from

supra-orbital supply aspects the the superior of scalp. and anterior arteries supratrochlear and The association it onto the is in the and supratrochlear supra-orbital nerves. branch They in the through continue the the from orbit, ophthalmic forehead with orbit, artery while and exit as far to ascend as the Like forehead supply of posteriorly scalp across the the vertex the nerves, the head. arteries the

artery external Branches from carotid the

part (Fig. superficial arteries largest lateral aspects supply occipital artery and scalp—the posterior branches of Three external the auricular, the of temporal, and the carotid of scalp posterior supply the the 8.74):

of deeper the auricular area an of posterior through scalp to supply posterior the aspect posterior branch the carotid to structures, artery) artery, the The external passes leaves smallest ear. (the emerges and

direction, ascends of musculature, in carotid several aspect and emerges is the Also occipital passes which through of external posterior the from posterior posterior the artery, large a the aspect back of of arising the scalp. layers to artery a part supply

the anterior into and anterior that carotid just terminal is almost superiorly, supplies the and temporal third the arterial the of artery, superficial the branches, lateral posterior entire scalp external supplying aspect the divides The to branch branch artery passes scalp. a ear, of

Veins the to pattern follow draining arteries: a the scalp similar

the and arches to the from The vertex of scalp head superciliary drain (Fig. anterior the supra-orbital of the veins the part supratrochlear of the to communicate to pass vein, tributary superciliary participate in inferior angular is facial vein. and the arches, ophthalmic 8.74), the formation orbit, the which with in upper continue the the inferiorly to the veins

lateral superficial vein. the inferiorly drains entire the temporal to The retromandibular before passing of the vein join of area the scalp formation in

the posterior retromandibular vein eventually drains the area into and The empties a to auricular of ear posterior scalp the of vein. the tributary

vein of the and triangle. the to formation from the veins of through of the to neck superior scalp passes lines deeper, occipital occipital the posterior the external head; nuchal in of in the plexus suboccipital it protuberance the drains musculature join The the aspect vertex posterior in the

generally distribution. of follows pattern the the arterial scalp of Lymphatic drainage

skull occipital drain initially of (Fig. lymphatics muscle region occipital attachment the the in the trapezius base nodes the to at The the near of 8.75). pathway the into nodes. upper drain Further cervical occipital deep along nodes is from upper cervical of to part deep nodes There also this drainage the direct some scalp.

part in of scalp upper the Lymphatics directions: from two drain the

process posterior to the (retro-auricular/posterior into mastoid drain the of to to of Posterior nodes efferent temporal cervical auricular and these upper deep ear nodes) nodes head the near from they nodes. the the drain vessels mastoid vertex bone,

gland. nodes Anterior of and to to anterior the the parotid vertex head parotid ear drain the they pre-auricular the surface on to the of

be follow there that Finally, drainage to facial vessels some nodes efferent from lymphatic artery. the the may the forehead submandibular through

face anterior upper supply are the fossa structures. these structures optic and tissue, the adipose eyeball, fossa the of the cranial orbits fascia, that the extra-ocular that bilateral apparatus, the nerve, lacrimal the the anterior in nerves middle to cranial and The the and contain vessels muscles, below half

contribute bones of the Seven orbit framework each to (Fig. 8.76). frontal, They are and lacrimal, the bones. ethmoid, sphenoid, zygomatic, maxilla, palatine opening base the direction. Together bony face its orbit its and they of with in a extending anteriorly a wide pyramid, onto posteromedial the shape the give apex configuration medial, walls. and are pyramid lateral, Completing inferior the superior,

and bone, bone, by maxilla by is the bone, foramen, bone, frontal frontal the maxilla, zygomatic the and apex process orbital is of the the zygomatic (the process the bony frontal the the the the by by of base the formed: laterally inferiorly of process superiorly and pyramid-shaped zygomatic optic medially the process of orbit the rim) bone. zygomatic whereas of The the zygomatic frontal

the the the of roof orbit The small from with part the sphenoid is made (superior bone bone up wall) a frontal (Fig. bony orbital of of contribution 8.76). separates fossa. of from in the of brain orbit the the anterior thin This the contents bone cranial plate

anterolaterally, pulley of gland. wall lacrimal include: anteromedially, for intrusion features superior the of the lacrimal a (the which of part the fovea, through the for orbital of the sinus; and the depression a of part attachment Unique frontal muscle passes, possible fossa) superior oblique the the trochlear

lesser completes the Posteriorly, of the roof. the wing bone sphenoid

walls paired bones of other the each four of to are orbits (Fig. and parallel The maxilla, medial ethmoid, bones—the consists sphenoid bony each and lacrimal, 8.76).

bone. to the the The contributor of ethmoid wall orbital largest is medial plate the skull. are a dried of ethmoidal the This in bone of part ethmoid which collections contains cells, visible clearly

anterior and the and visible, suture, are junction wall, frontoethmoidal with foramina. medial between ethmoidal the Also the the posterior associated at roof usually the orbit and these the leave ethmoidal and through nerves anterior openings. The vessels posterior

ethmoid the is the the and the medial to completing process lacrimal part the anterior Anterior is bone, bone wall of of frontal the maxilla. small contains bone) groove, the and the bound of (part of bones lacrimal which lacrimal lacrimal of the by in lacrimal two sac formation (part participate These maxilla). posterior the the the crest is lacrimal and the crest anterior

medial the a completed to medial bone small of which wall optic Posterior a canal. is sphenoid forms of part the wall the part bone, of the by ethmoid the

the is also (inferior the the bony maxilla of consists orbit, of wall) surface floor the which of sinus, maxillary orbital The roof of (Fig. primarily the small and from 8.76), with palatine the zygomatic contributions bones.

continuing inferior the posteriorly orbital orbit the bony Beginning along is of and boundary the lateral the of floor fissure. fissure floor the orbit. Beyond anterior zygomatic bony the bone end completes of the of the the

of bones. junction the and contribution sphenoid the ethmoid, bony to small floor the bone the makes the the Posteriorly, orbit near maxilla, a orbital process of of palatine

(Fig. the zygomatic and sphenoid wall bone wing consists of The the contributions two posteriorly, lateral the greater of the orbit bony from bone bones—anteriorly, of 8.76). that sphenoid wing roof. wing forms The the of orbital of and between the lesser of is part superior the the greater the sphenoid fissure

upper the protect closed, The of lower structures eyelids are surface and anterior when that, eyeball. the

space between when palpebral the are they The eyelids, fissure. is open, the

of skin, muscle, to and (Fig. layers of conjunctiva the the tissue, The orbital tarsus, septum, anterior subcutaneous consist voluntary posterior, eyelids, from the 8.77).

except the in addition The in two are for lower similar of the eyelids upper upper and eyelid. basically muscles structure

only connective thin separates voluntary the the layer from eyelids particularly substantial, not skin (Fig. of and a skin the layer The is muscle underlying of tissue 8.77). of accumulation account layer when for connective of occurs. arrangement injury The thin its the loose tissue an (blood) fluid and

muscle belong fibers an the anteroposterior oculi to in orbicularis next part encountered the of (Fig. the through The palpebral eyelid direction 8.77). eyelids. and of muscle the in larger which part, the This part part, muscle, palpebral orbital which orbit, surrounds is of parts—an the orbicularis two consists primarily oculi is which the The by the orbicularis is the [VII] nerve closes oculi and facial innervated eyelids.

medial The ligament by and medially anchored palpebral thin palpebral the part (Fig. is with the 8.78), at from the to crest in lacrimal and anterior palpebral ligament lateral attaches (Fig. blends the lower muscle which eyelid fibers the laterally 8.78).

lacrimal be oculi part crest. to orbicularis the medial third border, the fibers can attach identified deeply on consists pass of the which that of posterior to muscle A fibers of may involved orbicularis the lacrimal the part form These oculi, which in drainage of be the tears.

margin of eyelids is extension from to orbit part of the both and palpebral the into (Fig. of lower periosteum the oculi orbicularis the Deep upper an the 8.79). inside upward and the extends the lower the This into downward the upper into outside eyelid periosteum continuous orbital with and eyelid which orbit the is (Fig. septum, and is 8.79). eyelid. The upper attaches tarsus the of in levator lower eyelid the and to the tendon the to orbital palpebrae attaches the septum superioris in muscle

each (Fig. eyelid major is the support Providing for tarsus 8.80). smaller the a eyelid large (Fig. is tarsus and inferior superior upper a There tarsus eyelid lower the in in 8.80). the lateral of to connective are laterally attached the and by to the palpebral the medially dense ligament medial palpebral anterior crest plates on the tissue lacrimal by tubercle bone These orbital the zygomatic of ligament. maxilla

the difference. one Although in function, there eyelids plates structure tarsal lower in and generally similar are is and unique the upper muscle is upper Associated tarsus in the the palpebrae (Fig. with levator the eyelid superioris the raises which eyelid. 8.80), roof to surface part few with Its fibers of just from the the the tarsus, the orbit, the superior eyelid. the a skin the is foramen, into the it of upper the origin to and inserts optic anterior of of posterior superior attaching of possibility nerve innervated [III]. the by oculomotor is It

upper a companion collection surface tarsus the from superior the the is of superioris of edge passing Fig. In the levator levator inferior to palpebrae muscle muscle (see of with smooth the fibers 8.77). the superior muscle superior is cervical tarsal the from by fibers muscle. this Innervated sympathetic ganglion, postganglionic

a ptosis levator drooping muscle in muscle of upper eyelid. Loss palpebrae the superioris or tarsal or of results the superior the of either function

the completed eyelid structure conjunctiva), which a (the by Fig. of each membrane thin eyelid of covers is posterior (see surface the The 8.77). outer the surface surface (sclera) posterior membrane the before of the of onto extent of eyelid each the This eyeball. full reflecting covers junction to and sclera eyeball the It attaches the cornea. between at the the (Fig. conjunctival of when the a are the in formed sac sac membrane place, fornices superior this eyelids extensions is lower and upper With are closed, conjunctival this and the inferior and 8.77).

Embedded are the tarsal Fig. tarsal (see in plates glands empty eyelid. the which each 8.77), onto of free margin glands secrete glands rate tears eyeball. the of evaporation These of from modified the tears and viscosity increases that sebaceous are the oily decreases substance surface the of and an of the and inner of eyelid. the chalazion inflammation Blockage on surface tarsal is a of the and a is gland

glands with the only The associated tarsal not are eyelids. glands the (see are the sebaceous Fig. eyelash sweat glands Associated and follicles with 8.77). is and these the and of eyelid. either a the is Blockage of edge of inflammation stye on

area eyelids the to the numerous from is supply the arterial vessels (Fig. The in 8.81). the temporal from and superficial include: artery; the and temporal the facial from from branches facial supra-orbital, itself. superficial the lacrimal, nasal the ophthalmic artery arteries angular the dorsal artery supratrochlear, artery; They from artery artery; the transverse

an an pattern associated into and veins moving the various through through orbit pattern external connections arteries with ophthalmic the with drainage the internal veins. follows Venous

with lymphatic is parotid medial nodes, drainage submandibular of nodes. drainage angular and arteries corner facial Lymphatic the the the associated primarily vessels with the eye to from to some the along

Innervation and sensory the of includes motor both components. eyelids

nerve (Fig. trigeminal The [V] branches sensory of the all are nerves 8.82). branches supra-orbital, the and the arise maxillary lacrimal [V1]; nerve the [V2]. of infratrochlear, supratrochlear, branch nerve ophthalmic from: Palpebral branches of infra-orbital and the

the innervation and of palpebral sympathetic superior [VII], the palpebrae muscle. orbicularis is which the part facial levator nerve which innervate innervates the from: the fibers, the oculomotor which nerve innervates [III], Motor superioris; oculi; tarsal

close eyelids facial causes the resulting droops Loss of an innervation in lower by tears. of [VII] to the of away, inability the nerve spillage a the oculi eyelid tightly orbicularis and

inability to an voluntarily, the Loss levator the innervation producing complete ptosis. palpebrae of superioris by nerve oculomotor of open a eyelid the superior causes

constant partial Loss sympathetic by of tarsal muscle ptosis. fibers causes the superior innervation of a

apparatus from drainage is of involved production, surface and eyeball. the movement, the in lacrimal The of fluid the lacrimal the ducts, lacrimal canaliculi, made and the gland nasolacrimal duct. sac, of up is lacrimal the It its and the

the anterior of region (Fig. superolateral in gland the is orbit The lacrimal into levator 8.83) and superioris palpebrae divided is the parts (Fig. by two 8.84):

in is fossa, the depression, The bone. larger in a orbital part the frontal lacrimal

the is palpebral inferior part of the to eyelid. The superolateral the in smaller levator palpebrae superioris part

the the into fornix superior of part secretions glandular Numerous empty the lateral conjunctiva. ducts the of

lacrimal being lateral continually Fluid the blink. moved the medial is eyeball eyelids of by to the from as surface and secreted gland across the

The accumulates drained one associated canaliculi, lacrimal (Fig. fluid the lake from each lacrimal medially by canaliculus with eyelid the the lake and is in 8.83). through fluid enters each which is opening punctum The the canaliculus. lacrimal

the palpebral Passing oculi the the of (Figs. lacrimal part medially, sac ligament posterior the to posterior lacrimal join muscle the and lacrimal and medial lacrimal between anterior the anterior to eventually canaliculi crests, orbicularis 8.85 and 8.86). orbicularis sac blinking, part draw the dilate during sac. may contracts small conjunctival lacrimal muscle through tears oculi the it When the canaliculi muscle lacrimal the the and of into the from

(Fig. innervation lacrimal different The gland components involves the three of 8.87).

Sensory ophthalmic through the lacrimal branch return gland the to of the the nerve from [V1]. lacrimal neurons CNS

the the stimulate PNS division from of part of the fibers gland. Secretomotor the lacrimal secretion from autonomic parasympathetic fluid [VII], pterygoid of the CNS nerve neurons nerve in continue of greater the with nerve it this These preganglionic becomes canal and until the [VII]), branch nerve enter the the facial parasympathetic leave (Fig. facial (a petrosal nerve the 8.87).

on the pterygoid nerve neurons the where canal pterygopalatine eventually neurons. parasympathetic synapse preganglionic the The postganglionic parasympathetic of ganglion joins continue the a from join fibers neurons the small off and the zygomatic lacrimal postganglionic [V2] nerve travel postganglionic gives zygomaticotemporal in eventually branch joins and it, it with nerve, the that nerve until branches the distributes which until nerve. with parasympathetic maxillary zygomatic nerve it The gland. lacrimal lacrimal to passes nerve the The

the lacrimal innervation. similar path follows gland a as parasympathetic Sympathetic of innervation (Fig. the the Postganglionic the fibers ganglion plexus travel surrounding along artery originating superior cervical carotid in sympathetic internal 8.87). leave the join They nerve canal. the this as in plexus the the and parasympathetic petrosal pterygoid deep nerve fibers of to point gland. follow pterygopalatine Passing the parasympathetic lacrimal onward the through path sympathetic fibers from ganglion, the the same as this the fibers

ophthalmic arterial branches the veins. drainage through lacrimal is artery by ophthalmic supply is the The venous from to and gland the

enter structures leave and of (Fig. through orbit Numerous the openings variety a 8.88).

is lesser orbit optic the is bounded the anterolateral and When position, canal, the orbit opening sphenoid wing cranial viewed apex laterally fossa round medially into by the the the at and body which the the of is bony pyramidal-shaped the opens middle sphenoid. of from the an of by artery optic Passing (Fig. canal optic are through the ophthalmic nerve the the and 8.89).

roof orbit. Just to canal lateral bony optic triangular-shaped the wall a between the lateral of and gap the is allows is middle between cranial fissure and orbit superior the This fossa pass and the structures the orbital to (Fig. 8.88).

trochlear lacrimal, of superior frontal, and are through Passing [V1], ophthalmic of branches the oculomotor [VI], (Fig. vein nerve superior the the branches nerve nerve superior the the inferior nerve fissure [IV], [III], abducent nasociliary and the the orbital ophthalmic and the 8.89).

the orbital lateral wall from orbit inferior the (Fig. opening, is a the of Separating of the orbit fissure the floor longitudinal 8.88). and the palatine, the wing bones. Its sphenoid zygomatic of maxilla, and greater are borders the orbit posteriorly, posterolaterally. the the infratemporal fossa and the the and orbit allows temporal This the and pterygopalatine middle, in the fossa and orbit the fissure communication long fossa between:

are nerve a its orbital with the veins. vessels, plexus maxillary of [V2] fissure zygomatic the inferior the and branch, the and Passing infra-orbital through pterygoid communicating vein

fissure, encountered, infra-orbital groove groove) the of continues a which is inferior the and of floor (Fig. Beginning (the posteriorly two-thirds orbit anteriorly crossing about across orbital the 8.88). canal the opens at connects foramen. infra-orbital face the This groove the onto infra-orbital that with

this the part the through onto they vessels The as nerve, of and infra-orbital exit [V2], face. nerve pass structure maxillary

with bony medial smaller (Fig. are Associated openings of several orbit wall the the 8.88).

foramina medial and walls. ethmoidal junction between are anterior at The posterior the the and superior the provide nerves into and vessels. exits ethmoid openings These and posterior from ethmoidal bone the orbit for anterior the

the wall medial part Completing lower wall the anteriorly. is canal openings on in the a the of visible the bone lacrimal frontal Clearly the formed the lacrimal for is by depression sac maxilla. the and of process the meatus. the continuous the inferior leads This canal, nasal is which with depression to nasolacrimal canal the the nasolacrimal nasolacrimal within apparatus. Contained of lacrimal the part a duct, is

bones the that periosteum form the (Fig. orbit The the lining is periorbita 8.90A). upper the (the and eyelids margins It orbit the sends into of at the of periosteum is on the continuous lower orbital skull with surface outer the septa). and extensions the

cranial periorbita dura the where layer communicates the is At orbit the with the openings cavity the with of continuous mater. various periosteal part canal periorbita part around the fissure. optic the the superior of central In and the the orbit, thickens posterior the orbital of four is common of rectus the the and the This tendinous origin of muscles is point ring.

Fascial eyeball of the sheath

a fascia of encloses the (bulbar of part the eyeball layer that is The sheath (Figs. eyeball sheath) fascial a major of 8.92): 8.91 and

the it nerve around to white sclera of Posteriorly, the optic the of (the attached eyeball. the point firmly eyeball) the of entrance into part is

firmly the to the cornea the (the Anteriorly, the of is edge sclera part of attached eyeball). near clear it

point eyeball muscles attachment. through investing muscle pass and of of as the approach with the fascia blends fascial continue surrounding the Additionally, the muscles the sheath their the to eyeball, as each

the ligament part of (Figs. fascial A eyeball sheath lower is the of specialized suspensory the 8.91 supports which 8.92), and eyeball. the “sling-like” up muscles. ocular sheath made two of eyeball and and and contributions the lateral of from the ocular is fascial inferior muscles structure This medial the the

Check ligaments and the lateral of medial

in Other (Fig. ligaments are fascial check specializations orbit the the 8.92). investing lateral attach are medial walls to of lateral fascia the muscles, medial and the the orbit: which covering rectus bony of expansions the and These

extension the medial bone. an rectus ligament check lacrimal medial the the posterior is from of immediately covering crest posterior and lacrimal the muscle fascia The attaches to

muscle of is to and the covering the ligament lateral bone. the an lateral fascia is check from zygomatic the The extension tubercle attached orbital rectus

of positioning seems the Functionally, these muscles, medial the lateral the the of rectus restrict and fascial names ligaments specializations. thus to

of the of the two of muscles and size in upper the within within muscles pupil. (extra-ocular intrinsic eyeball, shape of involved eyelids, control which extrinsic and the eyeball muscles There movements the lens are raising of or the muscles) eyeball groups orbit:

The superior the rectus, lateral and rectus, extrinsic superior muscles oblique, inferior oblique. medial rectus, inferior rectus, palpebrae levator superioris, include

pupillae, the muscles and intrinsic pupillae. muscle, dilator The the ciliary include sphincter the

extrinsic whereas eyelids, (Table the one the muscles, six the 8.8). seven itself raises of the eyeball Of other in move the muscles group

dimensions, The movements eyeball, three of (Fig. the in the external pupil rotation the laterally (or medially, laterally, the of (or (intorsion)—rotating medially adduction—moving upper of superiorly, toward abduction—moving inferiorly, and (extorsion)—rotating the pupil toward internal temple). pupil the pupil are: the depression—moving nose), part pupil the the upper 8.93) elevation—moving the rotation the part pupil

anteriorly directed front, slightly eyeball directed laterally axis orbit each (Fig. The is of but each to from back is 8.94). on multiple a Therefore of movement of the that of has muscles the others whereas effects effect. eyeball, some single the pull has

the (Table eyelid superioris 8.8). palpebrae Levator raises upper It orbit, the to sphenoid from (Fig. muscle in just canal is optic superior inferior originating the the the of wing surface the the most roof, of lesser the on anterior 8.95B). primary fibers point into a of of upper skin attach superior Its the conjunctival to few of tarsus, and fornix. the insertion eyelid superior is the also but anterior the the surface

oculomotor by the branch the of nerve Innervation [III]. is superior

levator upper the eyelid. palpebrae raises the of Contraction superioris

tarsus palpebrae unique muscle of upper (see that a fibers the A superior is of smooth collection the to levator surface feature the Fig. of its inferior passes edge from superioris 8.77). help sympathetic superior group cervical elevation by smooth muscle) ganglion. eyelid of from This are (the the superior and fibers maintain postganglionic fibers tarsal muscle innervated

of results complete Loss superior of loss results drooping to the eyelid, oculomotor or ptosis of function ptosis. whereas muscle innervation [III] in superior nerve partial in sympathetic the tarsal

Four half and positions pass the from on as occupy medial, eyeball of points muscles attachment posteriorly the their lateral, inferior, of superior they their to origins rectus anterior (Fig. and Table 8.95 8.8). of cone apex form ring forward of pass originate from on eyeball. muscles and as at a attachment to tendinous group orbit as a the They common a the their they the

eyeball have to where directly the central the of apex the the muscles rectus the complicated because originate, orbit, muscles medial looking inferior is actions axis The superior of forward: and when

above tendinous ring the The originates part the optic of superior from rectus canal. the common superior

inferior The the below common the canal the (Fig. of ring rectus optic originates from inferior part tendinous 8.96).

of also laterally directed in pass forward (Fig. As muscles the are the half to these orbit eyeball, they attach the to anterior 8.95). these of Because orientations:

of adducts, rectus internally and the eyeball Contraction (Fig. elevates, superior rotates the 8.97A).

(Fig. eyeball the externally and Contraction inferior depresses, rectus adducts, rotates of the 8.97A).

branch rectus, inferior the [III] the branch the nerve inferior innervates [III] of and innervates the superior oculomotor nerve The the of superior oculomotor rectus.

and to To is to rectus finger or either the the a (Fig. inferior physician’s asked and patient muscles, downward function isolate upward then of a and track test superior laterally 8.97B). axis the axis the brings first of alignment muscles. The superior the eyeball movement into and the of with long inferior rectus finger tests downward muscle rectus Moving tests superior moving it inferior the muscle (Fig. the upward and rectus the 8.97B).

straightforward more lateral and superior rectus are than actions orientation muscles. medial of those of the rectus The the and muscles inferior and

as superior rectus optic originates orbital common the part ring the and medial bridges ring to lateral originates medial canal, the common fissure from lateral below common whereas of the part of the (Fig. tendinous from rectus the the ring tendinous medial The the tendinous 8.96).

eyeball of (Fig. attach the and pass forward medial anterior rectus to and muscles lateral the half The 8.95). the Contraction of abducts of contraction lateral (Fig. eyeball, the eyeball whereas adducts rectus medial rectus 8.97A).

the innervates lateral the [VI] branch and nerve nerve rectus. abducent inferior The innervates [III] of rectus, the oculomotor the medial

finger the horizontal (Fig. rectus physician’s laterally, and test function is in and a medially lateral the isolate track a to plane and To of asked respectively, medial patient the muscles, 8.97B).

muscles, eyeball, parts (Table unlike and to 8.8). The are from the in the their the are half do posterior muscles superior oblique rectus originate eyeball and, ring, attach in the not to tendinous inferior approaches the orbit, the common of of the angular

(Figs. from the the medial The the superioris to oblique levator palpebrae of optic the arises superior origin canal sphenoid, medial and to of superior the body and 8.96). and 8.95 forward, along border a trochlea), trochlear it the of until roof (the the to the orbit, It fovea of medial passes fibrocartilaginous attached of is frontal which the the reaches bone. pulley

the to turns passes of tendon cross posterolateral laterally The oblique superior direction. and in the a trochlea through the eyeball of muscle quadrant the the to posterior eyeball. the and It rectus continues outer deep inserts superior into

oblique directs down out the pupil and superior Contraction of therefore (Fig. the 8.97A).

its surface. oblique along the nerve innervates trochlear superior superior [IV] The

asked is muscle with tendon medially into track superior and which muscle (Fig. the alignment a the the bring and muscle, the axis oblique of the physician’s a to the eyeball, then to to To of the patient of finger of to the function down, isolate tests test axis look 8.97B).

extrinsic does The not the posterior origin the inferior from is part take only muscle oblique orbit. the that of the maxilla arises and posterior (Fig. rim, of the the is orbital to orbit, floor lateral side of attached from surface to of to It the medial orbital the the nasolacrimal just just groove the 8.95).

oblique floor outer inferior posterior the inserting rectus and posterolateral a floor the The the the crosses inferior rectus. quadrant into of of the in the the direction just lateral between before orbit under orbit,

out and up Contraction directs inferior the pupil (Fig. the of oblique 8.97A).

oblique. of inferior branch oculomotor nerve The the the inferior innervates

oblique patient up, (Fig. eyeball of asked to axis to muscle, the then to alignment muscle physician’s a the with medially and the the look inferior the of which to into a bring function axis test is finger To the the track isolate and tests muscle of 8.97B).

Six are muscles movements of extrinsic in the orbit of directly involved seven the the eyeball. of

muscles, of and 8.8). inferior lateral, For and of or the rectus can actions each and the superior, described obliques, specific be a action medial, group the inferior, (Table superior act not isolation. these muscles However, do in eyeball of of muscles the position the needed. coordinated They to as in the pupil work teams movement as

responsible muscle although is the moving it assisted rectus laterally, For inferior example, in for by lateral the this oblique muscles. eyeball and the the action primarily superior is

supply the the to in orbit, including structures by is (Fig. eyeball, the artery ophthalmic The the arterial 8.99). the artery, is sinus. This vessel off after carotid the branch a immediately carotid leaves given internal cavernous of internal artery the canal artery the orbit passes with optic the ophthalmic optic nerve. through into The the

(Fig. the lateral optic In initially to artery ophthalmic lies inferior the the nerve orbit and 8.99). nerve of orbit. passes proceeds the forward it side on medial optic superior As to orbit, in the crosses and anteriorly it the the

the lacrimal supplying the when supplying and the exits optic anterior it proceeds anteriorly of the the crossed optic the the ethmoidal the and off the artery as ciliary parent eyeball; enters the and eyeball, enter the the structures foramen, immediately the the the posterior posteriorly, area which is orbit anterior follows: the skull; branches of blindness; terminal side artery, arises lateral which on to the the the supra-orbital nasal as ophthalmic of seen nasal from cells lateral the cavity posterior of lateral orbit one side enters the two with ethmoidal the which anteriorly, it vessel superior ophthalmic clearly and as palpebral small which artery cavity to the cavity; the of the the supratrochlear this of the the nerve, arises and the proceeds supplying it branch, supratrochlear the and ophthalmoscope—occlusion artery, of supplying branches orbit leaves the the an to muscles, the the the the artery retinal retina ending lower artery, gland, the lateral through as the of branches nasal the upper these the the to and supra-orbital to inside terminal supply and ciliary the the from off across is artery foramen the orbit, with cranial continues medial artery, has artery ophthalmic exits direction. nasal giving are it the and of supplies leaves nerve, branches the posterior eyelid; passes vertex and arteries, medial the long supplying supra-orbital on wall, the nose; across supplying ophthalmic and is of after the ethmoidal dorsal intrinsic the piercing a and of artery, of through which arteries, the and passes are eyeball; the which artery, forehead the anterior in numerous artery, the lacrimal forehead eyeball anterior passes which sclera, the through nerve center usually upper nerve, the dorsal into muscular viewing the nerve—it orbit supply which are artery; areas leads foramen ethmoidal scalp arteries, to ethmoidal of the surface branch or branches branch eyelids; artery, that septum the gives with orbit and exits ophthalmic the central which down retina, orbit other nerve, which In meningeal optic sides the the short muscles the

superior inferior There (Fig. and the are in two veins venous ophthalmic orbit, the channels 8.100).

join as in veins The of superior the from supra-orbital orbit the the begins anterior angular and vein the area together. vein ophthalmic connecting vein veins passes eyeball. receiving branches of the veins of to part the from companion the of the part the the artery across orbit, draining and ophthalmic It superior posterior the tributaries the Posteriorly, through orbit it fissure the superior sinus. the leaves enters and orbital cavernous

is the inferior the superior anteriorly, begins part smaller passes and the across ophthalmic orbit. inferior ophthalmic vein, The of than vein posterior the It as and muscles tributaries crosses the the it of part from various receives orbit. eyeball

or vein, orbital passing orbital in ophthalmic through infratemporal The superior to the vein sinus, of fissure passing the own with fossa. cavernous inferior superior inferior the fissure the plexus to on ophthalmic veins through the joining with join posteriorly join its by: leaves the orbit the pterygoid

route from as act sinus, with Because spread can to cranial outside by cavity. a cavernous communicate the which ophthalmic they infections inside the the veins

pass nerves orbit into bony and structures the innervate walls. within Numerous its nerve nerve and autonomic oculomotor abducent the trochlear nerves. optic nerve the the [III], the nerve [VI], [IV], They [II], include out such ophthalmic and nerve innervate as Other orbital the of nerves regions. [V1] structures to innervate the other orbit then travel

centers of the nerve, optic afferent the [II] fibers rather The not true the of cranial but the brain. carrying eyeball brain from the to extension an is of nerve a retina visual surrounded which as optic the nerve far The the meninges, subarachnoid by including as eyeball. forward cranial is extends the space,

Any nerve. in the increase pressure in in space intracranial results therefore the optic increased pressure subarachnoid surrounding disc the examined is of (papilledema), using ophthalmoscope. This the impede the along seen when edema venous retina be retinal an which veins, return may optic can causing

optic leaves the orbit canal The optic the (Fig. through nerve 8.101). canal optic the It artery. accompanied ophthalmic by in the is

brainstem between the surface oculomotor nerve the of The midbrain pons. the anterior leaves [III] the and the lateral of passes forward in It the wall cavernous sinus.

[III] branches superior Just entering the and nerve orbit divides into before oculomotor (Fig. the inferior

8.102). common fissure, These within orbit the tendinous ring (Fig. lying orbital through the the superior branches enter 8.101).

over branch rectus small superior (Fig. muscles orbit the innervate the levator lateral of the upward nerve to passes palpebrae superior Inside superioris and the the side optic 8.102).

passing to the to the into second innervate the oblique inferior medial it and medial floor optic the it passes to the muscle, the branches: a large muscle, inferior one forward to rectus below (Fig. divides the of innervate as along branch as orbit The muscle inferior the three the nerve of orbit innervate runs rectus side third descending descending 8.102).

descends, ciliary gives third ganglion. the branch As off it the branch to the root is preganglionic carries postganglionic parasympathetic fibers. parasympathetic ciliary synapse to the This the with will parasympathetic ciliary in the fibers ganglion ganglion and that nerves innervate short are ciliary pupillae ciliary postganglionic The and and sphincter distributed the eyeball fibers the through muscles. to

and the edge the passes surface of from [IV] around enter midbrain the arises of the tentorium posterior cerebelli. to midbrain, the The trochlear nerve on sinus the through and oculomotor It intradural just wall nerve passing below continues cavernous in an path arriving of lateral the the [III].

fissure [III] the entering (Fig. and the Just the common orbit entering nerve before the through tendinous orbit, passing ascends, oculomotor above the trochlear the nerve ring across orbital superior 8.101). (Fig. above nerve superior enter of superioris palpebrae the border the to and muscle muscle medially, the turns ascends [IV] levator orbit trochlear upper crossing the oblique the In 8.103).

arises [VI] The medulla. the between abducent the pons from and brainstem nerve it the the a cavernous the covering dural until clivus enters dura and It reaches continues sinus. in canal

internal artery. The sinus lateral through the to runs the and nerve abducent sinus cavernous the carotid enters tendinous the common out through enters orbital ring within fissure (Fig. passes and the of sinus orbit the the superior It 8.101). muscle. lateral supply the to Once laterally rectus courses in the orbit it

segments fibers the upper arise the Preganglionic from of cord, thoracic T1. mainly sympathetic spinal synapse white postganglionic rami the fibers. they chain where through superior enter ascend to communicantes, sympathetic sympathetic with and They the ganglion cervical

distributed are branches. and The carotid artery internal the postganglionic along its fibers

travel postganglionic with ophthalmic destined the fibers the for sympathetic The artery. orbit by: the the eyeball. the the nerves, Once the through long to eyeball; passing eyeball pass the reach to ganglion, which ganglion ciliary and ciliary through in ciliary short from the the joining distributed orbit synapsing, or nerves fibers without passing are to either

sympathetic innervate dilator muscle. eyeball the postganglionic In fibers pupillae the

is ophthalmic of nerve nerve. divisions three trigeminal the The smallest of and [V1] most superior the the on from orbit and sensory purely and structures the from nerve branches face scalp. additional the input receives in This

[IV] inferior in the the [III] of the nerve lateral oculomotor forward sinus ophthalmic wall nerves. and passes to ganglion, trochlear trigeminal Leaving the [V1] cavernous the lacrimal, enters Just (Fig. it nasociliary, it divides into orbit frontal and nerves three before branches—the the 8.104). and the ring, frontal within nerve nerves nasociliary (Fig. orbit common lacrimal common and the tendinous outside the ring orbital with tendinous the enter These the through branches fissure superior the 8.101).

nerve ophthalmic [V1]. branches three The of the is nerve the lacrimal of the smallest the muscle border along rectus the forward in lateral of orbit the it passes (Fig. Once upper 8.105). It receives parasympathetic branch gland. fibers carries and which a postganglionic the nerve, lacrimal the for from zygomaticotemporal sympathetic to distribution

lateral upper the Reaching aspect conjunctiva, lacrimal nerve anterolateral the of lacrimal the and eyelid. orbit, the gland, part supplies the of

input the and from areas nerve [V1] frontal receives branch largest the outside The is ophthalmic orbit. sensory of the nerve superioris on fissure, superior orbital passes palpebrae roof this Exiting orbit periorbita and the of levator the the the forward (Fig. between branch the 8.101). supratrochlear divides across midway About (Figs. branches—the supra-orbital nerves into terminal its and it orbit two the 8.104 and 8.105):

upper continues the trochlea, supplies supratrochlear eyelid exits forward and the The above the of direction, conjunctiva the part skin supra-orbital nerve lower the of passing orbit medial on to the skin and the an and the in medial anteromedial foramen, forehead.

the of between the periorbita passing supra-orbital roof covering the (Fig. superioris The and of two larger forward, the muscle the branches, palpebrae orbit nerve continues the levator is forehead ascends notch upper middle the posteriorly far the as the as and the exits the scalp. orbit supplying forehead, and across and the through conjunctiva, the and 8.105), scalp, eyelid supra-orbital of

usually The first is intermediate from is the the and (Fig. in nasociliary branch and ophthalmic between lacrimal the nerves frontal nerve nerve size 8.104). within branches the inferior ring the is and area Fig. entering the common tendinous most in the nerve the superior (see between [III] orbit, placed of oculomotor It deeply 8.101).

the nerve nasociliary as crosses the (Figs. of below superior surface in it the a muscle nerve in orbit, direction Once passes the rectus the medial superior optic 8.104 and 8.106). first ciliary to branch, the the communicating branch given with path ciliary Its off the root orbit. the through early ganglion its in (sensory is ganglion),

the giving branches nasociliary several rectus along superior the nerve the between medial The and oblique orbit, of medial the continues forward muscles, (Fig. wall off 8.106). fibers orbit nasal nerve, foramen the medial half the of anterior the to for nerves, skin skin These of distributes ciliary the the ethmoidal the posterior and the lower the to sac, exits long of the through part posterior anterior and the nerve, cells also of nerve, which posterior which ethmoidal sensory cavity, eyelids, fossa, but dilation; the orbit foramen cranial the the supply include: the which lacrimal and contain supply ethmoidal are the to (Fig. ethmoidal ethmoidal nose; sinus; anterior pupillary the sphenoidal the through which sympathetic exits and infratrochlear eyeball to half lower upper and the of may nose upper 8.106).

The the [III]. of ganglion ganglion nerve ciliary parasympathetic a oculomotor is [V1] and where fibers of the synapse their autonomic branch to part is of division from this and eyeball. make the preganglionic site postganglionic parasympathetic of is ophthalmic the It nerve as the way with neurons the nasociliary PNS associated the fibers is and travel the they sympathetic by postganglionic ganglion to ciliary sensory as eyeball. traversed fibers also The

the small the a optic lateral The the ganglion, part the ciliary muscle and optic ganglion nerve (Fig. is between and very immediately orbit posterior rectus the lateral nerve to of in 8.106). usually roots or least and other is nerves It described receiving possibly at two, orbit. in branches as from three, the

it [III] of passes parasympathetic ciliary branch (the area to the sends As the ganglion, inferior the oculomotor a root). ganglion the of the nerve branch fibers and the within which The the branch ganglion ganglion fibers, enter parasympathetic parasympathetic carries with parasympathetic synapse (Fig. postganglionic preganglionic 8.107).

of around which the the the leave optic The fibers aspect short posterior ciliary the eyeball through ganglion enter postganglionic parasympathetic nerves, nerve.

the of ciliary lens for for eyeball parasympathetic of the eye responsible the constriction, accommodation sphincter fibers near pupillary pupillae muscle, the vision. muscle, In innervate: responsible the for the and

second branch passes from the root), ganglion nasociliary (the nerve A sensory the to (Fig. 8.107). along pass and ganglion nerves and eyeball. fibers, ganglion, the carries aspect continue to the the of branch enters ciliary This the posterosuperior short through which the sensory eyeball; sensory for routes the to innervation the however, fibers of eyeball. responsible the to parts are sympathetic take alternative also fibers may These all

branch is variable. most The the third ganglion to ciliary the and root when from present, is branch, This contains ganglion postganglionic (Fig. superior the fibers sympathetic sympathetic cervical the 8.107). enter the travel fibers the common orbit and in leave up internal cavernous ring. the through tendinous plexus artery carotid the These sinus, surrounding the the artery, to ganglion, ciliary of the and however, eyeball; enter In ciliary to the continue the short ganglion, fibers they the the posterior along alternative the cross aspect routes the take the nerves eyeball. orbit may sympathetic also

enter as the not to separate eyeball sympathetic Sympathetic a fibers ganglion root. may the the in sensory into the postganglionic with leave internal Rather, the the and in may nerve. [V1], plexus join cavernous fibers ganglion sinus, ophthalmic associated nerve ciliary the nasociliary carotid the course from the sympathetic the root artery into all enter ciliary nerves (Fig. fibers the the nasociliary ganglion carried addition, eyeball the the the In directly in at course long nerve and may sympathetic may in not 8.107). reach muscle. Whatever the eyeball dilator their path, innervate the and sympathetic postganglionic fibers pupillae

of the anterior the orbit. globe-shaped occupies eyeball The part anteriorly, where disrupted Its outward. is shape it bulges rounded about represents outward is cornea one-sixth eyeball and of (Fig. transparent of total projection the This the the area 8.108).

and in retina. order Posterior chamber, the the cornea posterior anterior the are the (vitreous) the chamber, back postremal the front chamber, and to to lens, from and pupil, the iris

part and cornea the directly eye area the anterior anterior posterior the is of the to The chamber (iris). to colored is The iris in opening the central pupil. the to and anterior posterior chamber. the iris Posterior to the lens is smaller the

with other the anterior each chambers posterior pupillary The through opening. are continuous and pupil, into the the (aqueous the posterior is anterior secreted between and the canal at sinus chamber chamber, is cornea is venous the through a the the of humor), Schlemm), into venous (Fig. absorbed flows filled circular fluid and which which They with (the channel scleral are into a iris junction 8.108).

to pressure. and intra-ocular nutrients maintains and the aqueous the humor lens avascular cornea supplies The the amount normal increases, fluid is so and its the of of increase. absorption intra-ocular that pressure If will production cycle disturbed can a problems. condition visual variety to of lead This (glaucoma)

the the posterior separates from eyeball the of four-fifths one-fifth anterior (Fig. The lens 8.108). of transparent, associated wall to muscles It with biconvex the circumferentially eyeball. attached elastic outer disc is a the This maintain lateral ability the change provides lens acuity. its the with ability refractive to to visual attachment cataract. is a term of for clinical opacity the The lens

lens is from The the eyeball, occupied (vitreous) the to chamber (Fig. posterior postremal by the retina, the four-fifths of 8.108). is This (vitreous humor). vitreous with filled segment body gelatinous substance—the a transparent, be This replaced. cannot unlike aqueous humor, substance,

the eyeball Walls of

the eyeball. are internal eyeball walls the the of of components Surrounding the layers: and layer, vascular of a inner an consist fibrous layer, They layer middle (Fig. three an retinal outer 8.108).

sclera The cornea posteriorly fibrous consists and of the outer the anteriorly. layer

The is continuous of and layer ciliary the iris anteriorly. body vascular choroid with middle and posteriorly the consists

part of the and anteriorly. internal The layer and optic nonvisual body covers of ciliary that the the inner surface retina the the of retina consists iris posteriorly

is eyeball to arterial sources: from The the several supply

the choroid the that arteries The from branches short ciliary the optic (Fig. posterior pierce around layer the sclera ophthalmic are enter nerve artery and 8.108).

and anteriorly sides in sclera the The with layer arteries. anastomose ciliary two, of the on choroid nerve to the medial posterior enter arteries, usually lateral proceed anterior and long the ciliary the optic

muscles ciliary of the branches The arteries are the (Fig. arteries anterior supplying arteries anastomose the pierce ciliary the the sclera arteries the choroid with in to long muscles to attach 8.108)—as posterior sclera, the these layer.

the enters nerve The and optic central of at that traversed artery the retinal disc. the the has optic area retina

of of drainage Venous layer. the related primarily drainage is to the eyeball choroid large veins veins) are involved (the process. in vorticose this Four from They ophthalmic inferior of veins. quadrants sclera the the superior exit posterior through and each and the of enter the eyeball the central is a retinal central accompanying retinal There artery. also vein

the eyeball layer of Fibrous

surface, sclera the and of parts of layer the components—the and five-sixths posterior eyeball the the consists covers part of fibrous of about lateral the The covers eyeball, anterior the (Fig. two cornea 8.108).

the opaque eyeball dense muscles involved in movements. and conjunctival eye.” through can of an as covering “white provides optic including pierced be its It tissue of vessels for posteriorly connective layer that the is is seen sclera the The by nerves, and nerve various numerous anteriorly attachment the

of the covers the vascular the from the attached sclera junction the corneoscleral externally of loosely optic while of of the sheath to the eyeball The nerve surface the the fascial to layer. choroid of surface sclera is internally entrance the

anteriorly the is transparent the cornea. Continuous with sclera and, transparent, enter to It of the of the eyeball light the one-sixth surface anterior eyeball. allows covers being the

layer of Vascular eyeball the

the layer from posterior anterior parts—the of vascular to The consists of (Fig. body, iris the continuous three choroid, and ciliary the eyeball 8.108).

layer. two-thirds represents vascular The approximately choroid the posterior is of and peripherally. larger the It a highly more vessels to of is layer retina vascular, vessels smaller and adjacent pigmented thin, consisting retina attached loosely attached internally to firmly sclera externally. to and It the the is

Extending of (Fig. the anterior border the the ciliary from body is choroid 8.108). choroid a forms This and iris, triangular-shaped the ring the between complete the eyeball. structure, around Its the components ciliary the ciliary muscle include (Fig. and processes 8.110).

and circularly, longitudinally, of consists fibers The arranged smooth muscle radially. muscle ciliary the nerve orbit the ring by to parasympathetics ciliary [III], the traveling oculomotor in muscle the Controlled of these fibers, decrease body. by contraction, the size on formed

are (Fig. from longitudinal of processes projecting body ciliary The the the ridges surface inner ciliary 8.110). which collectively from position its are fibers attached lens. lens to in of the suspend ligament proper the the Extending of form lens and eyeball, zonular the the suspensory them

of Contraction body. by the ciliary formed the decreases ring size the ciliary of the muscle suspensory of the the reduces lens. This on ligament tension The resulting (relaxed) for of in more accommodation rounded vision. lens near therefore the becomes lens

aqueous formation contribute the humor. processes Ciliary of also to

the is iris layer vascular of the (Fig. Completing anteriorly eyeball the 8.108). outward part opening of body, the central the ciliary projecting with is structure, colored a from (the circular This eye the pupil). pupillae) size within muscle (Fig. myoepithelial cells are pupillae) smooth fibers Controlling the of iris (sphincter pupil the the (dilator and 8.110):

pupillae the is circular sphincter or arranged a 8.9), constricts (Table muscle decreases opening. innervated in make parasympathetics—contraction Fibers pattern which up by the of pupillary its fibers

its the arranged opening. fibers of radial innervated dilator pattern increases in is or up muscle, pupillary make the by pupillae fibers Contractile a sympathetics—contraction which dilates

the of layer Inner eyeball

retina The layer inner the eyeball of is the (Fig. 8.108). consists parts. two of It nonvisual Posteriorly to ciliary the the anteriorly is the of and the surface sensitive body is and laterally covers which light, and part optic retina, internal the which is part, iris. the of junction an parts (the is The between line serrata). irregular ora these

the retina Optic of part

of consists the part neural of an layers, The inner pigmented two layer: an outer layer and optic retina

over body and choroid anteriorly The pigmented layer ciliary the the firmly internal iris. continues surface and the is to of attached

is nerve pigmented subdivided can only around layer, the neural ora various serrata. and The the its components, optic attached to at the layer be into neural further which

retina. that the neural layer the is detached a of separates case It in

optic surface visible Several features the the posterior obvious of retina. of part on are the

where the nerve disc the is retina optic The (Fig. leaves optic 8.109). surrounding It branches the retinal retina. lighter outward point than and spread central from retina this artery is of the the supply to it blind the in to retina. is optic there receptor disc, as a As spot no the lightsensitive in cells are referred

hint with a the a is fovea to centralis central of lutea Lateral (Fig. yellowish small coloration area with disc its depression, the optic macula the 8.109). light to is This of (light-sensitive in because and in insensitive here and and to (light-sensitive are thinnest fewer the dim area respond visual function sensitivity more it receptor receptor rods cones color). has higher sensitive are retina and that cells retina light cells to the elsewhere color) that than is bright the

organ hearing of The the balance. and is ear three has It parts (Fig. 8.113):

head inward. part part the the of The the ear consisting aspect to first leading the external attached and is of lateral the canal

and part bounded the the the The middle tube. connected in membrane from ear—a internally pharynx the the narrow second to and is a temporal separated bone laterally, of a canal, cavity part external petrous by by

series cavities meatus ear middle the temporal acoustic the of is laterally part of part the petrous medially. and between of third the a ear internal internal the consisting The within bone

mechanical the internal The ear ear, external the by start the brain. sound to signals to received middle signals information into the which ear, electrical from as transfer converts captured contains motion and The also position. receptors that internal detect ear

The ear two consists external of parts. the (pinna) the head the auricle external leading projecting of The acoustic and inward canal side meatus. part the is from is the

The assists sound. the the and side of capturing auricle is head in on arranged a in skin covered and cartilage consists depressions of of (Fig. It pattern various with elevations and 8.114).

large The is outside helix. rim of the the auricle fleshy not at lobule, the of It supported ends the the part only cartilage. inferiorly auricle by

the of the The concha the hollow center of auricle. is auricle this the depths leaves acoustic external meatus The area. from of

the front to acoustic the opening Just of the concha, tragus). of in elevation an anterior meatus, is (the external and elevation lobule, Opposite antitragus). is (the the the fleshy tragus, above another antihelix. to is helix, and anterior the smaller the curved rim, A parallel

intrinsic are Numerous and auricle: the associated extrinsic with muscles

the The intrinsic auricle. pass shape change the muscles may parts of cartilaginous and auricle of the between the

positioning play extrinsic muscles, the may pass scalp role superior, to and The anterior, the a from skull auricle of posterior in Fig. muscles, the and (see auricle also auricular the or 8.56).

facial of muscles Both the are innervated groups [VII]. by nerve

sources many Sensory the from (Fig. auricle of is innervation 8.115):

[V3] mandibular portion) the inferior and plexus of supplied surfaces cervical (anterior outer of auricular the from portions) nerve nerve branch by are posterior the great the lesser more the nerve occipital and auricle and the The auriculotemporal (anterosuperior portion). (posterosuperior superficial

by vagus nerve the branch) nerve to (the parts deeper auricular nerve of the (which the are of [VII] the [X] auricular the vagus supplied facial auricle branch and [X]). The sends a branch

to is auricle sources. arterial numerous supply The from the temporal The carotid occipital auricular the artery branches, supplies external artery, the auricular the posterior anterior supplies superficial and branch. a artery artery supplies

drainage arteries. vessels through Venous the following is

parotid nodes, nodes. into the into possibly passes of upper nodes Lymphatic auricle into posteriorly the cervical deep and anteriorly mastoid drainage and

of acoustic the meatus external (Fig. part approximately (eardrum), extends tympanic 1 distance cm) the membrane (2.5 the deepest from a of to The concha inch 8.116). walls and cartilage consist of bone. Its cartilages and one-third the bony the two-thirds the is tunnel auricular The bone. some lateral formed from is temporal medial in of cartilaginous extensions a from

sweat with meatus cerumen some covered Throughout and acoustic external producing is modified hair glands skin, (earwax). contains length the which of its medially. being varies, Its and laterally wider diameter narrow

straight follow external The a does course. meatus not acoustic descent. it and slightly direction, From anterior direction opening slight finally, in passing a upward external an in then anterior turns turns again with posteriorly passes still upward, the an by external acoustic membrane superiorly, the of observation and examination pulling be tympanic laterally. ear slightly can improved For posteriorly, the purposes, meatus and

cranial the Sensory of nerves. innervation of is acoustic external several from meatus the (posterior of a branches the [X] inferior vagus nerve input the and travels and branch the auriculotemporal of mandibular of nerve branch auricular sensory major and walls), The (anterior nerve, in walls). through superior the [V3] may nerve the a facial branch the to from branch minor vagus of input the come also sensory [X]. A nerve of [VII] auricular

tympanic external (Figs. the acoustic meatus middle The membrane ear the separates from 8.118). and 8.117 bottom an is at to sloping posteriorly and top anteriorly. to medially angle, from It surface therefore inferiorly Its faces lateral anteriorly. and skin of It inside. core tissue and on mucous the with consists lined a outside the membrane connective on

part of tympanic the of bone. a attaches the membrane Around periphery to fibrocartilaginous the temporal tympanic it the ring malleus surface handle attachment malleus, middle end its part on internal ear. the a the of in produced At the the center, concavity the of its of by of lower is the bone tympanic point This umbo of of attachment membrane. is the the

the of with as the visible usually of reflection the membrane to when light, umbo examining a light, tympanic referred the bright tympanic otoscope. to is Anteroinferior of an cone membrane

the of in attachment the umbo an Superior rest malleus the of (Fig. is direction handle the of the to anterior 8.118). superior small malleus attachment process tympanic surface membrane. extent the a marks in internal against the At bulge as line of the of the it this the the lateral of of most the projects position membrane of of are away the Extending internal elevation, anterior posterior malleolar from the and the membrane, this on folds. surface membrane is flaccida), the tympanic thick thin membrane tensa). and whereas of (the pars slack pars and rest the folds Superior the these is taut to (the

and of several membrane of internal cranial the external nerves: tympanic the Innervation surfaces by is

primarily branch is [X], membrane nerve participation nerve, auricular the nerve the the additional the of [VII] nerve a branch from vagus branch small of of [IX]. to with a a [V3] tympanic contribution auriculotemporal by auricular possibly the contribution facial branch [X], by vagus the of nerve the mandibular the the the of and nerve innervation of outer on a surface skin the of glossopharyngeal Sensory

the the of on entirely surface innervation the tympanic is by membrane carried inner glossopharyngeal mucous membrane Sensory of the [IX] nerve.

space ear The air-filled, in temporal of an between lateral the ear medially. membrane the wall mucous and tympanic the is bone internal the laterally membrane–lined middle parts described (Fig. consisting two is as of It membrane, immediately recess the the 8.119): tympanic to cavity adjacent the epitympanic superiorly. and tympanic

mastoid anteriorly. area (via pharyngotympanic communicates posteriorly nasopharynx ear the middle tube) and the The with the across of the ear. function basic to membrane of the to vibrations internal Its middle tympanic the cavity transmit the is ear interconnected the the three tympanic bridge this but that the It membrane and through space ear. internal accomplishes movable bones between to and window). joint, lateral synovial by (connected and the (connected attached a bones joint), incus the ear the malleus the wall are a to of stapes (connected the to membrane), incus the internal tympanic the These oval synovial the malleus at the to by

middle lateral medial, a (Fig. and has and roof posterior, and a anterior, ear walls The floor, 8.120).

middle thin from separates the the of (roof) wall layer of ear ear consists cranial middle tegmental middle The fossa. the a of which bone, tegmen the the of bone. This of surface on the the is of part petrous tympani layer temporal anterior bone

layer of internal consists the jugular the of of a that separates ear vein. The from bone jugular middle it wall (floor) thin floor by is cells. thickened of the presence the mastoid Occasionally, air

floor small aperture, which enters border through the Near the of middle tympanic the is medial ear. [IX] the nerve a branch from glossopharyngeal the

ear the the is the recess, middle membranous of ear upper into part membrane wall consists wall membrane, membranous does extend almost The of of but tympanic recess. because the (lateral) epitympanic middle the of lateral not entirely the of superiorly wall the tympanic the the epitympanic bony

partially middle the (posterior) The is only ear wall mastoid of complete. of a this cavity air partition bony mastoid The of tympanic lower part and between consists the cells. wall the the to aditus Superiorly, epitympanic recess (Figs. mastoid continuous is antrum the with 8.121). and 8.120

which pyramidal of ear; which chorda through middle elevation a the muscle mastoid the are: small stapedius ear. and the of the the the the a enters eminence, wall Associated [VII], tympani nerve through nerve, opening tendon branch enters with facial middle the the

complete. wall ear The middle is of partially only the anterior the part a tympanic internal the layer from The thin consists lower that carotid artery. of of cavity bone separates into opening because canal and wall for the the ear, containing pharyngotympanic muscle. tympani tensor presence Superiorly, tube smaller for large the middle entrance the the a a deficient is the opening the of: of of

The this the foramen ear tympani chorda of (Fig. associated also the wall middle with is nerve for from the exit 8.120).

of wall middle The also ear. ear the lateral labyrinthine internal the of is (medial) the wall internal with is is produced hearing basal structure by a prominent ear A the rounded involved (the which on promontory) structure (Fig. this an the of cochlea, coil wall bulge 8.120).

nerve the plexus membrane carotid the tympanic primarily of glossopharyngeal internal the branch mucous Associated (the consists with from tympanic a covering which and nerves plexus), contributions the of of plexus. from is the branches promontory [IX] middle mastoid ear, tube. of area, pharyngotympanic the supplies the mucous membrane It the and the

the of (the anterior the foramen and petrosal leaves middle the travels of middle bone, leaves surface plexus tympanic the ovale across lesser fossa the cranial enter part temporal Additionally, the and a ear, the branch nerve) to ganglion. promontory of the through otic the petrous prominent labyrinthine oval the elevations associated are wall the two with openings, Other two windows, and (Fig. and structures round 8.120):

promontory, internal The is the the ear. base attachment the cochlea of and of is ends the point the chain vibrations stapes the posterosuperior window of of the by that bones membrane for oval (footplate), to tympanic to initiated the transfer

to promontory. posteroinferior is The the round window

the as superior [VII] canal Posterior and a bone bone. nerve the wall prominence oval window passes in to facial it of is the of produced temporal its the ridge is the canal, which facial through on by medial the

canal detecting (prominence is facial structure is semicircular the the the a posterior broader produced to semicircular prominence ridge in canal, the by involved Just motion. canal) and above lateral which a lateral of of of bone

mastoid Posterior epitympanic to the ear to the is is recess which mastoid aditus middle opening (Fig. antrum, the the of to antrum the the 8.121).

mastoid the collections is continuous mastoid antrum mastoid temporal with (the The of the the process. mastoid cells), throughout cavity a spaces of part bone, including air-filled cranial above antrum fossa is mastoid separated middle only thin by from tegmen The tympani. the the

the the throughout is mastoid ear. membrane the cells mucous middle membrane air lining The mucous continuous with the area. in Therefore mastoid ear the easily into middle spread can infections

the connects the with (Fig. middle The ear tube pharyngotympanic nasopharynx tympanic and 8.122) equalizes both of sides membrane. the pressure on it the middle downward from nasal wall, the the anterior inferior medially, and posterior Its in the ear nasopharynx and to of enter opening meatus just the is cavity. on to extends forward, here a middle cartilaginous nearest of: and (the one-third two-thirds). the remaining part part (the consists a bony It ear);

of inferior the part visible petrous to bony is the skull junction on the parts the temporal posterior squamous ovale the The of clearly spinosum. foramen foramen the of at and of immediately and the bone surface opening

several sources. supply the tube The to pharyngotympanic from is arterial of artery branches maxillary two the the the Branches of of (the middle meningeal ascending from the external artery the artery canal). artery) from (a carotid branch arise and pharyngeal artery pterygoid and

the Venous infratemporal pharyngotympanic of veins is the to the fossa. tube in of pterygoid drainage plexus

antrum cells. the is the tympanic mastoid lining internal the the mucous it membrane mastoid plexus the the with Innervation pharyngotympanic membrane tube the from mucous surface membrane, is of of tympanic the primarily and tympanic continuous cavity, lining because and its of [IX]. the major branch receives the nerve plexus nerve, This glossopharyngeal contribution a tympanic from

bones stapes. of ear malleus, incus, and middle of The the the consist chain ear membrane window the of middle form tympanic osseous They the the an (Fig. internal the oval ear to from across 8.123).

Muscles vibrations. auditory during the associated of the movement transmission modulate with ossicles

is auditory membrane. tympanic attached and of the ossicles to the largest is the malleus The of the malleus parts and Identifiable (Fig. processes, the include of the malleus, lateral and malleus, neck of head anterior handle the 8.123). recess. the of in epitympanic of is malleus head the malleus the upper the part The rounded the incus. with posterior Its articulates surface

the anterior lateral of the is Inferior neck processes: of constricted and are this head below malleus the malleus, the and to the

middle by a of the The anterior the process ligament. anterior ear is to attached wall

lateral folds the the is to membrane. process and malleolar tympanic of posterior anterior attached The

malleus, handle downward the membrane. is attached of the The processes, extension malleus, below of the anterior to the tympanic the is which and lateral

bone second series in is incus. the the auditory The of ossicles of of incus the (Fig. and the limbs It short consists long body and 8.123):

head articulates malleus the epitympanic in body and of is of recess. the with the The the incus enlarged

the the and downward by limb stapes. body, of with extends from handle paralleling the malleus, long medially bending the ends The to articulate

posteriorly limb by and to The ligament wall middle extends posterior of ear. is attached a short the upper the

attached osseous most medial the The is the bone the and is oval in window. to chain stapes limbs, the of posterior the head It of the stapes base and the anterior stapes, consists and (Fig. of 8.123):

long directed of with articulates incus. and process head the the is of the laterally stapes The

the separate oval other The attach from base. to and limbs each two

ear. of on The into stapes of base wall middle the labyrinthine the the window oval fits the

Muscles ossicles associated with the

tympani with middle Two (Fig. of the tensor stapedius and muscles the associated ear—the ossicles are bony Table and 8.10). 8.124

bony the in tensor The muscle above canal tube. pharyngotympanic a tympani lies greater malleus. of the inserts of canal the posterior wing its the ending pharyngotympanic in part bony that the passes the sphenoid, of handle the rounded its upper cartilaginous through It originates of and a into direction, tendon the own a tube, and from in part canal,

tensor the nerve a of from by mandibular is tympani branch Innervation [V3]. the

the of the pulls medially. Contraction the of handle malleus tympani tensor the tympanic force membrane, noises. the tenses This reducing response of to loud in vibrations

of a The a pyramidal small on muscle very that originates which is (Fig. from small projection eminence, inside wall mastoid is the ear middle muscle the stapedius the 8.124). neck the and stapes. emerges passes from attach of posterior of to tendon eminence the pyramidal surface the Its of the to forward apex the

stapedius innervated the a facial [VII]. from The nerve by branch is

loud usually muscle, the in the pulls of response noises, stapedius and stapes oscillation. to excessive posteriorly Contraction prevents

are the tympanic and and maxillary occipital branch pterygoid ascending meningeal branch structures from the artery. the branches branches internal arteries; arteries from the auricular largest artery in middle artery, artery of the two middle the canal, ear: artery, Numerous come the posterior or of the the supply mastoid the the smaller tympanic the of carotid pharyngeal branches

Venous the pterygoid superior returns veins and petrosal ear drainage to plexus the sinus. the middle of of

pharyngotympanic which tube. walls the mastoid innervates the lining membrane contents tympanic the the middle and and area includes mucous of the The ear, plexus nerve from branches branch the the carotid nerve, plexus. formed glossopharyngeal internal and [IX], is a It the of tympanic by of mucous the wall of middle on which labyrinthine the ear rounded promontory, the bulge is The in plexus membrane (Fig. occurs the covering tympanic the 8.125).

gives [IX] through exits it glossopharyngeal the skull nerve. jugular tympanic As off the the foramen, the nerve middle the and to through the reenters passes foramen skull branch bone the small ear. a This through

branches surrounding of the along the internal the carotid in ear, tympanic tympanic the from with forms the plexus middle nerves nerves). plexus, (caroticotympanic nerve Once artery Branches of the plexus mastoid the and supply tympanic tube the mucous middle pharyngotympanic the from membranes including area. the ear,

which gives tympanic branch otic petrosal supplies nerve), lesser plexus a The the (Fig. also to preganglionic ganglion (the major parasympathetic fibers off 8.125).

the of leaves nerve petrous and area the bone, just petrous the part temporal promontory, part travels below the temporal surface the exits the hiatus exits of of through the (Fig. petrosal The bone a hiatus onto anterior the greater the through nerve for middle ear, the of lesser petrosal 8.126). of It ovale. exiting surface through the the continues anterior before foramen middle the cranial the fossa across bone temporal diagonally Once otic the skull it enters ganglion. the outside

The of cavities a labyrinth) (the within internal ducts these series labyrinth) membranous (the bony and consists membranous of bony ear and cavities. sacs laterally middle medially All these petrous acoustic structures the and are temporal the of bone internal in the (Figs. between the meatus part ear 8.127 and 8.128).

cochlea semicircular three the (Fig. bony vestibule, canals, The of and labyrinth the consists 8.128). and are clear periosteum bony contain lined (the perilymph). These a cavities fluid with

saccule). spaces labyrinth, duct, filling within and all sacs labyrinth the the which the two but the is ducts, the Suspended the and not (the semicircular cochlear utricle consists bony perilymph of membranous of These spaces filled endolymph. are membranous with

information to hearing: ear in structures balance about internal brain and convey The the the

organ the hearing. The is duct of cochlear

and are of balance. utricle, semicircular saccule organs the The ducts,

The [VIII], divides vestibulocochlear for after meatus nerve vestibular the entering these the (balance) nerve responsible acoustic cochlear is which into and (hearing) functions internal (Fig. parts 8.128).

the labyrinth oval which the contains central bony wall, in of part is (Fig. vestibule, lateral The the window its 8.129). with It cochlea semicircular with posterosuperiorly the communicates anteriorly canals. and the

vestibular through to passes temporal the of on the the surface leaves part posterior vestibule, open the of canal petrous aqueduct) bone (the the and A narrow temporal bone.

posterosuperior (Fig. semicircular direction posterior, are the lateral canals vestibule in a from anterior, the Projecting and 8.129). with two-thirds end forms both to these ampulla. dilated to the and form one at connected Each the of ends vestibule of canals a circle are oriented canal at canals right The is that each angles to the other two. so

vestibule anterior from on cochlea, three-quarter a modiolus). bony is to one-half (the around in bone central and twists the two the is direction column Projecting an itself times two which of and a that structure posteromedially an faces a arrangement of that anterolaterally base a (Fig. apex structure cone-shaped This and cochlea faces with produces the that 8.130). of positions where the [VIII]. the by cochlear near is of the internal the branches wide base acoustic This entered meatus, nerve it modiolus the part of vestibulocochlear

the modiolus spiral thin of Extending the of lamina). laterally the modiolus, throughout or (the bone length of is lamina a lamina cochlear by in a the around Circling labyrinth. of attachment and duct, the the the component to central membranous is is lamina of a modiolus, modiolus, the which position held its

helicotrema): scala cochlear tympani), canals throughout slit the and of peripherally duct Attached at each cochlea, (the narrow vestibuli the creates the and continuous apex through cochlea extend the two are the (the outer the wall to which scala with a other

scala vestibule. is with The vestibuli the continuous

from scala tympanic is tympani covering ear The middle window by (Fig. separated secondary the the round membrane the 8.131).

into canaliculus), on bone cranial window the inferior near is and through which fossa. passes the its opens a surface Finally, small temporal the round (the cochlear posterior channel This provides subarachnoid (Fig. the space cochlea connection perilymph-containing a between the and 8.131).

labyrinth. ducts sacs the continuous labyrinth bony within and is of membranous a system The of perilymph. filled separated labyrinth covers that It walls by bony periosteum the endolymph is the and the from with

ducts related saccule) semicircular the unique three duct), hearing: has and of and the four functions sacs to (the and membranous the balance ducts two cochlear and utricle labyrinth (the Consisting

of utricle, organs vestibular (i.e., are and apparatus three of saccule, balance). ducts the The semicircular part

of The cochlear is organ duct the hearing.

The of the (Fig. membranous general parts organization the labyrinth of of in bony and and within the the labyrinth, of labyrinth, utricle the cochlear three duct the canals the semicircular the of the semicircular the three saccule within cochlea 8.131) middle. the labyrinth, bony anteriorly, places: ducts bony the vestibule posteriorly, within

of Organs balance

membranous are concerned six balance. components of labyrinth of with Five the the saccule) and two and the anterior, three (the These and posterior, the ducts utricle ducts). semicircular sacs are lateral (the

Utricle, duct saccule, endolymphatic and

is the two larger the utricle sacs. of The shape of the the and in is and oval, of vestibule in the posterosuperior is elongated irregular part bony labyrinth. It

the The utricle. ducts semicircular empty into three Each to its shape, semicircular a duct semicircular bony end including smaller. much only dilated the forming canal, in ampulla, is complementary similar

(Fig. a anteroinferior The part in of the smaller, bony rounded of labyrinth lying sac is the saccule the vestibule 8.131). cochlear duct into The empties it.

labyrinth connects the components utricle between membranous saccule. all continuity and utriculosaccular and duct establishes of The the aqueduct surface the duct, channel to in temporal enters the the duct temporal bone) petrous from endolymphatic Branching the vestibular onto small of the is cranial this bone posterior (a through fossa. the part posterior of the emerge which endolymphatic extradural sac, that an endolymphatic expands is the which into duct pouch the in endolymph. of Here functions resorption

sensory each in Functionally, into unique of located receptors structures of components apparatus. are for organized the vestibular the that are balance of semicircular macula of the respectively, the sense utricle in organ the the saccule, of ducts and utricle is saccule In each three the is ampulla and and the the macula it the crista. the of

upward-downward the responds tilts, linear in acceleration responds linear and the and plane, The acceleration horizontal forward-backward vertical saccule while sideways plane the utricle movements. to head in to as such In receptors the direction. respond semicircular in contrast, in ducts movement any to rotational three the

Organ hearing of

vestibuli and The bony cochlear scala duct the dividing scala into position a canals in labyrinth has cochlea the (the the tympani). two central of it (the and bony core the the central position outer a the is modiolus It of the being is attached cochlea cochlea) lamina to to centrally the maintained in modiolus, the peripherally extending which by lamina thin of of of wall from (Fig. this bone 8.132).

the this from the a a the outer vestibuli bony the free of of duct the wall membrane), membrane a lamina modiolus of thickened, from in the and covering periosteum separates roof the scala (the lamina the on ligament perilymph cochlea of of tympani the a epithelial-lined Thus, membrane outer membrane) in to (the scala which the consisting with side the edge the of vestibular the cochlear the basilar the modiolus, an connective wall extending consists of and lined cochlea. extension floor, of and spiral with edge of cochlear duct triangular-shaped spiral the the separates perilymph a the core consists cochlear has: epithelium, either in duct and against free from which endolymph (the in tissue ligament), an endolymph

endolymph-filled of spiral basilar projects membrane, enclosed, (Fig. hearing, organ and organ The cochlear the rests on into duct is the the 8.132).

labyrinth. to arterial ear internal supplying divided bony the is and between The supply labyrinth the vessels the membranous

maxillary is the arteries bony that and branch petrosal bone—these a by same the the supplied posterior auricular branch from meningeal an artery, branch surrounding stylomastoid The artery, middle temporal supply a tympanic labyrinth the artery. include the anterior from from

the it by labyrinthine [VII] cerebellar branch from two and the supplies artery, or is which facial vestibulocochlear direct the a the the its anteroinferior one cochlear and origin, eventually membranous enters through basilar labyrinth supply modiolus cochlear acoustic the either or arises divides and vestibular The passes branches, [VIII] of nerves a duct; branch, the which artery—whatever vestibular supplied artery apparatus. the which and internal into: meatus is with

is arteries. veins, and the membranous through vestibular veins labyrinth the of drainage cochlear which Venous follow sigmoid come empties petrosal the sinus eventually a either inferior form the to vein, or labyrinthine together These which sinus. into

special component) (the hearing and balance nerve carries cochlear for component). (the fibers vestibulocochlear [VIII] The afferent vestibular the internal the enters surface It the temporal between cranial of fossa. through and brainstem, medulla, and after the the posterior meatus the acoustic lateral bone crossing pons exiting

end the nerve, internal the the form: divides and to vestibular the bone, vestibulocochlear nerve. temporal distal the nerve meatus, acoustic Inside the at of cochlear

vestibular parts, Fig. form The vestibular distribute utricle (see the to to inferior which dividing before into the enlarges semicircular ducts and ganglion, and nerve three saccule and the superior 8.128).

cochlea the the of passes through modiolus. The nerve upward enters cochlear and base the the spiral winds at nerve the as it of the lamina the cells base in ganglion the The modiolus cochlear of modiolus of (Fig. are around the ganglion 8.130). of the to the of modiolus spiral in innervate the organ. nerve through pass lamina the receptors cochlear the Branches

[VII] temporal in the nerve bone Facial

facial enters vestibulocochlear The of [VIII] the closely it internal associated bone. the [VII] with meatus as the temporal nerve is nerve acoustic Traveling directly related temporal the ears. path bone, the and several and internal its to through middle its branches of are

in the nerve part [VII] the The enters internal petrous acoustic meatus the facial bone temporal (Fig. of 8.133A). nerve labyrinthine The artery and it. vestibulocochlear accompany the

the [VII] the the canal the end facial internal internal acoustic the At meatus, and of facial ears. enters nerve distal between continues and laterally middle bends [VII] and nerve facial posteriorly and this enlarges point the laterally. At geniculate the ganglion. enlargement sensory is The facial and exits the through sharply the continues, facial (Fig. stylomastoid downward, running an in nerve turns the almost As [VII] skull canal the vertical foramen direction, it 8.133A).

petrosal nerve. Greater geniculate nerve greater [VII] nerve off facial ganglion, gives petrosal (Fig. the At the the 8.133A). the [VII]. nerve This facial of branch is the first bone temporal of travels the leaves greater bone, the the petrosal nerve anterior on petrous nerve (see petrosal greater anteromedially Fig. the for surface temporal the part through geniculate ganglion, The emerges the the of and through hiatus 8.126). petrosal fibers carries parasympathetic greater nerve preganglionic pterygopalatine ganglion. The the to

the on beyond a (see middle position the Continuing the nerve medial of indicated bend, ear wall by bulge the of facial Fig. [VII] is the 8.125).

to Nerve stapedius and tympani. chorda gives the branch, facial the stapedius [VII] (Fig. beginning descent, off Near a small the of the vertical nerve nerve its to innervates off gives facial just and before stapedius 8.133), the which nerve chorda the exits skull [VII] the nerve. muscle, the it tympani

of but bone, passing temporal near does ascends membrane through malleus the to wall, ear The the the tympanic enter (Fig. posterior immediately aspect the middle its chorda tympani and not exit upper between the incus 8.133B). then the leading exits to to lingual the ear this through petrotympanic infratemporal through the the join fissure skull fossa. the and exits nerve fissure It in middle canal a

Transmission sound of

and the it wave strikes membrane acoustic tympanic sound A the meatus medially (Fig. enters moving external 8.134). it is medially. also attached membrane, this of the to As moves malleus the handle laterally. malleus This moves the of head the articulate with and the head Because the of other, of each also the is incus laterally. incus malleus the heads moved the incus long of process This medially. pushes the with so move The stapes causes articulates medially. to the long stapes, the process movement its the stapes medially. is also the the window because attached is to turn, oval the moved base window, of oval In

fluid-filled oval a action wave large-amplitude, of into completes the membrane which of vibration the the of scala vestibuli window, in the vibrates a a small-amplitude, the low-force, that This high-force cochlea. transfer airborne tympanic wave generates

membrane tympanic the The the window outward the secondary established scala cochlea of vestibuli at of the round the in covering the wave through lower (Fig. scala causes tympani end and an of perilymph bulging moves the 8.134). which receptor to organ. of basilar turn membrane in in vibrate, the cells This spiral stimulation to causes leads the

to cells [VIII] vestibulocochlear The back interpreted of sound. as send brain cochlear nerve receptor part are they through where impulses the the the

the (attached sounds muscle causing contraction of the membrane, malleus) vibrations the tensor the stapes) of to of excessive and movement too If force to the the reaching tympanic (attached the the decreases muscle dampens are vibrations the of tympani stapedius window. and/or ossicles the the oval loud,

fossae The side head temporal spaces are and on the (Fig. lateral of infratemporal the interconnected 8.135). soft are boundaries by formed and tissues. Their bone

to skull. below gap surface zygomatic arch, infratemporal superior above temporal the arch communicates the and through the between and zygomatic medial The the the fossa the is with fossa, of the infratemporal fossa more

wedge-shaped mandible. space infratemporal deep is underlying masseter of the ramus and the The the fossa muscle to a cavity, of the the it. the pass through neck, pterygopalatine between head fossa, temporal that cranial floor superficial fossa, cavity, oral the Structures and floor of travel of regions orbit,

(masseter, in at fills lateral fossa, the and are the of four medial joint, pterygoid) one (masseter) muscles the lateral to temporalis, and the (medial lateral infratemporal jaw the infratemporal fossa, is move and mastication pterygoid) that lower temporomandibular two temporal pterygoid, one the fossa. Of

and that mandible sphenoid the boundaries to maxilla fossae contribute of and the and temporal and include bones, the the temporal, significantly infratemporal zygomatic, (Figs. Bones 8.137). 8.136 and

the of bones are and frontal also parietal Parts involved.

the of the the of framework bone temporal squamous part part forms infratemporal bony The fossae. and temporal of

of fossa, head temporal the temporomandibular joint. the also posteromedial The of bone corner mandible the articulates with the part of forms form roof the and the tympanic to the infratemporal of

temporal vertically the the posteroinferior of from the superficial a process fossa: base of of two the squamous surface a of which lateral features supramastoid and artery, fossa; groove for zygomatic the branch of surface the bone The temporal oriented extends temporal marked of crest, the part temporal temporal artery. middle a is by marks the wall border transversely and on medial oriented the the posteriorly

the mandibular process the forming the fossa. Two are of joint the on zygomatic of features and temporomandibular aspect the that the inferior articular participate root tubercle in to medial Both are from lateral. elongate mandibular external fossa is Posterior to acoustic the the meatus. of external and from of a concave curves temporal auditory of tympanic wall of the back inferiorly forms fossa the meatus. plate mandibular the flat bone The is part the of bone part the that

distinct of tympanic between fissure bone. tympanosquamous viewed the is there inferiorly, parts squamous from the and a When temporal a forms and the it fissure of bone slip the insinuates petrotympanic itself small tympanic Medially, of from part (Fig. fissure bone between the into part temporal a and the petrous 8.136).

skull the the chorda the exits The infratemporal end and enters tympani fossa of petrotympanic medial nerve through the fissure.

and bone fossa The the framework of parts are of wing that (Fig. bony the the greater the plate pterygoid of infratemporal lateral process the of part the sphenoid form 8.136). the wing greater The part also wall medial temporal fossa. the forms of of

from side one wings the body of each on the extend sphenoid. The greater project body They laterally and from curve the superiorly. the the of fossa infratemporal of surfaces temporal fossa, and lateral inferior wall The roof and the the medial respectively. form

the crest of and boundary sharply lateral wing the between (Fig. the surfaces infratemporal The is angled inferior greater 8.136). and the spinosum) foramen Two and cranial fossa pass the the ovale through of mandibular [V3] middle nerve between the the allow apertures and and wing the base middle greater artery, (the respectively, fossa. foramen to infratemporal pass meningeal the of anteromedial wing sphenoidal penetrate cranial pass ovale plexus cavernous emissary or one and addition, the the more sinus middle base the allow veins between In in foramina infratemporal veins of to the to the fossa small in and the greater foramen emissary pterygoid fossa.

end shaped the foramen of the the to which spine the of medial the wing ligament. vertically the is irregularly attachment site cranial the spinosum Projecting from for is greater downward immediately sphenomandibular sphenoid,

lateral the sheet vertically of plate bone oriented projects (Fig. from a the posterolaterally that pterygoid of pterygoid is process The process 8.136). lateral pterygoid provide medial respectively. and Its lateral medial the surfaces for muscles, attachment and

the infratemporal The (Fig. fossa the of anterior posterior to of contributes wall the maxilla surface 8.136). surface vessels. by is posterosuperior and foramen marked a for the alveolar nerve This fissure. inferior inferior border The forms margin the of the orbital superior

zygomatic of palpable cheek: bony that the quadrangular-shaped bone a prominence is The bone the forms

process process maxilla. the the zygomatic with of extends maxillary A to anteromedially articulate

of superiorly frontal A to articulate bone. with extends zygomatic the the process process frontal

with bone the the to of posteriorly to extends arch. process the process temporal complete A zygomatic zygomatic articulate temporal

and onto transmits small of zygomaticofacial surface bone the A nerve on cheek. foramen the the the zygomaticofacial lateral vessels zygomatic

other. wall extends wall orbit contributes lateral temporal on and posteromedially from thin side and the anterior the of on the process frontal plate the of the fossa the bone one A to of plate the foramen A is the nerve. on the frontal surface to zygomaticotemporal the for it fossa where process temporal of attaches zygomaticotemporal

Ramus mandible of

and condylar lateral has and is and shape mandible The medial ramus of and (Fig. the quadrangular in coronoid surfaces processes 8.137).

of ramus ridges. for obliquely is of of presence a mandible lateral the except generally the the few surface smooth oriented The Most muscle. provides masseter of the surface the lateral for attachment

the mandibular posterior of mandible, form The of superior the form intersect border notched the the notch. is inferior while angle ramus borders the to to and with of continuous oblique mandible. sharp body the and The on line anterior border the below the is is

borders process the of superiorly ramus. the of The superior and the from anterior extends coronoid junction flat, provides It for is attachment that process muscle. temporalis triangular the a

the of extends posterior process the ramus. condylar The and superiorly from borders superior for participates the head attachment which medially forming of the pterygoid a lateral is mandible, the surface joint; neck It the the and and shallow which expanded the depression pterygoid on consists fovea) temporomandibular muscle. anterior in of (the of mandible, its bears of:

The is the the of (Fig. the mandible wall the lateral surface fossa of medial infratemporal ramus of 8.137B). mandibular is is most opening mandibular which foramen, feature distinctive the Its of the the superior canal. through inferior foramen. vessels alveolar this and The nerve pass

ligament. of (the triangular a to sphenomandibular mandibular elevation the attachment the foramen is end for mandibular lingula) the anterosuperior Immediately of

anteroinferiorly groove) mylohyoid groove An mandibular (the the elongate foramen. from extends in the nerve to is mylohyoid this groove. The

muscle. the mandibular pterygoid to the groove of the attachment mandible mylohyoid medial and medial Posteroinferior for of ramus roughened surface of the the is foramen,

of temporomandibular one chewing each complex and jaw. movements lower of and the on allow the opening side, side-to-side or mouth joints, The closing

articular the head tubercle (Fig. and between temporal mandible is the and articular is formed bone fossa of the of the Each synovial and joint 8.138A).

layer are bones other by joint the of of are where fibrocartilage. temporomandibular covered hyaline cartilage, by most the the surfaces Unlike articular those covered of synovial a joints divided addition, articular by joint the into disc two is parts: fibrous a completely In

and part joint hinge-like elevation The the allows mandible. the of depression mainly the of lower

allows the articular of mandible upper The onto backward fossa. mandibular the and tubercle joint (retraction) head of the forward to the the into (protrusion) translocate part

and mouth depression (Fig. both protrusion involves Opening the 8.138B).

the protrusive neck. The into preventing in mandible angle the structures or mandible by allows depression of movement greater forward of backward of the movement the

the the the compartments is and upper joint The nonarticular lower articular all of and joint attached surfaces of membrane to of capsule the of lines margins disc. the synovial

part along and region margins joint the margin the tubercle, below the anterior of upper of attached: mandible. the the posteriorly fibrous temporomandibular joint and articular the membrane fossa, articular the the of laterally the suture, along complex of the The medially of neck encloses to the of tympanosquamous and around is above capsule

The to membrane. attaches fibrous articular the disc inner of periphery its aspect the around

temporomandibular joint—the are the stylomandibular sphenomandibular, (Fig. and associated the lateral, ligaments Three extracapsular ligaments with 8.139):

the and to tubercle the margin ligament capsule, lateral the joint, neck the just backward The runs is mandible. from to articular to lateral of the the of diagonally closest

The the skull of side lingula the of the on the the mandible. base the to joint, sphenoid ramus from at ligament of spine sphenomandibular medial the the temporomandibular is the medial runs bone of to

of angle margin The ligament the process styloid temporal to from and passes bone of the posterior the the stylomandibular mandible.

Movements mandible of the

the of temporomandibular a are or at grinding movements movements chewing A one other with on the set on occurs at coordinated the joint reciprocal motion side when side. the joint mandible of elevation, (Fig. retraction and protrusion, depression, Movements the include 8.140):

and involves is Depression mandible because of assisted sides, it the the digastric, articular the by both movement involved. the generated geniohyoid, also normally muscles is tubercle, are the onto gravity, pterygoid on by muscles of mylohyoid forward and, head lateral

and into masseter, medial movement very pterygoid movement of head involves muscles and temporalis, also Elevation the is mandible mandibular by a the powerful the generated fossa. the of

lateral with the pterygoid. by assistance by is some achieved medial muscle, mainly Protraction pterygoid the

is the and carried Retraction muscles, muscles, the geniohyoid of and masseter by out by and respectively. digastric deep posterior the and temporalis fibers

muscle, muscles [V3] for the the the originate by infratemporal the innervated by nerve which innervated spinal mandibular branches joints in is that the fossa. all geniohyoid Except move nerve, by are temporomandibular that C1

muscle The that the (Fig. masseter a is powerful muscle mastication elevates of mandible Table and 8.11). 8.141 of of mandible. the lateral overlies the ramus surface the It

to zygomatic above is below shape and of of anchored The muscle of quadrangular the and surface in is ramus mandible. to arch masseter most the lateral the the

masseter two-thirds the the superficial part from of the of more the maxillary bone of The of process originates the anterior and zygomatic process maxilla. zygomatic the the It inserts surface angle the of the part of of ramus mandible of related lateral into and posterior the the mandible.

originates part the the posterior of as inferior medial masseter and part the the high part the The inserts zygomatic process. the of margin of of mandible from aspect coronoid its of ramus as and upper arch and the into central deep the

the nerve with from the nerve masseteric blood the The supplied [V3] maxillary artery. masseter the by masseteric artery from innervated by and mandibular is

fossa infratemporal to in of of muscle. masseter artery the deep laterally mandibular The over margin the masseteric enter originate the pass the nerve the surface notch and and

temporal fossa lateral that The is of covers a skull surface the fan-shaped space narrow (Fig. the 8.142A):

to supramastoid the pair arch bone. of the of bone the Its zygomatic skull that crest defined margin the upper frontal across is a process temporal lines of from temporal the by

is overlying and outer aponeurosis a margin laterally superior tough, is its arch. by and attached its temporal by fan-shaped the limited temporalis by the temporal to line muscle It to margin inferior zygomatic the which the fascia,

posterior Anteriorly, the process fossa the of the the temporal and frontal from of zygomatic is process in the of the zygomatic front. which posterior frontal behind the by orbit limited bone separate it surface surface bone, of the

and infratemporal greater the margin is the crest the by by wing sphenoid of marked (Fig. inferior the laterally of medially arch Its zygomatic containing infratemporal the to 8.142B)—between and the features, two masseter laterally these the muscle. of fossa open floor medially to is region fossa the the temporal

the structure muscle. The in fossa temporalis major temporal is the

fossa the through fossa zygomaticotemporal the of through nerve on enters is temporal maxillary the the branch [V2], bone. region the zygomaticotemporal zygomatic Also surface the foramen of which passing the

of temporal fills a that much the muscle The (Fig. fan-shaped is fossa muscle large, temporalis 8.143). of temporal fascia. of fossa bony inferior the temporal is the and superiorly It line to laterally surfaces the surface the from attached the originates to the more are more horizontally. anterior posterior are fibers fibers oriented while The vertically oriented of coronoid to crest and wing process converge to the The fibers greater the the a the which arch of on the infratemporal of inferiorly form between zygomatic mandible. tendon, insert sphenoid the passes

of the related mandible, muscle the the of the almost of margin tooth. and the molar The anterior to along temporalis down process last coronoid attaches ramus the surface

of a mandible. elevator the temporalis is The powerful translocation tubercle into from the mandible the back of the the involves retracts temporal temporalis the posteriorly. also this bone and it articular or movement the posterior pulls mandible of head the mandibular Because of fossa, mandible. participates the temporalis movements of the In side-to-side in addition,

into fossa [V3] then deep and is that fossa. in the temporalis infratemporal innervated originate by mandibular temporal temporal the The pass the nerve from nerves

with at deep temporal arteries, posterior which of the the temporal fascia by temporalis travel end supply penetrates the Blood which middle the nerves, zygomatic the the of temporal and arch. artery, is

(Fig. in infratemporal in mandibular deep originate anterior two number, nerves, the nerve fossa temporal trunk [V3] the the of from usually The 8.144). the pass the supply the sphenoid and infratemporal temporalis the deep and They of muscle. temporalis enter to muscle, of wing temporal fossa superiorly to the the crest around greater

is The the zygomaticotemporal (see zygomatic branch Fig. nerve of nerve a p. 922). 8.87, [V2], branch the a the is nerve in and pterygopalatine The fossa into of the originates zygomatic maxillary passes orbit. which nerve

or through foramina zygomatic enters more The the the one small the fossa on surface bone. zygomaticotemporal temporal nerve fossa temporal of

Branches temporal pass the the between to penetrate the bone skin nerve superiorly zygomaticotemporal the of temporalis (Fig. the supply the temple fascia and of muscle and 8.144).

the the originate the the deep the two Normally crest the supply infratemporal artery nerves greater in fossa from vessels muscle with temporalis number, to travel around sphenoid of wing these infratemporal (Fig. temporal the maxillary of and in 8.144). anastomose artery. middle with the They branches of temporal

the zygomatic of just temporal between external to temporal root superficial artery middle the arch originates the ear from (Fig. superior the this The and structure artery 8.144). the penetrates of and the surface of the muscle, deep fascia, temporalis the temporalis temporalis margin travels under superiorly muscle. the passes on It

temporalis artery supplies arteries. temporal the the The anastomoses middle branches of and temporal with deep

of temporal of and The the the laterally fossa medially. mandible the inferior wedge-shaped infratemporal to between pharynx the the fossa ramus and wall is the roof, lateral is a and has neck posteroinferiorly a and medial a open It wall, wall, to (Fig. 8.145):

superiorly is bone, open of inferior surfaces of of the the is fissure, formed the by roof sphenoid, greater temporal the temporal and wing foramen ovale, petrotympanic the lateral foramen the fossa. the and contains the The to and the wing of the infratemporal greater to crest spinosum, sphenoid

which mandibular of mandible, The opening the the wall the to contains medial surface lateral is the the canal. ramus of

more contains (tensor the posteriorly formed pterygopalatine fissure palatini the plate the infratemporal soft by structures the which levator pharynx and anteriorly, fossae. wall medial process and anteriorly muscles), and of is lateral muscles palate the pterygoid and the veli two between allows by and of pterygomaxillary by pass The to

posterior wall part the and formed The the of of is as into anterior maxilla orbital opens the inferior upper the contains by the the foramen, part and fissure alveolar surface orbit.

the branches (Table include sphenomandibular 8.11), pterygoid veins. nerve of the [VII] nerve muscles [V3], of the the mandibular maxillary ligament, of pterygoid plexus and medial and glossopharyngeal nerve infratemporal facial artery, Major and lateral the the the fossa contents [IX],

the extracapsular an joint. ligament is sphenomandibular ligament temporomandibular of The attached of to to to attach posterior mandibular is expands foramen bone mandible and It the (Fig. sphenoid the and inferiorly the the the of superiorly of lingula spine margin the 8.146).

deep heads in The pterygoid shape (Fig. muscle medial is and quadrangular superficial and has 8.146):

ramus The the medial pyramidal attach and the the sphenomandibular roughened of downward, to head medial near bone, surface and the of the lateral above surface obliquely medial the descends the of associated ligament, pterygoid of mandible of palatine the plate of of process to attached deep the to the to angle is surface process mandible. the the

the of deep head mandible. joins pyramidal superficial process adjacent tuberosity and on the from to the the bone and head the of maxilla originates palatine insert with The

The pterygoid elevates medial the mainly mandible. the to lower backward also assists it pterygoid Because in passes muscle insert into protruding the the obliquely jaw. it mandible, lateral

[V3]. pterygoid innervated from to nerve medial mandibular the the the The pterygoid nerve medial is by

pterygoid two the thick muscle (Fig. medial triangular has like a and The is lateral heads muscle pterygoid 8.147):

foramen the the of head greater and (inferior lateral wing roof from foramen originates infratemporal of the the the of fossa to infratemporal spinosum. and sphenoid The upper crest) surface the ovale

The between medial two the and cranial the of pterygoid. lateral upper head the of than insinuates attachments lower the process, plate the itself from head the and larger the of pterygoid is of lateral originates the inferior heads part surface

into capsule neck internally mandible attached temporomandibular the into in joint to fibers the insert the lateral articular is pterygoid converge the the disc. the capsule and from muscle fovea where region of the the heads of of The pterygoid of both the to

Unlike fibers to whose muscle oriented vertically, oriented be tend medial lateral of almost are pterygoid those the pterygoid horizontally. the the of result, As the therefore articular and it pterygoid and tubercle the mandible disc articular when contracts major the head pulls lateral lower onto of a jaw. the forward is the protruder

by the nerve mandibular the pterygoid lateral is pterygoid to [V3]. innervated the nerve from The lateral

When the only medial pterygoids to one side, and chin contract the the opposite moves on side. lateral at results. joints the a chewing two movement When are coordinated, opposite movements temporomandibular

nerve nerve [V]. The three of divisions largest mandibular trigeminal the of the the [V3] is

sensory, [V2] motor nerves, which mandibular Unlike both are maxillary and purely [V1] the ophthalmic is sensory. [V3] and the nerve

carrying of mucosa of and temple palatini). cavity, the also the muscles mandibular one that most soft of tongue, move the palate muscles teeth [V3] mandible, the of addition to of lip, (tensor the and oral the over sensation nerve In part lower the anterior mandible, and two-thirds skin the carries muscles the mater, the ear, on tympani) lower of in to general veli innervation motor the floor (tensor the dura cranial one and gingivae of the the face, middle from the the of

originate mandibular the branches All of fossa. in [V3] the nerve infratemporal

the in maxillary sensory the and the originates ophthalmic part [V2] nerve [V3] Like middle nerves, mandibular of the ganglion [V1] from trigeminal cranial (Fig. the fossa 8.148):

the infratemporal [V3] the foramen muscle. the pterygoid the muscle The tensor sensory the of mandibular and part the head enters between palatini ovale and lateral upper fossa nerve through drops of vertically veli

trigeminal cavity, the [V3]. nerve immediately the passes the to passes sensory The trigeminal foramen mandibular the of the root then motor the and of cranial nerve small in [V] joins through part ovale ganglion medial

mandibular the rise after sensory nerve motor and the divides nerve Soon small medial and trunks to a [V3] branch to and posterior pterygoid, then the gives meningeal and to into roots the (Fig. join, anterior 8.148):

the (which temporal from the anterior deep are buccal, buccal nerve and motor which, nerves. are of masseteric, except nerve lateral predominantly Branches the nerves, to is all pterygoid, and the the sensory) trunk

lingual, inferior trunk that Branches inferior from nerves. all posterior small branches the (nerve alveolar except to the sensory which, and auriculotemporal, of are the nerves, from a the alveolar mylohyoid) are nerve nerve,

meningeal middle from leave reenter nerve and branch mandibular [V3] side of to the meningeal with through The (Fig. fossa the cranial spinosum originates and medial cavity artery foramen the ascends the infratemporal the the 8.148). middle that for with of cranial the the ear. mainly cells also supplies mastoid the sensory dura the mater, is It communicate middle and fossa,

to Nerve pterygoid medial

mandibular also [V3] the (Fig. nerve nerve originates the pterygoid The to medial medially from 8.148). supply the muscle. surface descends to pterygoid deep the It medial and enter of Near its nerve mandibular small the from has two [V3], origin branches: it

the supplies One these palatini. of tensor veli

pharyngotympanic to the ascends in occupies The supply bone. the other to which above tube tensor temporal a muscle, tympani and parallel bony small the canal

The [V3] is (Fig. trunk the mandibular the nerve nerve branch of a buccal of anterior 8.148). sensory the also is of the It nerve, may muscle. but innervation the temporalis carry predominantly to muscle pterygoid motor and a to part lateral

of upper lower around margin the through heads the temporalis. the passes between slipping insertion temporalis and to of anterior the anterior laterally The the the lateral nerve often the the buccal of of pterygoid the and margin mandible, then ramus muscle the of descends tendon of It sensory and skin general the oral the supply into to molars. nerves lower the the gingivae muscle to to and of mucosa lateral buccal cheek the adjacent continues buccinator

the nerve is [V3] of a nerve of masseteric branch The the mandibular trunk anterior (Fig. see also Fig. 8.148; 8.141). through the notch to mandibular muscle laterally pterygoid muscle. the and It passes lateral over masseter supply and the penetrate

mandibular nerves, temporal the of (Fig. [V3] deep from The the in originate nerve usually trunk anterior two number, see Fig. 8.148; also 8.144). deep the temporalis muscle pass fossa pterygoid ascend infratemporal lateral in the crest laterally above muscle surface. the They and to the around its curve temporal and from supply

Nerve lateral to pterygoid

of or buccal its directly as from lateral from may nerve the the (Fig. mandibular a trunk nerve the to branch [V3] anterior branch originate The pterygoid 8.148). directly From lateral it pterygoid deep passes the its muscle. surface origin, the into of

artery first to meningeal The roots, is branch posteriorly as the maxillary auriculotemporal the spinosum two middle and ascending nerve of pass the (Fig. posterior foramen nerve [V3] of which the from trunk around the mandibular the artery originates 8.149).

and passes the palatini muscle, between the veli of the lateral and upper mandible. and the pterygoid between neck head The first then auriculotemporal ligament nerve of the sphenomandibular muscle tensor the mandible of It the to the and ascends joint ear. temporomandibular and neck the around curves between the then parotid deep gland laterally

large over from The a of auriculotemporal carry sensation branches nerve general terminal area the the temple. of skin external and In nerve sensory addition, ear, joint. contributes membrane, external temporomandibular the to the auriculotemporal the tympanic meatus, innervation of auditory glossopharyngeal It to [IX] nerves postganglionic gland. also the from parotid delivers the parasympathetic nerve

of posterior (Fig. sensory a The the of branch lingual nerve major mandibular is the nerve trunk [V3] 8.149A,B). lingual It the oral the the general oral floor carries cavity, from the of with associated tongue, mucosa gingivae of on sensation anterior teeth. and the lower two-thirds

branch The chorda infratemporal the high the [VII] tympani nerve nerve (Fig. is facial of lingual the joined by in fossa which salivary from the taste 8.149C), oral carries: the level below fibers of of anterior the to glands tongue, two-thirds the all fissure. parasympathetic and

the muscle, by nerve, surface of muscle nerve muscle across the lingual it lateral descends tympani chorda oral and The the between then lateral tensor the first pterygoid descends is the and veli medial the palatini enter joined cavity. to pterygoid where

pharynx cavity of constrictor superior enters the attachment the posterior to the pterygomandibular nerve muscle mylohyoid the oral mylohyoid of the line attachment the between to the raphe. The of lingual and the molar of on medial immediately surface inferior is lingual nerve the the shallow enters tooth. last it of oral to mandible a the the the As cavity, in the groove floor

(Fig. is position, and it in on gingivae one is this danger through when the the mucosa teeth palpable and molar operating In oral 8.149C).

muscle lateral the where attached is ganglion. The hyoglossus submandibular surface passes nerve the the to on tongue into lingual it the of of is from infratemporal parasympathetic lingual the the oral ganglion the (see Fig. the with preganglionic synapse into postganglionic carried fibers on the fossa fibers where floor nerve parasympathetic This cavity 8.150).

the branch [V3] (Fig. major alveolar sensory a nerve posterior nerve, is of lingual nerve, The trunk inferior the the mandibular like of 8.149A–C). lip and all mucosa associated the the of innervating to addition and lower skin chin. it skin the lower and In also much of the of supplies gingivae, teeth the has muscle. belly It of one anterior and innervates muscle branch, the which motor mylohyoid the digastric

posterior deep with the inferior trunk mandibular the The lateral the from originates nerve. lingual alveolar nerve in association of nerve muscle to pterygoid the [V3] pterygoid passes enters of sphenomandibular mandibular the and It through foramen. muscle, canal the descends between the mandible, the and ligament the the on of mandibular the lateral surface then medial ramus entering before to the to mylohyoid origin it nerve the mandibular the gives Just foramen, (Fig. anteriorly mylohyoid the floor below the oral anterior the muscle. in mylohyoid inferior belly lies muscle to innervate digastric foramen continues groove of which of the and the and the the to cavity 8.149C),

jaw. canal The the mandibular lower inferior of anteriorly the within passes alveolar nerve molar extraction canal these teeth are curve to can The roots its and mandibular sometimes of the teeth, difficult. the roots contents making of the inferior the and canal around

lip and canal branches: teeth labial the associated lower the gingivae, three (Fig. second the canine continues mandibular nerve teeth, two first and supply the terminal gingivae; supplies into the and exits incisor, through The related incisive and then which the and the and branches mandible which its and to inferior mental to premolar chin alveolar and the tooth in molar premolar, nerve, foramen the supplies divides nerve, mental 8.149A,B). and the sometimes the premolar roots nerve palpable mucosa of visible mental adjacent teeth. is oral the The to through

the lesser petrosal and tympani nerve Chorda

Branches cranial of two the nerve (Fig. in nerves join of [V3] the infratemporal mandibular fossa branches 8.150). plexus the nerve (see the These had chorda nerve, the the branch and [IX] the glossopharyngeal branch of Fig. branch [VII] of tympani origin a are its middle in from the nerve which petrosal of ear, a facial tympanic lesser 953). 8.125, p.

chorda tympani The (Fig. the parasympathetic and carries all to oral glands of level taste tongue the the two-thirds salivary 8.150) the innervation fissure. below of from anterior

chorda middle facial the the canal, within wall the nerve and [VII] ear. of with mastoid from ear, temporal originates enters bone of passes The the association middle small lateral tympani and through anteriorly the in a the aspect membrane separated As is it it the malleus. of continues ear, middle the across anterosuperiorly by from tympanic handle the the the the ear the and the lateral the through the joins enters leaves sphenoid middle petrotympanic then It of descends to medial medial and pterygoid fossa, the of to muscle, nerve. infratemporal lingual fissure, the end spine

(Fig. ganglion, in lingual parasympathetic the fibers submandibular the parasympathetic cavity carried Preganglionic fibers chorda in synapse off” with nerve floor in the tympani the the oral which of “hangs postganglionic 8.150).

and glands fibers submandibular its nerve ganglion lingual ganglion target or (Fig. directly pass from Postganglionic with submandibular either: leave reenter into branches the reach to the the terminal parasympathetic to travel tissues, 8.150).

ganglion the taste through The terminal branches (SA) do pass of lingual with and not nerve. the fibers are distributed

for mainly lesser carries fibers parasympathetic The parotid the nerve petrosal destined gland (Fig. 8.150). foramen the skull. [IX] fibers jugular in the at it the located base The exits as are glossopharyngeal of parasympathetic nerve preganglionic the from nerve jugular either foramen immediately tympanic the the is glossopharyngeal [IX] (Fig. the within Branching or nerve outside 8.150B).

reenters on small located through a (medial) nerve the promontory through on separating (inferior a small ridge bone ascends the jugular canal to carotid canaliculus) tympanic the labyrinthine of temporal wall the bony foramen The ear. the the bone tympanic the middle of and foramen canal from in plexus. Here formation participates the the of it tympanic this branch The petrosal nerve is (Fig. of plexus a lesser 8.150B).

lesser contains preganglionic parasympathetic mainly petrosal nerve fibers. The part petrous [VII]. the the ear the nerve petrosal leaves middle inferior on the opening anterior through of of the surface a temporal enters and branch of bone cranial opening a facial the to for the small It the fossa just nerve, and lateral middle greater through with passes medially The the descends [V3]. lesser mandibular nerve foramen then petrosal ovale nerve and the

the on of the origin side parasympathetic mandibular fossa, in around ganglion postganglionic cell to medial the infratemporal medial nerve nerve bodies with the the synapse pterygoid. In of the of the located preganglionic parasympathetic otic fibers [V3] fibers the leave fibers the auriculotemporal parasympathetic carries Postganglionic nerve, join ganglion otic to gland. parotid them the and which the

cavity, the artery largest artery the cavity, the and neck mater the wall of the a cranial blood the the teeth, carotid is major for supply and of the in in of oral nasal and external cavity. lateral The branch dura all roof is maxillary source the infratemporal through and the enters branches then terminal it (Fig. passes pterygopalatine It supplies fossa fossa, origin where to and gives 8.151).

the of infratemporal originates of The parotid fossa. substance neck then the the forward, ligament, maxillary and into passes within sphenomandibular artery the mandible and between the gland obliquely by passing It pterygopalatine fossa fissure. to enter through ascends through the the pterygomaxillary fossa infratemporal the pass This may of the lower head pterygoid. lateral or medial vessel either of lateral part to the the the and access of to to the lower upper maxillary medial If between head, then pterygoid passes pterygomaxillary the it lateral laterally artery lower the the fissure. heads loops

Branches artery (Fig. follows of are maxillary the as 8.151):

alveolar auricular, the first part of of and inferior of sphenomandibular The artery maxillary neck (the branches the (the mandible number accessory the arteries) ligament) middle (deep major the meningeal anterior smaller two to between branches a meningeal). origin part gives and and tympanic, and

origin The gives and branches, pterygoid the masseteric, branches part part which (the lateral course deep the second of [V3]. muscle) nerve pterygoid to related maxillary artery with of temporal, the buccal, to mandibular

fossa pterygopalatine is part Fig. The maxillary (see of artery the in the third 8.158)

foramen passes the the the meningeal artery ascends from through vertically enter cavity maxillary middle artery The (Fig. to cranial and spinosum 8.151). In side. passes the infratemporal superiorly on lateral muscle lateral on fossa, and the pterygoid side the ligament medial the the it sphenomandibular between their between at (Fig. Just inferior auriculotemporal the nerve it of foramen mandibular nerve the origin the passes to the from roots [V3] two spinosum, 8.151).

the is the vessels of artery marrow the the middle The and supplies related bone meningeal cranial dura cavity mater, largest of bone, and of much meningeal walls.

is dura periosteal branches the Within tightly in middle (outer) artery which bony the its mater, meningeal and cranial to the travel layer of the adherent walls. cavity, can by lateral the the up be artery pass cavity, they of As the blows the walls meningeal head. to middle damaged major branches cranial of superiorly the separates is resulting to arterial hematoma. extradural blood, mater attachment the in dura an slowly vessels which the from under pressure, torn, its are bone, When the leaking

descends artery with maxillary inferior nerve (Fig. the enter to The and artery alveolar the canal foramen from inferior the mandibular alveolar 8.151). the and It is lower inferior to and chin, the supplies alveolar distributed with of nerve lip. the supply buccal and lower teeth, gingivae, all contributes

small inferior accompanies to gives entering origin the which branch, nerve the alveolar mylohyoid. the to the Before mandible, artery mylohyoid a

meningeal anterior arteries accessory tympanic, Deep auricular, and

the branches mater, and supply deep auricular, and blood artery cranial tympanic surface tympanic, the of the maxillary part meningeal dura membrane, and are from accessory of external respectively. of to The small meatus, anterior first the contribute deep the arteries acoustic

in foramen accessory meningeal ascending the through cavity into branch branches dura small fossa mater. surrounding the before The to to cranial contributes the ovale supply infratemporal muscles also the

part Branches second the from

maxillary fossa muscle of in deep second temporal Deep and temporalis the number, usually the part temporal with (Fig. arteries, nerves artery originate the travel to the supply in from temporal two the 8.151).

artery originate pterygoid maxillary part and also muscles. arteries Numerous pterygoid the supply from of second the the

artery, the also notch masseter The masseteric the the from muscle. part of artery, maxillary masseteric second nerve laterally through mandibular supply the accompanies to the

the the supplies distributed is artery skin, mucosa muscle, buccal and The and of with buccal oral cheek. nerve

a lateral is temporalis medial lateral plexus veins pterygoid and the of and The between pterygoid between (Fig. and network muscles, the muscles pterygoid 8.152).

pterygopalatine in with plexus. that the the maxillary pterygoid the from by Veins and supplied artery connect fossa arteries regions fossa drain infratemporal branching the all the cavity, fossa, These roof nasopharynx. muscles infratemporal and oral those paranasal drain teeth, lateral sinuses, that of wall cavity, nasal tributary include of and the veins In inferior vein through into pterygoid plexus. orbital from ophthalmic the the addition, can drain the inferior orbit the fissure

plexus connect in infratemporal cavity. cavernous fossa in to Significantly, emissary sinus veins pterygoid often the small the the cranial the These medial foramen through which at and foramen plexus. side route process a lateral are lacerum, such skull, the sphenoidal the the from base small which the that as cranial through drained a plate the spread the the veins, of structures, the emissary the that pterygoid the on ovale, foramen cavity teeth, by into the can by of of pterygoid through pass are fills infections cartilage valves injected in of pressure into cranial or pterygoid the head tissues into cavity. there veins are the plexus and neck, veins anesthetic inadvertently the backflow no of Also, because can under into

the plexus vein connects: via deep facial the vein neck; pterygoid in The a posteriorly, the and via a vein, with retromandibular the anteriorly, facial on face. with vein, short maxillary

immediately bones maxilla inverted is between the to lateral side an skull fossa (Fig. posterior The pterygopalatine the the teardrop-shaped space of on 8.153).

the with floor wall roof walls infratemporal fossa, of via Although fossa, small and orbit, communicates cranial cavity. pterygopalatine oropharynx, foramina oral in in size, of cavity, middle fossa and the lateral fissures the nasal its of the: the

the [V2] location, for distribution its terminal fossa site and maxillary pterygopalatine of a is artery. maxillary strategic of nerve Because the the of for the major part T1 ganglion also in along parasympathetic postganglionic originating branches the fibers with and level fibers It [V2]. contains synapse parasympathetic spinal sympathetic the fibers, these nerve fibers nerve cord maxillary join the where facial of from the [VII] originating with preganglionic pterygopalatine

fossa. their respectively, the supply artery, of pterygopalatine All teeth from maxillary through the the the upper and terminal innervation [V2] receive and part the nerve pass maxillary blood that

and the sphenoid by palatine, walls (Fig. of are fossa parts maxilla, pterygopalatine the formed of bones The 8.153):

posterior wall surface The maxilla. is anterior of the by formed the

medial lateral bone. is by of The formed the the wall surface palatine

are parts formed sphenoid and of roof the wall by The posterior bone.

is The the process anterosuperior to pterygoid of of that pterygopalatine of the surface (Fig. the part contributes formation fossa the the sphenoid bone 8.154). surface two this onto foramina: are large Opening

(Fig. most passes middle communicates superior and fossa lateral of these—the maxillary the rotundum—which the foramen The nerve with through [V2] posteriorly cranial 8.154B).

opening pterygopalatine the anterior canal. to from sympathetic fossa forward and passes of the internal The that nerve and greater the medial nerve petrosal join carotid inferior canal the fibers facial pterygoid form from the into of the the [VII] foramen—the pterygoid nerve plexus through more

pterygoid The canal (Fig. is root bony the the canal of of 8.154A) running process bone. the a horizontally pterygoid through sphenoid opens It fossa. into the anteriorly pterygopalatine cranial cartilage canal middle carotid it cavity fossa through artery cranial the the continues through lacerum to into vessel anteroinferior carotid just as the filling (Fig. the and enters internal opens the foramen the the Posteriorly 8.154B).

fossa and apertures through (Fig. structures the leave foramina which pterygopalatine provide and Seven fissures enter 8.155):

middle communicate onto open pterygoid rotundum the and posterior with cranial The fossa the and foramen wall. canal

leads palatovaginal and onto the the A nasopharynx. small wall posterior canal to opens

the The and palate) of canal opens leads the oral palatine to inferiorly. roof cavity (hard

medial lateral is the nasal foramen the opens the of The onto wall. wall sphenopalatine and cavity in

(the is process the a the pterygomaxillary maxilla of via sphenoid the bone. large lateral of of with the continuous fossa the between and pterygoid surface infratemporal gap pterygopalatine The fossa aspect fissure) posterior

opens anterior The floor of the orbit superior the of into via fossa inferior fissure. the of wall the the orbital aspect

enter the pterygopalatine [V2] branch maxillary part maxillary fossa. of artery and The the within nerve and terminal of fibers carrying: branch fossa from the from carotid In sympathetic petrosal plexus. the enters fibers the deep parasympathetic branch the facial addition, greater postganglionic the pterygoid canal of and nerve the [VII], petrosal nerve of preganglionic the

[V2] preganglionic parasympathetic the The both sympathetic into and with of the pterygopalatine regions. adjacent ganglion fibers synapse branches of parasympathetic the pass the nerve and fossa fibers and out in postganglionic maxillary

fossa. veins nerves pass also and to through addition arteries, and In the pterygopalatine lymphatics

maxillary sensory. [V2] purely The is nerve cranial the ganglion middle through originates the and the exits from the foramen pterygopalatine the in cranial rotundum It fossa cavity, enters trigeminal fossa, (Fig. 8.156). fissure. infra-orbital fossa and passes through the through nerve exits as It inferior orbital the anteriorly the

through [V2] alveolar nerve the posterior the gives maxillary to two branches nerve, While superior nerve, the pterygopalatine rise zygomatic passing (Fig. the fossa, and ganglionic 8.156). ganglionic its The branches the inferior originate through surface two pterygopalatine and from pass ganglion.

[V2] the join do in the the the maxillary sympathetic parasympathetic postganglionic nerve ganglion, plexus. as pterygopalatine Postganglionic of fibers in carotid from general the ganglion, fibers, branches arising sensory pterygopalatine fibers nasal, ganglion The and as types palatine, orbital, branches. pharyngeal of three the leave

branches. Orbital to of the the orbital fissure through the sphenoidal pass inferior to are orbital contribute The orbital and wall supply the branches sinuses. of small and and ethmoidal

palatine Greater and nerves. lesser nerves lesser palatine greater and The (Fig. canal, lesser foramina. the pass the inferiorly the from 8.156) pterygopalatine and pass enter the palatine and palate through through surface oral and greater of palatine the ganglion, enter

almost to hard nerve gingiva, the of innervate incisor as of on roof forward greater mucosa cavity glands the the and forward as The teeth. the oral and the palatine palate adjacent passes far

plate the which nasal the In innervation palatine foramina of nerve nasal perpendicular through greater palatine of the and medially the canal, contribute in the pass gives to origin palatine posterior lateral the to small wall. nerves, bone inferior

palatine palatine the passing lesser through supply foramen, passes palate. soft the nerve the lesser posteriorly to After

nerves. Nasal (Fig. The nerves nasal 8.156), sphenopalatine nasal seven enter number, approximately pass to through in the the foramen cavity. medially to of roof pass the across nasal the supply Most others wall wall. the supply pass while lateral medial anteriorly to the cavity,

supply and nasal the supply of largest through the enter down the roof the cavity septum, nerves roof nasopalatine the in to wall and oral the passing the canal the cavity across incisor is nerves and anteriorly (the adjacent teeth. the incisive the of One hard gingiva, to medial the to passes mucosa, palate nerve) glands nasal of and nasal fossa of the

nerve. Pharyngeal pharyngeal nerve (Fig. The which to and exits of the and canal, 8.156) from passes palatovaginal the leaves pterygopalatine supply ganglion, through the it the glands the fossa posteriorly then mucosa nasopharynx.

Zygomatic nerve. nerve (Fig. The zygomatic orbit the fossa, directly enter maxillary the originates fissure. in the 8.156) the to orbital nerve from [V2] which leaves through pterygopalatine inferior it zygomaticotemporal the wall divides passes into lateral branches: It and forward and on zygomaticofacial orbital

the through process zygomatic temple. the and the at fossa the zygomaticotemporal the margin of continues lateral passes small base bony of a enter small of temporal in branch to The passes lateral posterior the forward bone bone, through wall, on to orbital the the a over frontal in surface foramen the orbital superficially supply skin zygomatic canal

the the multiple anterolateral zygomaticofacial the margin, and branch opens in the supply branches adjacent passes the small zygomatic orbital its which base also lateral via bony a and bone, canal, leaves surface The at through wall foramina of the skin. of small on forward orbital

nerve. superior alveolar Posterior The posterior (Fig. alveolar superior nerve in [V2] pterygomaxillary fossa from enter 8.156) through laterally infratemporal the the nerve pterygopalatine fossa. of fossa fissure originates the to out the passes maxillary the and continues through between to molar alveolar inferior of and inferiorly maxilla fissure. approximately a the surface posterior laterally midway and tooth the the foramen last enter small the It orbital It the sinus of mucosa to then the join superior dental plexus. to deep the just passes inferiorly maxillary

teeth supply adjacent and gingivae, The contributes the the buccal posterior to of supplies nerve molar alveolar the and sinus. maxillary superior

nerve. Infra-orbital infra-orbital nerve (Fig. The inferior nerve pterygopalatine the continuation the fossa anterior of fissure. leaves the orbital is that the maxillary [V2] 8.156) through of in then groove in infra-orbital lies the in the floor the the and continues infra-orbital forward first canal. orbit It

superior nerve groove the superior nerves, anterior gives to supply upper to infra-orbital alveolar middle respectively, the origin While join canal, ultimately infra-orbital alveolar which and teeth: the and plexus the in

The also supplies alveolar nerve middle maxillary the sinus. superior

supply the floor to the medially alveolar lateral the passes through nasal parts and nasal also branch, cavity The small walls. wall gives of which areas of the to anterior a nerve superior of nasal origin

the branches: palpebral, margin inferior nasal, The labial the infra-orbital through to foramen and the infra-orbital and canal exits superior into orbital nerve divides infra-orbital

Nasal over and skin supply of the external of part the aspect septum. nose branches nasal the lateral

branches supply of Palpebral skin eyelid. the lower

skin mucosa. lip, cheek upper oral related the branches labial the and and over supply Superior

the canal and pterygoid pterygopalatine Nerve ganglion of the

(Fig. canal the nerve pterygoid The of in (a fossa branch and the formed greater petrosal is of of: internal deep nerve nerve the nerve by facial the the carotid union petrosal (a branch [VII]), middle the plexus). cranial the 8.157) of

of into pterygopalatine passes ganglion. the and The the pterygopalatine joins fossa the nerve pterygoid canal and fibers. carries preganglionic It parasympathetic postganglionic sympathetic mainly

surface fissure bone, exits [VII] ganglion the petrosal the petrous temporal a small of the onto in temporal bone nerve, the The opens via the of the a the originates temporal through from nerve bone. of canal geniculate anterior part greater which facial that the the fossa surface superior the along passes foramen the anteromedially It posterior carotid then margin filling the under of lacerum. to artery middle and internal cranial cartilage the reach of

the artery, greater petrosal nerve joined the to pterygoid form by is petrosal nerve As the canal. nerve internal of carotid it deep the the under passes

oral the The nerve the orbit. in in glands upper half to in nasal innervation parasympathetic cavity, oral carries above glands petrosal glands including: fissure, the the salivary of gland greater lacrimal mucous the all the and cavity,

also the lesser carries greater petrosal (SA) from nerve. some palate in The soft taste the fibers nerve palatine

in deep carotid The as petrosal originate ganglion fibers the that postganglionic internal nerve. formed and ganglion is cervical leave the nerve sympathetic neck by the in the superior sympathetic

Preganglionic fibers ganglion the the from nerve. T1 spinal in that are synapse

The artery the cavity. internal the carotid cranial carotid forms artery nerve internal skull through passes into as the internal plexus carotid around and internal the carotid the deep middle plexus branch plexus converge nerve the which the fossa of internal cranial carotid Some in greater from [VII]. the carotid fibers internal facial leaves of nerve, form and petrosal the the to the petrosal the joins

vessels. nerve carries petrosal for fibers deep blood postganglionic destined The mainly sympathetic

the anteriorly of the fills superior the enter that bone. sphenoid and process cartilage the the to root pterygoid the cartilage canal in pterygoid foramen The the the of the of passes canal pterygoid nerve enters surface through lacerum of joins the nerve into formed the the pterygopalatine passes of the and It maxillary it fossa the canal [V2] branches pterygopalatine where ganglion (Fig. through around 8.157).

nerve of head the facial with pterygopalatine of petrosal the [VII] and of nerve the greater The preganglionic bodies ganglion the nerve formed largest the pterygoid of the the carried the parasympathetic cell four fibers by the is ganglia in and postganglionic is parasympathetic by neurons associated canal.

ganglion, together pharyngeal fibers [V2] postganglionic to postganglionic form branches, join nasal, branches from passing the that in with orbital, the parasympathetic ganglion, the of nerve and pterygopalatine ganglion. originate fibers which maxillary through The the leave the sympathetic fibers ganglionic palatine,

main to alveolar, nerve [V2] posterior maxillary branches and maxillary nerve and distributed sympathetic be the infra-orbital the the the parasympathetic and superiorly zygomatic, nerves. of pass of Other superior trunk with the fibers enter postganglionic ganglionic through important ultimately lacrimal pass that are zygomatic the Of these, because orbit the parasympathetic innervate particularly into fibers nerve the and with gland. they postganglionic the sympathetic

lacrimal Innervation of the gland

to orbital the which the (Fig. nerve Approximately nerve, lateral a form wall, sympathetic zygomaticotemporal wall nerve lacrimal fibers along and and the midway join postganglionic zygomatic branch orbital special the the travels leave parasympathetic of up the autonomic Fig. 8.157; see also 8.87).

passes lateral ophthalmic between which a forward lacrimal nerve sensory major is the the orbit of in the the The wall margin [V1], and branch general nerve at roof.

The lacrimal and postganglionic fibers the to pass gland. nerve with sympathetic the lacrimal parasympathetic

along are fibers facial gland [V1] the eye. the results of ophthalmic eye” lead to “dry [VII] the the of vision in branches parasympathetic and lacrimal affected ultimately lesion part can as and to the loss eventually that brain A nerve the in leave carried along of anywhere course of nerve

the a artery maxillary is branch in the external neck. of carotid major artery The fossa enters infratemporal the fossa, neck the and originates the then (Fig. of through It mandible, the forward through pterygomaxillary to passes fissure adjacent pterygopalatine the 8.158).

part the and nerve third artery the the ganglion pterygopalatine pterygopalatine to origin that the pterygopalatine and (the maxillary branches gives anterior in of [V2] of is The fossa accompany to maxillary ganglion. part) the branches

infra-orbital, and of the include greater sphenopalatine arteries, posterior canal superior maxillary palatine, (Fig. the of pterygoid Branches alveolar, artery the and artery the pharyngeal, 8.158). the teeth. these the upper cavity, branches oral of cavity, all the of Collectively, supply nasal much and roof the to contribute the oropharynx, and of they of In floor orbit. supply addition, sinuses, the blood

alveolar superior Posterior artery. posterior (Fig. The artery superior alveolar maxillary 8.158) the originates through from as passes fissure. artery pterygomaxillary the it the alveolar of molar the through accompanies nerve, and gingiva, the surface infratemporal the adjacent superior maxilla, the alveolar teeth, and meets premolar foramen on maxillary it It posterior supplies and the sinus.

Infra-orbital artery. The (Fig. artery infra-orbital 8.158) pterygopalatine passes nerve fossa leaves forward inferior with and through the infra-orbital the fissure. orbital the of infra-orbital to parts canal, in and nerve, the foramen lies infra-orbital the infra-orbital the and it With infra-orbital emerges the groove face. supply through

of origin the canal, floor orbit—the the to artery infra-orbital sac; rectus and to: branches the inferior alveolar lacrimal the blood supply of infra-orbital arteries oblique gives and (Fig. and muscles, structures Within superior the contribute inferior that anterior the near and the supply incisor the maxillary and canine sinus. teeth which 8.158),

Greater palatine artery. greater artery palatine The (Fig. passes the canal. into nerves the palatine with 8.158) palatine inferiorly lesser palatine branch (Fig. origin to It a gives palate, to continues 8.158), the palate. to foramen through palatine the soft through foramen passes supply palatine greater then hard the and supply the which lesser cavity. the septal and forward nasal pass the passes of through of supply the latter enter the the canal the incisive to to incisive inferior superiorly wall palate fossa aspect the of on surface vessel anterior The

Pharyngeal branch. The branch pharyngeal (Fig. with pharyngeal the 8.158) maxillary artery pterygopalatine the through the of palatovaginal the posteriorly leaves travels fossa nerve. and canal nasal the the the of and tube. sinus, supplies cavity, roof of aspect the the sphenoidal It pharyngotympanic posterior

Sphenopalatine artery. The sphenopalatine artery (Fig. of 8.158) terminal maxillary the is the artery. branch of sphenopalatine the and septum cavity the through and supply the down which giving the nasal end of palatine It nasal of lateral supply contribute medially nasal sinuses; greater the to the leaves lateral the wall arteries, septal anastomose pterygopalatine the the passes and across the travel anteriorly branches which nerves, branches, paranasal fossa accompanies roof posterior largest to the medially of the nasal foramen with off: septum—the posterior to supply these artery.

pterygoid of Artery canal. canal into The of posteriorly passes pterygoid the artery the pterygoid canal. the nasopharynx. inferiorly passing cartilage through filling the after of mucosa in terminates, foramen and tissues the lacerum, It supplies surrounding

these travel terminal fossa. pterygopalatine part the the maxillary back that of with artery Veins by areas into generally branches of supplied the branches drain

infratemporal pterygopalatine the plexus in in then fossa veins the through pterygomaxillary the fissure pterygoid join The and fossa to pass coalesce veins laterally of the (Fig. 8.159).

directly the inferior so bypassing orbital the pass into drains infra-orbital The aspect the fossa which inferior pterygopalatine of the infratemporal fossa. aspect through may of fissure, the the orbit, vein, lateral

the to tube from providing continuity a trunk. neck the The is head of posteriorly the on between nuchal vertebrae. the and upper from TI sternum, the CVII the and surface intervertebral the lower anteriorly extends the line of the of occipital mandible border the It bone skull of superior from disc the the to to manubrium longitudinal compartments tube, organization (Fig. the four provide Within 8.160):

anterior several and of The compartment parts and systems, visceral is endocrine the contains digestive glands. respiratory and

and spinal cervical vertebrae, vertebral contains associated with and vertebral column. is nerves, the muscles posterior cord, compartment The the cervical

nerve are lateral each the on vagus two vascular the major side, contain blood [X]. and and one compartments, vessels The

within unique layers All compartments are fascia. cervical these contained of

is triangles divided into the (Fig. and purposes For posterior descriptive anterior neck 8.161):

anterior of and are border the the midline border the inferior anterior boundaries The sternocleidomastoid the of the the of muscle, of triangle neck. the mandible,

trapezius The the of muscle, of sternocleidomastoid of are border the muscle, the posterior middle posterior one-third the clavicle. triangle and border the boundaries the anterior the of

of features. number has The fascia neck a of the unique

with and location. the to the of begins the superficial fascia muscle the thin this runs attach by muscles the platysma), sheet fascia facial found and of is in mandible cervical blend the in innervated nerve (the face, the of on thorax, which to [VII], neck only is branch upward The contains superficial in a the

the the is layers organized fascia several fascia, deep superficial into (Fig. cervical Deep to distinct 8.160). sheaths, layer, the an bundles deep and fascial the neurovascular prevertebral and of a the of the which in receive the These pretracheal encloses major from with contribution the surrounds back; layer, viscera column include: muscles carotid layer, the layers which on the the either surround associated which the neck; structures neck; the two surrounds side all and vertebral which other the investing three neck.

neck muscles (Fig. layer completely the investing trapezius the and and encloses The sternocleidomastoid surrounds 8.162).

muscle, again reunites forward again and of of process the to it splits ligamentum Attaching a reunites the other the triangle, into posteriorly and CVII forms to the single to surround sternocleidomastoid the side. nuchae layer the layer from to muscle, its this splits as fascial enclose vertebra, it the twin the join trapezius roof as passes posterior spinous

the muscles. Anteriorly, infrahyoid fascia the investing fascia surrounding with merges

laterally inferiorly superiorly of to occipital the line, and to nuchal external zygomatic the of protuberance and scapula, the and the is arch, the and sternum. superior spine manubrium the fascia to the process clavicle, investing the mastoid attached: acromion, The the

jugular the the lesser cervical The cervical, branches and nerves, auricular, transverse investing pierce great of occipital, external veins, fascia. the plexus, supraclavicular and and all anterior

layer that vertebral the muscles fascia with layer the The surrounds (Fig. a associated prevertebral cylindrical it and of column is 8.162). muscles, middle, of and deep include the and group anterior, in muscles, scalene Muscles this the muscles the back. prevertebral the posterior

length superiorly nuchae, attached is fascia skull. continuous line along of a of prevertebral and base the to attaching ligamentum the the the posteriorly circular The forms opposite This and from to protuberance, jugular anteriorly ending laterally, part along basilar circle continues associates bone, the it as the and attaching external the to process; the the partner the foramen, continues occipital nuchal mastoid the superior with canal; of the begins: its the the area fascia where of carotid attaches side. occipital posteriorly at line

CI prevertebral the of transverse and bodies surfaces to CVII. the attached anterior processes to of Anteriorly, fascia is the vertebrae

points on fascia between transverse passing attachment The prevertebral unique. the the is processes through splits creating fascial the extends this loose connective it that base thorax of longitudinal layers, a space (Figs. the containing skull location, In the into tissue two from 8.162 and 8.163).

prevertebral the specialization the the region is in of additional of fascia neck. There one lower the brachial scalene an the subclavian anterolateral surround axilla. and in anterior extends plexus position into to middle structures pass and as artery fascia from muscles the these prevertebral The is extension sheath. the axillary This fascial

gland and surround a of thyroid The trachea, collection (Fig. consists pretracheal that fascias esophagus, layer the of 8.162). thyroid of and that trachea encloses neck crosses Anteriorly, and muscles, consists fascia covers it and the pretracheal the the infrahyoid a the gland. The inferiorly at bone fascia in hyoid cavity. upper the thoracic begins superiorly and pretracheal the ends encloses that fascia Laterally, is gland thyroid fascia surrounds esophagus. the and more the continuous this posteriorly with

pharynx, to as from Posterior (Fig. the layer referred the the is the prevertebral fascia buccopharyngeal and pharynx the layer to pretracheal separates 8.163).

at thoracic continues superiorly the begins inferiorly and then of that base the the buccopharyngeal fascia with The into merges fascia covering cavity. skull esophagus the

artery, common and of nerve is the fascia carotid pass as jugular the that these a carotid the carotid Each vein, through internal artery, surrounds (Fig. vagus structures sheath internal the the neck column 8.162).

pretracheal investing, from receives It layers, contribution varies. though extent and of prevertebral, the each contributions the component’s

various The (Fig. arrangement of the fascia the longitudinal neck four into organizes layers of compartments cervical 8.160):

layer. the and other is includes largest, surrounded area of consists three, the first investing compartment the The the by

this area structure, within with muscles vertebral deep compartment prevertebral the the layer. is column the The and the of contained associated consists second and

are compartment the pharynx, third visceral compartment) trachea, the pretracheal the surrounded The thyroid gland, and by layer. the (the the which contains esophagus,

carotid of of from compartment skull neurovascular cervical base the the to cavity, is a the the pass the from and there contributions receives other Finally, (the structures thoracic that fascias. sheath) structures sheath consisting the these enclosing

the the fascial in for the from spread spaces conduit may mediastinum. the a infections of provide the neck to are layers that Between neck

(Fig. 8.163):

of the the covering pretracheal of the between layer the muscles passes cervical surface thyroid and investing fascia and pretracheal the (covering anterior between part the trachea the space gland), and first neck mediastinum. The which of fascia of the is posterior anterior the the infrahyoid surface the superior

the and pharynx the to vertebrae), the which the esophagus) anterior extends The (on of the transverse fascia space of cervical skull prevertebral second the surface upper and mediastinum. the the the (on from part retropharyngeal posterior base is bodies the posterior surface fascia and buccopharyngeal of of the the between of processes

the of third anterior prevertebral cervical of the covering transverse the the The space surface vertebrae. processes within is bodies and layer splits create and into of the a the laminae that This base through diaphragm. extends space the the at two layer fascial begins posterior skull mediastinum to to

jugular neck The the anterior (Fig. and the drainage veins venous for superficial channels venous jugular of are primary external 8.164).

join: auricular angle vein jugular as formed vein the to mandible external vein the The posterior the posterior of is retromandibular the and

above auricular posterior the vein and The drains ear. the behind scalp

join (Fig. and to where divides of and is The retromandibular of anterior division veins maxillary the the it the it gland parotid into superficial an temporal a the posterior when vein in and angle substance formed mandible, descends facial and which the form the form common vein the auricular the to 8.164)—the to jugular facial to a vein, anterior jugular vein, becomes tributary deep vein joins division internal external vein. division joins the posterior passes and the posterior

descends. superficial crossing throughout fascia in muscle down vein the formed, Once is its and the it it course, to the as superficial external diagonally sternocleidomastoid neck jugular the straight passes

to lower Reaching layer of passes fascia, clavicle, subclavian immediately part the vein. the jugular the neck, the the to clavicle the external superior enters sternocleidomastoid the to pierces and the just of and investing posterior cervical muscle, deep vein

neck) superficial the by posterior suprascapular and Tributaries the of along external the jugular and received vein (draining areas its the the the jugular scapular veins of include vein (draining transverse back posterior region). external cervical course

the veins, described of aspect are the inconsistent, (Fig. anterior although draining anterior The variable as jugular usually neck and 8.164). These at small come paired to the channels, bone. venous veins, as hyoid or just which superior begin together on Once vein jugular the the either formed, each midline neck. of descends anterior side of

Inferiorly, the medial the of investing of enter each to jugular anterior vein the layer attachment fascia near subclavian the muscle, vein. sternocleidomastoid cervical pierces may enter Occasionally, subclavian enters vein vein anterior jugular vein jugular the the jugular immediately the the external vein. external before

each jugular left being jugular suprasternal the area anterior of other, Often, connected communicate venous the veins by and in arch notch. a right with the

triangle of neck the Anterior

inferior superiorly, the by of of border medially the (Fig. anterior and anterior the The the neck outlined triangle of the neck muscle sternocleidomastoid of the the mandible border laterally, midline is 8.166). further smaller into subdivided several is triangles as It follows:

outlined the border and inferiorly. by The anterior superiorly triangle of muscle is the mandible of bellies and the submandibular the posterior inferior digastric

belly bone outlined the anterior inferiorly, digastric midline. the by and the hyoid laterally, submental of muscle is triangle the The

anterior omohyoid of and outlined border the and bone muscle, The hyoid is muscular belly laterally, of by the sternocleidomastoid the the midline. the superiorly, superior triangle the muscle

digastric triangle the sternocleidomastoid of and muscle the posteriorly. the carotid anteroinferiorly, the anterior by muscle stylohyoid and superiorly, muscle is belly superior The of outlined the posterior border the belly omohyoid of

through a these outside passing to the being passing structures triangle triangles can into a passing originating from that identified several triangles through and numerous as triangle, of triangle, region. or while contains be another specific one in the area, within specific triangle passing Each

of the triangle in describing triangle. area, of each with neck a contents of vessels, the and the A the systemic must therefore discussion anterior nerves describing a combine approach, muscles, approach, the regional

neck bone: relative to in the can (Table be the location The the according 8.12) their muscles triangle anterior to hyoid grouped of

classified are muscles the include digastric, geniohyoid. hyoid as to and stylohyoid, the suprahyoid superior mylohyoid, Muscles and

hyoid inferior Muscles and sternohyoid, and the to include sternothyroid. the thyrohyoid, infrahyoid omohyoid, are muscles

(Fig. and are muscles related to pairs submental suprahyoid four the of The triangles submandibular 8.166). They or a occurs hyoid superior the pass to hyoid, and the bone from skull in swallowing. as mandible raise the during direction

the body attach of base hyoid arises to and area stylohyoid The to from lateral styloid process (Fig. the the of bone of muscle passes the the anteroinferiorly 8.167). [VII]. it During posterosuperiorly nerve it bone swallowing the facial the pulls by hyoid innervated is and

the has by digastric body a bone attaches which hyoid bellies the muscle two The (Fig. of tendon, connected to 8.167):

of The notch arises on bone. mastoid the of the process mastoid belly posterior side the temporal the medial from

inside lower on mandible. belly digastric the fossa The arises of the from the anterior

two the tendon hyoid which attached of point the between of body bellies. is The the both bellies, insertion of bone, to is the depending bone which Because has multiple fixed: is actions of muscle this the arrangement, on

When fixed, the is raises muscle hyoid bone. the mandible the digastric

bone mandible. hyoid the digastric muscle is the mouth lowering the opens by fixed, the When

Innervation nerves. from different muscle digastric cranial of two is the

mandibular [VII], the of belly of the is by anterior the the the muscle posterior is The nerve muscle facial digastric [V]. belly of by trigeminal the [V3] of innervation nerve division the whereas innervated

side, belly is the The to the anterior muscle floor forms of the of the mylohyoid with its partner opposite digastric from and, superior (Fig. mouth the 8.167). the from of bone on body the inserts mylohyoid also the line originates with into the blends and surface side. It the the medial and muscle opposite hyoid mandible the of from mylohyoid

of supports floor elevates the muscle and and hyoid the bone. elevates mylohyoid mouth the This is the trigeminal division [V3] mandibular innervated [V]. nerve It by the of

of anterior is floor superior of is the be generally considered the muscle cavity a triangle neck; regarded of muscle. The however, can to suprahyoid it oral the the a geniohyoid as not muscle and suprahyoid It the muscle the (Fig. group is final in 8.167). to medial narrow of the it A muscle, superior mylohyoid is each part muscle. next each to side each other the in midline. from muscles are The

arises spine on passes and downward body to The geniohyoid bone. and inferior the of the of insert hyoid the backward the from mandible mental

two which on has It fixed: functions depending is bone

hyoid mandible and elevates forward. Fixation the pulls of bone the

hyoid pulls inward. bone Fixation and downward the of mandible the

[XII]. innervated nerve branch a from geniohyoid of hypoglossal the C1 is The ramus by anterior along the carried

(Fig. four The triangle muscular infrahyoid related the muscles to are 8.166). attach hyoid structures bone to They and hyoid the depress the bone. inferior attachment also for stable the point They suprahyoid of a muscles. provide they appearance, as are sometimes of their “strap the muscles.” to Because referred

the thin adjacent long, of and joint sternum aspect sternoclavicular muscle originating the is muscle manubrium the sternohyoid of a (Fig. posterior from The 8.168). hyoid bone. onto of the the It to ascends insert body the through and the rami innervated is anterior depresses C3 the bone of hyoid ansa It cervicalis. to by C1

Lateral to muscle muscle sternohyoid the (Fig. the is omohyoid 8.168). posterior of with and bellies an of both tendon two in the neck: muscle triangles the anterior This intermediate consists

begins the the The to and scapula, border the notch, intermediate posterior forward the belly the inferior on superior passes of and across tendon. suprascapular upward at ending triangle medial

intermediate to of The and to body sternohyoid. belly the attach the superior just the the at lateral tendon attachment bone begins ascends the hyoid of to

by sling. near attached is end, The fascial a clavicle, intermediate its to medial tendon the

fixes The and the bone. depresses omohyoid hyoid cervicalis. It to C3 of the by C1 innervated the is anterior rami through ansa

deep of is (Fig. the superior thyrohyoid The omohyoid parts the and to muscle sternohyoid 8.168). the it of the passes insert Originating the thyroid body on of to upward the of aspect and horn lamina the adjacent hyoid the cartilage bone. oblique line greater at into

functions fixed. variable which muscle depending on The thyrohyoid is bone has Generally, but hyoid depresses larynx when high it the when raises are the sung). fixed notes (e.g., it is hyoid, the the travel by anterior It with C1 [XII]. ramus is hypoglossal that nerve of the innervated from fibers

in with muscle infrahyoid Lying is the the in group last sternohyoid the beneath the and sternothyroid thyrohyoid, (Fig. the continuity 8.168). on cartilage. the lamina passes the posterior sternum thyroid of to upward of arises line the attach of the surface and from oblique It to the manubrium the

C1 rami cartilage) is the C3 the to The the ansa by muscle through larynx (thyroid draws downward sternothyroid of cervicalis. and anterior innervated

neck the branches, internal carotid arteries arteries. are carotid external common Passing triangle of the the their through the and anterior and vessels supply of These structures and the all head neck.

are arterial this internal vein the and Associated its jugular system with tributaries. all of and These the head neck. from structures blood receive vessels

common The carotid the beginning arteries the of system carotid are (Fig. 8.169):

common carotid to right its trunk is brachiocephalic sternoclavicular neck throughout immediately the from The right originates the joint posterior course. and entirely in the artery

near left superiorly the branch sternoclavicular arch a and carotid begins The the left artery in enter of joint. neck direct the thorax of the as the to common passes aorta

Both fascial a (the sheath). and carotid esophagus, to and neck, right compartment within through the just left arteries common trachea ascend the lateral carotid through They as the no pass they off give neck. branches

into external Near of (Fig. branches—the thyroid common artery cartilage carotid edge the carotid and arteries terminal two each internal the superior divides its 8.170).

common arteries part of division and internal carotid each and into the superior (Fig. carotid occurs artery its triangle in The carotid external the 8.170), the of (see anterior Fig. a subdivision is neck of which triangle 8.166).

the internal the beginning and of carotid carotid bifurcation, dilated. the common artery are artery At the sinus dilation is This carotid the (Fig. branch pressure the nerve a by glossopharyngeal are and blood that 8.171) receptors of in monitor innervated contains and [IX]. changes

in for changes oxygen of responsible accumulation chemistry, in blood of the detecting is Another area primarily bifurcation the content. receptors glossopharyngeal the carotid [IX] both body the and This by vagus and innervated is [X] is nerves. branches from

After ascends carotid the skull origin, its internal base artery the (Fig. toward of the 8.171). canal in neck in part the petrous off enters the bone. no cranial of gives branches cavity the the the through carotid temporal and It

contents internal forehead. carotid The the hemispheres, orbits, cerebral of the and eyes and supply the the the arteries

the carotid giving of bifurcation The begin (Fig. off arteries carotid external arteries after branches immediately the common and 8.171 8.13) follows: Table as

arises bifurcation downward artery gland. in thyroid reach and The or first anterior surface thyroid branch—it a the the of the superior passes the is to from and near forward pole superior direction at the

arises internal ascending artery and carotid the pharyngeal second ascends artery external aspect smallest of posterior the pharynx. is from and the the carotid between and artery the branch—it The

bone, hyoid the superior nerve above at hypoglossal external carotid the the the level deep lingual and to passes artery the muscles. of surface the between pharynx hyoglossus arises and constrictor from thyroid passes of the The of artery anterior artery the just middle [XII],

over artery between anterior and deep lingual the above just external the artery, stylohyoid is of digastric branch the and arises of face. of continues just enter the the anterior and gland deep mandible the masseter third edge the muscle, to artery—it carotid The the mandible, the facial emerges submandibular posterior muscles, the to to passes belly

the deep artery, the of muscle, facial level from artery surface to and near upward aspect belly digastric the the of on and the posterior passes emerges origin posterior external posterior the The the scalp. the of of occipital artery, of carotid posteriorly arises

from of artery and small surface is the the auricular artery upward external passes a posterior carotid and The branch posterior arising posteriorly.

divides ear, to superficial as into the branches. this passes and bone, anterior the artery—beginning of carotid zygomatic the artery to of temporal The external and is terminal temporal posterior point it above appears the continuation crosses branches posterior neck an of the process one of mandible, anterior the the upward and

the neck the continues the external medial artery—arising The of infratemporal gland, into mandible, branches two the this fossa, to the and the pterygopalatine to parotid maxillary it fossa. neck mandible into area carotid the larger through of is terminal the passes and the of artery continues the through posterior of

neck, venous superficial the which continuation sigmoid of as dilated dural Collecting begins brain, sinus, parts vein from the the is jugular a sinus. the of blood internal a skull, and face, to vein the dilated is referred formed. and it initial sinus of after sinus) as jugular receives inferior (the venous petrosal bulb soon part another superior dural This is carotid the accessory sheath. jugular vagus the [XI] through with [X], nerves, It associated enters and exits foramen the glossopharyngeal and [IX], skull the

posterior carotid the neck more farther traverses within to passes position internal carotid lateral the down. the initially to jugular The sheath, but artery, a vein internal the between neck the vessels. through artery and posterior of [X] rest vagus carotid partially common remains to the the nerve with two lateral It the

paired the veins the to The subclavian right (Fig. left veins form end and the brachiocephalic of jugular clavicle to posterior with veins join internal sternal the 8.169).

superior to occipital, sinus, jugular facial, lingual, internal inferior each middle and petrosal veins. thyroid, the vein pharyngeal, Tributaries and the thyroid include

and of the destination, they and nerves: cranial final the send structures. continue neck, the peripheral triangle triangle the as branches while anterior pass anterior in to neck, in to boundaries the the nearby of triangle forming their to neck Numerous of branches anterior send or through structures of

facial [XI], [IX], accessory the in cranial these hypoglossal glossopharyngeal [X], categories vagus [VII], nerves and [XII]. include The

upper plexus and transverse include these the cervical ansa from nerves Branches in cervical cervicalis. the roots lower and the spinal categories of the nerve of

muscles with foramen, two associated digastric, the the stylohyoid. neck: nerve After branches the belly of of innervate triangle from that gives and stylomastoid facial anterior the off [VII] emerging the posterior the the

triangle muscle neck. part and the overlies also of that platysma the triangle facial The nerve the innervates anterior [VII] posterior the of

nerve foramen. [IX] leaves The jugular cranial cavity the the glossopharyngeal through process its to It deep artery process. the the begins jugular and the lying carotid associated internal between the muscles vein, with internal styloid descent styloid and the forward completes internal the and passes around the glossopharyngeal stylopharyngeus it muscle descent, curves (Fig. lateral and its nerve carotid external the between arteries, of [IX] the As border 8.172). area point, anterior in direction, the it and reach this the deep the tonsil. continues base tongue the an to hyoglossus to At muscle, palatine the of of

of nerve a triangle of and As to the innervates sinus, carotid muscle, branches through pharynx. to the passes it branch neck the anterior sends the the glossopharyngeal the supplies sensory area the [IX] stylopharyngeus

the [IX] nerves. the glossopharyngeal jugular [X] cavity foramen vagus accessory and cranial through The [XI] between exits the nerve

through [X] the this in enters neck jugular the the and internal common the enclosed carotid (Fig. posterior internal vagus medial sheath to descends Outside and skull to and structure carotid the the vein carotid arteries nerve 8.173).

the through anterior motor the of branch possibly the passes body, divides to [X] (which a into internal triangle cardiac of as branch. branch the Branches external a branches), the laryngeal nerve it laryngeal and and nerve a vagus neck superior to the include pharynx, carotid

cranial [XI] posterior nerves accessory foramen. the three through nerve of exiting is the The cranial jugular the most cavity the internal sternocleidomastoid begins backward the it lateral into of to the border beneath the vein downward and internal as It passes vein internal (Fig. emerging the its either between vein, jugular jugular or surface jugular internal the to to carotid anterior medial muscle disappear cross and artery descent of from the 8.174).

the gives no anterior accessory neck. as it off passes of The nerve triangle the through branches

vein the internal cavity artery immediately medial and nerve outside the the and the through The to internal hypoglossal is canal jugular leaves cranial hypoglossal [XII] skull. carotid (Fig. carotid the passes outward artery between and it descends, jugular it internal vein As internal 8.175). artery, of the belly and the and forward, deep the carotid passes point surfaces across lateral and of it digastric this then external internal hooking occipital arteries around the artery, posterior lingual to the muscles. and At the stylohyoid continues hyoglossus passes and mylohyoid disappears of the It to the over the surface deep muscle muscle.

branches passes of the which the it does through The as neck. give triangle the any anterior hypoglossal off supplies [XII], tongue, nerve not

transverse the The nerve the cervical cervical and branch C2 rami arising from of plexus anterior is a cervical C3. nerves of middle (Fig. anterior its near It to direction of sternocleidomastoid transverse cross the border surface around loops the muscle, muscle, the of and in the the a posterior sternocleidomastoid beneath from emerges 8.176). cutaneous across provides neck innervation this continues the to It area. and

“strap triangle The ansa C1 from cervicalis to is nerves the fibers C3 in loop a the innervate muscles” anterior of the neck (Fig. that nerve of cervical 8.177). It hypoglossal [XII] soon after as nerve it skull. branches the join begins cervical leaves the from the nerve C1

cervical nerve leave to As fibers it jugular pass begins across then completes arteries. and some of internal, and common, carotid internal the and external descent its nerve carotid forward between the vein hypoglossal the the and and the [XII] descend arteries, internal superior nerve superior cervicalis muscle, upper of the belly muscles. the are These fibers root the and sternothyroid and and the of ansa innervate the omohyoid of the parts sternohyoid

third is loop C2 (Fig. second and nerve nerves the from branch C3 from the and fibers a cervical cervical containing the Completing plexus direct 8.177). root the This the is of ansa cervicalis. inferior medial vein lateral before superior descends It or root. the the turning join either to jugular internal to medially cervicalis location, branches and sternothyroid the of this the omohyoid, off muscles. that of At innervate sternohyoid and the the belly lower ansa the inferior gives parts

gastrointestinal Elements of the

trachea, to the in lie The are larynx anterior and and pharynx, esophagus, related triangles. the neck

gastrointestinal a course only of part the esophagus The system lower the and has neck. in is short courses with It level thoracic is inlet. it continuous to at and begins CVI, vertebral pharynx where inferiorly pass the the through above vertebral lies It the to column (Fig. anterior directly 8.178B).

and, at esophagus, with continuous trachea (Fig. is lower above of larynx the airway like The the begins where vertebral CVI, the level is it part 8.178B). the midline in and to the passes lies The enter anterior inferiorly to esophagus thorax. trachea directly the

and the pathway lower pharynx in for head common neck the pp. compartments The air and is (see food, a with similar 1029–1041).

The the upper the airway. lower is of larynx end continuous (see posterosuperiorly with the pp. below the pharynx is It trachea and 1041–1058).

are and the thyroid parathyroid The endocrine neck. positioned anteriorly in glands glands

to as their that caudally development migrate outgrowths Both continues. as positions glands begin pharyngeal final

number, thyroid large, the a gland. is the the parathyroid The usually of four glands, in unpaired small on surface gland while posterior are thyroid and are gland,

anterior gland lateral cartilage the thyroid (Fig. the The below and to thyroid neck in is 8.178). the It of of the connects and (which the anterior cartilage, lateral isthmus tracheal cricoid lower the cartilage) crosses cover lobes that the anterolateral third and surfaces consists and trachea, lobes an second part of the two thyroid cartilages. surfaces lateral the of the with

sternohyoid, to and of is gland Lying visceral omohyoid the neck. the compartment thyroid deep muscles, sternothyroid, the in the esophagus also and is by compartment fascia. the surrounded layers This pretracheal of pharynx, and trachea, includes the

of from a arises The as the tongue. outgrowth thyroid the the gland of floor the near median pharynx base thyroglossal of to origin path adult site of gland and The the duct location. the tongue indicates its the migration the cecum foramen of of final thyroid the marks as or usually a a early thyroglossal (i.e., cyst disappears the cecum connection remnants development, but foramen in The duct fistula). persist a may to as

path (a gland: (a the or thyroid the of also There gland tongue the along extending with along of associated gland, migration thyroid thyroid), upward path lingual the functional thyroglossal of anywhere be duct from may the lobe). pyramidal the

the thyroid Two gland. arteries supply major

Superior artery. thyroid first The artery external thyroid artery is of (Fig. branch the carotid superior the 8.179). of It glandular muscle, posterior thyrohyoid superior anterior the where reach and to of it the passing descends, along the pole margin divides into the lobe the gland lateral of lateral branches:

and with opposite anastomoses isthmus superior The the side anterior of gland across branch the border (Fig. the from its glandular along thyroid twin the passes 8.179).

(Fig. posterior anastomose The with of the posterior gland and glandular artery passes thyroid the to inferior may branch the side 8.180).

thyroid Inferior artery. first part a from is trunk, branch the of The which of (Figs. the subclavian thyroid inferior artery arises thyrocervical the artery and 8.180). 8.179 pole carotid sheath, the of along ascends posteriorly of gland. lobe reaches the anterior edge the the It of muscle, inferior the passes thyroid and to scalene the lateral medial

divides and parathyroid the of thyroid which of an: an and thyroid lower thyroid the the anastomoses thyroid supplies artery glands. superior the which inferior inferior with artery, the ascending into gland branch, supplies branch branch, At posterior part gland the the

to thyroid ascends the from and arises of supply or Occasionally, thyroid trunk arch surface small the artery brachiocephalic trachea anterior the ima aorta the the gland. a the on of

thyroid (Fig. gland veins drain the Three 8.179):

superior thyroid The supplied vein superior the by thyroid primarily area drains artery. the

gland. inferior veins drain The the middle thyroid rest thyroid and of the

the jugular drain veins, superior vein, the into veins and inferior thyroid middle right thyroid the and into respectively. veins and empty brachiocephalic internal The left

Lymphatic vein. omohyoid muscle the cervical to jugular gland the (paratracheal nodes is deep the thyroid along inferior to to beside internal the nodes trachea and drainage nodes) of

related to The nerves. the thyroid is laryngeal recurrent gland closely the ascend nerves the from the the around of the looping After trachea (Fig. nerve and laryngeal vagus the [X] right on groove between the recurrent the left, artery subclavian and and esophagus arch in branching a aorta on 8.180). and surface by lobes larynx deep of the the inferior gland margin lateral to enter the the of They pharynx. lower to of the constrictor thyroid passing deep of pass the posteromedial the

through thyroid and to the gland ligaments, thyroid arteries, the and each of bind the to, the pass Together branches larynx. the that clearly nerves to trachea cricoid one cartilage may are on side, related with inferior laryngeal the of recurrent manipulating surgically need thyroid relationships the be removing These to when gland. considered or

two structures of deep the ovoid, parathyroid of gland. glands on of lateral yellowish surface the pairs are thyroid small, lobes the The superior the designated (Fig. glands as and parathyroid inferior are They 8.180). superiorly they mediastinum their variable quite carotid inferiorly. may anywhere position and the However, from to be is the bifurcation

from their superior parathyroid Derived adult structures and inferior final the paired these glands) are accordingly. third glands) pharyngeal positions to fourth (the and migrate parathyroid named (the pouches,

thyroid the thyroid for venous arteries, the and described are arteries drainage follows lymphatic and parathyroid that the glands inferior supplying The gland.

neck in of Location different the triangle of anterior the regions of structures

8.14. the of Table in summarized major structures anterior in triangle The the location regional neck of is as several can and from into being originating identified specific subdivision, to traversing passing area, a or the subdivision subdivision through a specific region. the outside subdivisions be passing passing within one while Structures in subdivision, another

the Posterior neck triangle of

on of is upper neck triangle direct of the The with the continuity aspect (Fig. limb posterior the neck in lateral the 8.183). trapezius of sternocleidomastoid and occipital by come the bone by anteriorly anterior the posteriorly basally the the the sternocleidomastoid to where of the edge muscle, of muscle, clavicle, by edge posterior middle apically It mastoid bordered: the by and just of the trapezius together. the process is one-third the posterior attachments

of posterior passes cervical as and an consists the it that through region. roof muscles of trapezius triangle the sternocleidomastoid surrounds The investing layer fascia of the

anterior is layer triangle covered the middle, and scapulae, splenius posterior, of inferior posterior muscular the of the prevertebral superior capitis, to scalene levator and floor and of from fascia; muscles. the cervical by The consists

and of triangle forming (Table the the the Numerous borders posterior of neck muscles in participate floor 8.15).

the triangle anterior omohyoid emerging addition, of the and passes under in before inferior across (Fig. sternocleidomastoid part In the muscle the triangle disappearing posterior the muscle 8.184). to layer medial fascia triangle a crosses in superior posterior It of the it the direction. and as in investing lateral cervical is continues from enclosed hyoid the medial notch bone. and to eventually the into body It the inserts border originates of just of on inferior border superior scapula, the of scapular the the tendon, fascial bellies by It a which by a connected to clavicle: two anchored sling is has the

anterior The the superior is triangle. belly in

inferior subclavian much belly larger inferiorly omoclavicular triangle it small, occipital crosses triangle into The a triangle, subdividing a or posterior and the superiorly.

and of rami it is cervicalis bone. depresses omohyoid The to hyoid (anterior innervated ansa C3) the C1 from the branches by

most is of superficial jugular the triangle vein One the through the structures passing posterior of (Fig. neck the external 8.185). retromandibular when near in through the vein auricular the large the branch forms and mandible, superficial posterior and angle the of fascia. descends the posterior of neck the join, This veins

descent. the After external enters crossing jugular posterior muscle, its continues triangle the and sternocleidomastoid vein the vertical

the in fascia jugular layer of and of triangle, the ends external part the investing the the vein lower subclavian vein. cervical pierces In posterior

and Tributaries transverse posterior of triangle external include the vein it veins. cervical, neck anterior jugular the the suprascapular, to traverses while the jugular

of neck. Several are triangle the of the boundaries found within arteries the posterior triangle The subclavian is largest crosses the of the it the base the third as part artery (Fig. of posterior 8.186).

right on artery from side the from of on border aorta trunk directly brachiocephalic of the either first the subclavian medial The of muscle the the the part to left the ascends anterior side. arch the scalene or It numerous has branches.

between subclavian and it. the arise artery middle part second muscles, of passes from anterior The laterally scalene may branch the one and

the base between artery cross muscles emerges anterior posterior and The the subclavian of the part triangle from (Fig. scalene of to third the middle 8.186). becomes extends rib lateral axillary where the anterior into of to the artery upper border continues it of border the It muscle the the I lateral and limb. scalene from

artery. single arise A branch from part the of may third scapular (the dorsal the artery) subclavian the posterior the branch where posterolaterally the of of passes rhomboid This the reach along border descends angle the superior to it medial muscles. to scapula scapula

other posterior the arteries of the small base Two triangle. cross also (Fig. arteries transverse the These and cervical are suprascapular the 8.186). both the thyrocervical first part are the from which of They arises trunk, of subclavian artery. branches the

transverse the laterally artery passes cervical across triangle to posteriorly trunk, anterior from the the scalene After thyrocervical posterior anterior and the brachial the branching the and muscle base slightly plexus. of the muscle, and deep Reaching the trapezius divides superficial it surface branches: into of deep

trapezius the superficial on The branch the continues muscle. deep surface of

the border of the rhomboid deep on of The medial muscles continues the branch deep scapula. the near surface

to the (Fig. laterally, a posterior clavicle thyrocervical posterior passes the downward up of also ends suprascapular and across branch direction the triangle, a the trunk, The slightly part lowest in artery, of 8.186). muscles scapula, the and distributes it superior the the transverse surface posterior passes to ligament on branches over scapula. the Approaching of scapular

accompany arteries described Veins the all previously.

the subclavian begins continuation vein lateral is the and vein at border rib of I. axillary of a The the (Fig. it triangle, the possibly, of posterior jugular, the and cervical external crosses veins it As and, transverse base the suprascapular enter 8.185). form It brachiocephalic joining with vein to vein near the internal by the joint. jugular sternoclavicular the ends posterior slightly anterior passes In muscle. it to the and anterior artery scalene the lower anterior than, triangle the is to, and subclavian

travel the each of suprascapular and Transverse veins named with arteries. similarly cervical or to the either the part vein initial veins of vein. jugular subclavian These become tributaries external the

within through are of A the variety triangle. or posterior pass nerves the nerve the of and the include brachial cervical plexus, forming accessory These brachial plexus. branches plexus, branches [XI], the components of

[XI] cranial exits accessory The the cavity foramen. nerve the jugular through border posterior in anterior muscle. direction, through reach the It to the a the sternocleidomastoid descends of neck enters the the nerve posterior sternocleidomastoid (Fig. or and descend triangle innervating continues and through [XI] deep to to the accessory either muscle, Passing 8.187). obliquely the sternocleidomastoid an triangle, muscles. the in cervical crosses fascia investing as the downward fascia crosses layer It between this trapezius within direction, and posterior still of the the the [XI] surface muscle, of border When accessory innervates it trapezius the deep and anterior on reaches trapezius continues it. nerve of the injury. of location posterior the it the nerve accessory The crosses triangle it susceptible to as makes superficial

is (Fig. C4 cervical C1 to cervical nerves formed the plexus of The rami anterior by 8.188).

superficial) the muscles (or of substance muscular triangle cutaneous up the fascia, in consists of cervical The forms making within plexus (or deep) and of branches. floor of: the branches, cervical the posterior and prevertebral layer the

visible (Fig. posterior the sternocleidomastoid beneath from the emerging branches The muscle cutaneous in posterior triangle are of border the 8.187).

the plexus cervical (deep) distribute Muscular to branches of muscles. of several groups both A nerve, branch the major and motor (Fig. the with sensory supplies which is phrenic innervation diaphragm 8.188). C5. rami the from nerves to cervical arises anterior of C3 It the surface the lateral the around within scalene Hooking thorax prevertebral inferiorly upper of (Fig. continues border anterior the the anterior enter across the scalene the to anterior nerve muscle, of fascia 8.189). the neck, As anterior and the muscle transverse it is descends “pinned” to scalene cervical in the arteries. suprascapular the nerve by

colli, the rectus capitis branches prevertebral plexus vertebral of longus and capitis muscular muscles, cervical anterior, lateral the lateralis, longus capitis (Fig. including rectus supply and Several and Table 8.16). 8.189

inferior cervicalis also roots the formation and the superior to of plexus cervical ansa contributes the The of (Fig. 8.188). rami receives C3 from nerves the of infrahyoid nerves loop This the and cervical contributions of anterior to the muscles. C1 innervates

in they pass as triangle the visible (superficial) the muscle from are posterior outward (Figs. of Cutaneous the posterior branches sternocleidomastoid of plexus border the cervical 8.188): 8.187 and

contributions consists C2 occipital nerve nerve The (Fig. cervical lesser of from to muscle, skin the posterior the sternocleidomastoid of 8.188), along and to and distributes posterior neck ear. scalp ascends border the of the the

auricular the ascends C3, the parotid nerve sternocleidomastoid The the branches across the the border area. skin of muscle of from and cervical and mastoid emerges nerves ear, the the region, the and to muscle, the from posterior great of base ear, consists supplying C2 of

The the of to cervical passes of continues nerve across the horizontally C3, and the the the the neck. supply cervical of transverse C2 parts muscle around and branches anterior lateral consists muscle, from midpart nerves and sternocleidomastoid

are rib inferiorly over the the C3 muscle, supply group beneath of The nerves skin cutaneous and far clavicle from from a C4 posterior the nerves II. descend as and cervical and sternocleidomastoid the nerves of supraclavicular border after shoulder that, emerging as

nerve plexus anterior T1. rami of The cervical from C5 C8 and brachial the to forms nerves thoracic the these of of plexus. The are which contributions nerves, middle the roots brachial anterior muscles, scalene between and the are of each trunk. of lower follows: the brachial C7 the the rami next the T1 the and the trunk, of C6 As emerge roots anterior of middle (the the muscles, C5 form they plexus as component the anterior trunks) ramus C8 and form anterior form of between forms from the these rami trunk, upper

triangle cross the of Fig. trunks posterior the base (see The 8.186). in brachial branches visible of posterior the be (see Several plexus the Fig. may triangle 7.54 pg. on 730). muscles. nerve muscle, include the serratus rhomboid supraspinatus the: the to and scapular long These thoracic the nerve suprascapular muscles, nerve the and to muscle, infraspinatus subclavius dorsal to nerve anterior to

neck the of Root

of root neck the The (Fig. superior superior aperture 8.190) is and thoracic immediately the area the to axillary inlets. top margin the It sternum the superior posteriorly. the margin and thoracic manubrium to the the anteriorly, superior is the of the scapula the of coracoid top and of vertebra bounded TI by: clavicle and of of the process

thorax, It structures neck, upper contains passing the between and limb. root projecting of is also extension the the neck There an cavity into of the (Fig. thoracic 8.190). of apical sides, superior (cupula), the the and the both pleura projection of the part part parietal cervical of lung. lobe consists on of of cavity, the upward and includes each This an pleural

cavity top pleural the superior border extends vertebra I, aperture, of the manubrium slope the and of of the Anteriorly, pleural the sternum posteriorly, rib to TI. below above thoracic while remains the top superior the due downward of of cavity the

sides the neck the enter root to thorax of (Fig. of out both on arteries subclavian arch The the upward 8.191).

the of terminal artery posterior trunk. right one of subclavian sternoclavicular begins joint the to two The brachiocephalic as branches muscle. It laterally in cavity of scalene to superiorly neck of the the to and and pass arches the to the extension anterior anterior root pleural the posterior the axillary as Continuing its border. lateral crosses artery it across it I, becomes rib laterally

direct the of the artery left than branch a artery lower aorta. thorax begins of subclavian right The the arch in the subclavian as Lying left it the anterior the to the extension the to passing laterally, muscle. anterior common and arches the of and trachea, posterior scalene artery pleural to ascends and to lateral posterior cavity carotid it lateral as It laterally continues border becomes the the rib artery of I. I, crosses axillary over and rib

scalene subclavian three arteries the Both (Fig. are parts divided by into anterior muscle 8.191):

origin artery extends to first anterior part the from muscle. of scalene The the the

the the the artery is posterior scalene The part to second anterior muscle. part of

reaches the scalene border part artery third lateral muscle anterior rib part to before the is the the The I. of lateral

in of trunk) the the the branch subclavian from All side from (Fig. costocervical and branches of one part case left right first artery, the arise right on except (the the arteries 8.191). trunk. vertebral thyrocervical internal and The artery, the include the branches trunk, the thoracic artery, costocervical the

(Fig. the of the neck the first vertebral subclavian root the it of as artery artery is branch enters The 8.191). the subclavian medial of and large from vertebra artery foramen the first transverse enters in arising CVI. part the to muscle, it scalene of A anterior the process ascends the branch, CI. to pass CV vertebral the to vertebrae Continuing of artery superiorly, through the foramina passes of At arch border superior medially the and crosses posterior CI. vertebra turns CI, vertebra the the artery of through cranial foramen passes magnum the to it enter posterior fossa. here the From

the branch subclavian (Fig. second the is artery thyrocervical trunk The of 8.191). the the anterior suprascapular three to into arteries. the part first medial thyroid, It from transverse artery the and of the cervical, scalene and inferior subclavian arises divides branches—the muscle,

thyroid artery. Inferior (Fig. inferior The artery thyroid 8.191) of is thyrocervical continuation the trunk. the superior sheath muscle, scalene contents turns anterior anterior to the the artery. anterior to eventually the its to carotid It posterior and crossing vertebral and medially, ascends, and surface gland. Reaching the the thyroid thyroid gland supplies of the posterior it

these the continues spinal sending gives When anterior the medially, supplying prevertebral inferior important branch the muscles thyroid of it cervical off and an artery ascending to muscles, on (the which turns the surface to branches ascend artery), cord.

Transverse cervical artery. (Fig. middle transverse the the cervical of The thyrocervical trunk is artery branch 8.191). surface anterior phrenic anterior of the enters across muscle the and laterally, of the neck. passes scalene base and the This the branch and the nerve, of triangle crosses posterior branches: deep divides surface trapezius and to superficial it into continues muscle, It where deep of the the

deep of muscle. The trapezius on the surface branch continues the superficial

the continues surface on near rhomboid scapula. branch The of the border of the muscles deep deep the medial

artery. Suprascapular (Fig. trunk is artery the The suprascapular of thyrocervical the branch lowest 8.191). part laterally, trunks passes the the to anterior subclavian nerve, scalene the brachial of third branch phrenic anterior the This muscle, crossing of the plexus. and the artery, the scapular enters and ligament the crosses scapula, transverse border supraspinatus the fossa. the superior of it over At superior

the is artery the branch internal thoracic of (Fig. subclavian The third artery 8.191). This branches artery subclavian the inferior descends. artery the edge and of from

to the It and clavicle anterior large to the cavity. pleural posterior veins in the and passes the region descend and continues the anterior to the ribs to to transversus muscle and posterior It thoracic the enters giving numerous off thoracis branches. cavity

the of the trunk neck root (Fig. costocervical the in artery the is The of branch subclavian final 8.191). different the a position, side: depending arises slightly in on It

from just the the arises artery, of subclavian left, muscle. to the anterior medial first part it scalene the On

the the part second arises subclavian artery. of it from the On right,

the pleural costocervical muscle. scalene posterior and trunk dome the over behind continues ascends and of cavity the On direction passes sides, posteriorly the a in both anterior the cervical arteries: Eventually branches—the supreme deep divides it into intercostal and two

artery. cervical neck and back the with the ascends anastomoses The artery branch descending the deep the of occipital of in

form the descends and supreme artery posterior divides to arteries I rib two intercostal the to for intercostal intercostal anterior spaces. first The

Numerous the pass veins of neck. the through root drainage large of above, channels. arteries major accompany veins form veins Small the and described each

margin the veins at as the axillary The subclavian of continuations lateral begin I of veins. rib vein Passing internal vein medially anterior is jugular just each muscles, form each veins. anterior the to subclavian by joined the on scalene to brachiocephalic side, the

jugular The tributary to is vein. vein each only external subclavian an

veins into arteries the other veins. region The in empty numerous accompanying this

system pass nerves Several and components root of the the the nervous through of neck.

side on rami each branches of the C3 come nerves The cervical together. as of nerves are phrenic and from anterior to C5 arise contributions cervical the plexus lateral across phrenic anterior anterior upper the within continue of scalene each the of layer nerves scalene surface muscle, prevertebral the each of fascia muscle inferiorly the Passing cervical around border (Fig. anterior 8.192). subclavian enter and phrenic diaphragm. the to passes scalene nerve of the artery and the thorax each the between to the lower anterior continue vein edge Leaving muscle

between jugular descend carotid sheath, to vein. through [X] internal nerves and the the The the posterior within carotid the and neck just common vagus artery

into neck, which the nerves the medially, the give continue branches, off of cardiac In to the arteries posterior vagus disappear lower part and passing [X] downward the to subclavian thorax.

anterior neck, and the each root to of thorax posterior vagus [X] the subclavian nerve as to the subclavian (Fig. the enters it vein passes In the artery 8.192).

(the and or as of the left laryngeal nerves originate visible neck. right root (the recurrent through the The left laryngeal they nerve), are laryngeal pass recurrent nerve), recurrent in right

right reaches the root it in [X] recurrent of branch nerve of laryngeal The the neck. is the right the the of artery first edge of nerve part subclavian the lower vagus a as larynx. as It esophagus it and a the the trachea upward the around artery passes and between groove and in subclavian the medially to heads

the nerve nerve left is The the aorta arch in superior left vagus mediastinum. crosses the as laryngeal of of it recurrent a the [X] branch larynx It to beside the trachea and the aorta and arch passes ascends (Fig. the below behind of the 8.192).

are visible root system of through (Fig. pass nervous the they of the Various as components the sympathetic neck 8.193). and sympathetic trunk. part trunk, with part associated ganglia include: part cardiac branching from These trunk, of the the the the cervical cervical the sympathetic of the cervical the nerves sympathetic of

of parallel from coccyx. run trunks base are two to the sympathetic the the cords that The skull the CNS. ganglia, cell Along by are which bodies of the are they collections outside way neuronal punctuated

Cervical trunk the part sympathetic of

and capitis carotid of the and in muscles, cervical internal longus longus and the anterior the the to The trunk artery is posterior sympathetic carotid to carotid common part sheath artery. the colli cervical to is a gray connected spinal by ramus communicans each It (Fig. nerve 8.194). communicantes There region. the rami white no cervical are in

ganglia the and synapse usually postganglionic region, from are cervical ganglia upper sympathetic sympathetic course trunk cord ascending along in the fibers of sympathetic levels preganglionic spinal Three the described fibers. thoracic these with in distributed fibers branches postganglionic are these ganglia. sympathetic in from The

ganglion. Superior cervical area sympathetic vertebrae superior (Figs. CI marks CII the the in the of very trunk of A superior large cervical ganglion cervical extent and 8.194). and 8.193 carotid nerves nerves. these to around heart communicantes, arteries, C1 through superior C4 pharynx, pass cardiac internal cervical forming external vessels, carotid gray and and the the the Its to: branches spinal rami as plexuses

ganglion. cervical Middle the along the superior trunk of vertebra encountered inferior A level CVI ganglion) is (Figs. sympathetic second cervical the (the to of cervical ganglion course ganglion at middle the cervical about and 8.194). 8.193 spinal C5 to: the C6 middle and communicantes, as from pass through rami nerves. cervical this Branches gray ganglion heart and cardiac nerves

Inferior cervical ganglion. part inferior when becomes it (the lower cervicothoracic the large ganglion). ganglion of another sympathetic first with thoracic cervical the which the combines ganglion cervical At is and ganglion trunk ganglion), very (stellate the forms the end of ganglion (Figs. cervical inferior The to vertebra and of artery. vertebral rib first is the and the posterior the and part neck of subclavian origin anterior artery 8.194) the to I transverse CVII, the and the cervical of of process 8.193

ganglion heart through this as and C7 forming communicantes, from vertebral the associated inferior Branches cardiac spinal nerves. gray plexus to artery, with vessel, T1 a rami to: nerves pass the this

white This also T2. rami thoracic communicantes occasionally, nerve from may and T1, spinal receive from ganglion

ends the abdomen, begins a in that thorax, The neck. in and through the channel the channels duct is superiorly passes lymphatic the venous major thoracic in

lower passes the in and the vein the through right, aorta thoracic on on thoracic azygos with: It midline anteriorly. cavity the the left, esophagus the the

thoracic to to the the continues left duct thoracic and At passes left the of esophagus. of ascend the just about TV vertebra to level the neck and superior the It left through of esophagus the the the passes the enters to of root mediastinum (Fig. 8.195). vertebral phrenic carotid artery. it front and the posterior nerve, of inferiorly the in turns the thyrocervical to trunk, and passes laterally, the sheath Arching

veins the in The between and thoracic duct left the (Fig. the internal terminates subclavian jugular junction left 8.195). system the left jugular neck, of the subclavian occasionally, which left its lymph the which the head lymph and it which is from left limb, half drains left venous trunk, from the Near lymph bronchomediastinal from drains upper left the with the of trunk, joined junction and side by: the (Fig. thoracic structures left trunk, the drains 8.196).

A side similar the of three confluence the lymphatic right of on occurs body. trunks trunk thoracic right cavity occasionally, half (Fig. the neck, and upper jugular intercostal spaces bronchomediastinal the in from trunk between right the lymph carrying the subclavian the the right and trunk internal head right right into from right and right veins structures from Emptying the the jugular the junction are: limb, and the subclavian right of upper the 8.196).

in trunks these variability enter veins. There how is the the lymphatic right combine into separate to as may system enter three venous a They or trunks. duct enter single

of neck Lymphatics the

becomes and the the lymphatic in organization a neck. system in the the of head of system A summary of lymphatic neck description the the to regions. It two separate is impossible system the superficial this cervical internal of along superficial vein, jugular around vein forming chain nodes nodes the (Fig. jugular a deep external nodes cervical The head, the components along include and 8.197).

the basic pattern of drainage superficial to superficial vessels is lymphatic nodes. to for The drain the to nodes. way these deep their on Some directly cervical nodes the drain to cervical others nodes drain superficial deep and of cervical to the

head of scalp. primarily face form and around superficial the groups the a and the drainage of lymph are Five lymphatic ring for nodes responsible of their similar location. of very drainage Their the area distribution the near arteries is pattern of to

Beginning (Fig. these posteriorly groups ear the with path to is teeth, drainage facial associated anterior parotid the artery—lymphatic the muscle and from the and eyelids, the nodes scalp, pre-auricular of is scalp; to and half from of of body auricle, face, skull as mandible associated forehead, the trapezius as the from the artery lower tongue, center the lower the the half the anterolateral and as the drainage chin, of the the tip and occipital with associated inferior is nodes 8.197) drainage high are: neck; ear associated the of to inferior the and anterior the surface nodes) posterolateral the the the is posterior the posterior the the posterior artery—lymphatic the arteries—lymphatic of drainage to the teeth. tongue; mouth, well lip, the the attachment scalp drainage submandibular near with the attachment temporal the incisor sternocleidomastoid of the mastoid and near along cheeks; facial artery—lymphatic structures posterior muscle and superficial the and transverse upper nodes (retro-auricular/posterior as and the chin—lymphatic facial the with from the part submental of the occipital from gingivae, auricular and of nodes is to of the auricular the floor nodes

from lymph these superficial directions: passes flow several in nodes Lymphatic

external mastoid from nodes to the the jugular Drainage occipital and vein. along passes superficial nodes cervical the

submental and deep passes to parotid the pre-auricular submandibular nodes nodes, and the the from nodes, the Drainage cervical nodes.

on are the collection the muscle the nodes vein jugular (Fig. nodes external superficial a sternocleidomastoid of cervical surface of superficial lymph along The 8.197). of posterior They the and in through receive the the of vessels scalp mastoid lymphatic lymphatic drainage occipital and the deep from regions cervical nodes. nodes, and send primarily the direction posterolateral

nodes form deep that a of chain along a jugular The nodes cervical vein internal lymph the (Fig. are collection 8.197). vein. upper the carotid common of the tendon internal muscle They the artery jugular divided intermediate crosses groups omohyoid and are the into and lower where

the superior group in cervical The node most (Fig. jugulodigastric deep is node the upper 8.197). node posterior region. and where the tonsillar receives from the crosses internal the belly the muscle and tonsils drainage is digastric lymphatic jugular vein large of This

tendon the jugulo-omohyoid omohyoid it the at to node or intermediate because (Fig. large is node, inferior muscle, is Another with of associated the the deep cervical lower group usually just 8.197). receives drainage tongue. This node lymphatic from the

and of lymphatic cervical through nodes neck from either nodes. The all the receive groups eventually or drainage deep regional head directly

into on right deep empty the trunks, the nodes, duct which cervical side lymphatic or the on right vessels side. left From left and the lymphatic form jugular the right duct the thoracic

pharynx that in in neck is half-cylinder The the and head (Fig. larynx links the a esophagus the nasal musculofascial to oral the cavities and 8.198). pathway The food. air and pharyngeal for common is cavity a

with is esophagus. the above is level of to and below, attached top of The skull the the CVI, pharynx base vertebra the the of continuous at approximately to anteriorly of the nasal margins cavity, pharynx attached cavities, walls The are and larynx. of oral the the oropharynx, and the on subdivided the is these anterior laryngopharynx: three relationships regions, into Based nasopharynx, pharynx

cavities open (choanae) nasal the posterior nasopharynx. The of apertures into the

opens isthmus) opening The the cavity into posterior oropharynx. of the oral (oropharyngeal

into the opens aperture of laryngopharynx. (laryngeal superior The the inlet) larynx

posterior the to of is the openings, to tongue pharyngeal cavity related In and addition the the aspect the these to of posterior one-third larynx. anteriorly nasopharynx. the the tubes pharyngotympanic The of lateral walls into open

on pharyngeal walls. and palatine the of surface tonsils pharyngeal, Lingual, are deep the

connective column The a pharynx by tissue. separated posteriorly loose vertebral the containing positioned is space thin from retropharyngeal

soft also it part palate roof of to is the as Although oral the pharynx. is considered related generally the the of cavity, (depress) swing to posterior close seal valve” from down “flutter type the is nasopharynx can: the isthmus, isthmus off pharyngeal the the and palate oropharynx. and up seal close the cavity off of hard attached swing oral that a oropharyngeal the oropharynx, to from to and soft margin of The the is and (elevate) the palate

the cartilage, of and are attached anterior pharyngeal and ligaments. margins bone superior and wall to to The of wall two raphe). welded the pharyngeal by in together the a oriented cord-like ligament (the vertically pharyngeal midline posteriorly The sides are of the of where blends in with wall esophagus. to structure This skull base tubercle the descends cervical the connective the raphe the from of the vertebra posterior tissue on tissue connective CVI level pharyngeal the

wall pharyngeal on base C-shaped of an line attachment There is the skull (Fig. the of irregular 8.200). part faces open C cavities. the nasal the The of plate to at the of begins of margin the Each pterygoid of the just process pharyngotympanic arm posterior inferior the cartilaginous part medial the bone, of the tube. C sphenoid the of to the inferior of crosses the one the bone to tube of it the soft (levator and muscles just of of where attachment medial temporal passes onto The roughening line is palate. for then pharyngotympanic the veli part palatini) petrous the the onto bone (the tubercle). other at pharyngeal the the the here, occipital From medially prominent a swings from line and side line joins in bone of elevation midline the the

for Anterior attachment the walls of pharyngeal vertical line lateral

nasal (Fig. cavities discontinuous and walls in to three larynx vertical for attachment is pharyngeal structures line to and and The the the lateral of parts related oral 8.201).

of the plate line the each On pharyngeal the the just medial wall where begins the on anterior bone of superiorly to lateral of side, against plate. posterior inferior tube sphenoid pterygoid attachment lies pharyngotympanic edge of the this It the the along continues pterygoid plate pterygoid and the the onto process hamulus. of edge inferiorly medial of part along line to point, From this the descends the this mandible the the where line raphe pterygomandibular terminates. of

that connective the pterygoid tissue on posterior triangular molar ligament the third is roughening spans distance mandible. to hamulus cord-like pterygomandibular linear of between and the immediately a raphe The the tip a the It lateral muscle of wall pharyngeal the lateral muscle wall the a a of (buccinator). of joins cavity constrictor) oral the (superior with

is of to hyoid the related of The bone. attachment second of the the wall line lateral part pharyngeal lower which connects bone It bone. of tip the temporal on horn of the to aspect the the process hyoid lesser ligament, stylohyoid the styloid of the begins of the of continues the hyoid upper terminates. and the entire runs then The of greater the and onto lesser horn it the where turns horn posteriorly along line surface

the line descends and along superior of cartilage, of third inferior The part tubercle the begins pharyngeal the inferior the to thyroid on attachment wall superiorly oblique of and lateral line most the tubercle. of the

continues the attachment along cricoid the the fascia it to cricothyroid tendinous where muscle the terminates. tubercle, of over inferior line From cartilage of thickening a

is formed The pharyngeal and fascia. by skeletal muscles by wall by structures Gaps the the muscles reinforced to provide the fascia wall. for pass are through and routes between

the orientation of muscle muscles The groups into are organized based on the pharynx of fibers. two

The to pharyngeal whereas relative oriented in muscles fibers have constrictor the oriented the circular vertically. a have direction wall, fibers longitudinal muscles

contributors the on side are structure of The constrictor wall three (Fig. the pharyngeal major each muscles to and their Table names constrictor and muscles. their position—superior, 8.17) inferior indicate 8.202 and middle, muscles each Posteriorly, by from pharyngeal the side are together raphe. the joined the the Anteriorly, to attach oral margins and the larynx. lateral muscles and to ligaments and of nasal these cartilages, related cavities bones,

the in one on muscles pots flower a overlap walls three The stacked the each other. resembling fashion constrictor of other constrictors. the superior lower the middle of inferior overlap overlap the the way, the constrictors margins The and, constrictors middle in same constrictors

constrict pharyngeal cavity. muscles narrow or the the Collectively,

the sequentially move into and swallowing, top bottom, through bolus When muscles in a contract the as they of the from pharynx esophagus. constrictor to food

the pharyngeal vagus of are [X]. All innervated the nerve branch by the constrictors of

bracket together the upper constrictor pharyngeal part (Fig. The superior the cavity of muscles 8.202).

of Each to attached is bone pterygoid anteriorly the raphe, and mandible. the pterygomandibular hamulus, muscle adjacent at side other attachments, pharyngeal with joins from the these raphe. fans partner muscle muscle its the From out and posteriorly the

of band from inner circles wall, aspect palate with A the surface the muscle of the inner aspect the (the anterolateral sphincter) soft of of and pharyngeal palatopharyngeal originates superior special the the constrictor. blending

on oropharynx. which pharyngeal isthmus When the forms deep elevated the constricts of pharyngeal the soft the constrictor and margin of nasopharynx ridge catches between wall superior the seals the during closed aspect then a swallowing, that the it prominent palate,

to horn the bone, the the middle of the greater The upper attached aspect lesser of hyoid (Fig. stylohyoid of of the ligament, hyoid entire the are and the lower surface constrictor muscles horn 8.202).

attach raphe. superior and the muscles Like fan posteriorly to constrictors, constrictor pharyngeal the the out middle

superior The the constrictors middle part the constrictors. overlaps posterior of

crosses (Fig. constrictor The anteriorly of ligament spans muscle muscles attach line the these oblique and cricothyroid cartilage to thyroid cartilage, a that to inferior cartilage, the and the two cricoid between the attachments 8.202).

the posteriorly the the pharyngeal out attach muscles inferior constrictor muscles, to spread other Like and constrictor raphe.

the part constrictors. inferior of the middle constrictors The posterior overlaps the attach blend Inferiorly, the the and esophagus. fibers into with muscle wall of

inferior bracket attached pharyngeal of of to cavity. cartilage the parts cricoid narrowest the part constrictors the The the

pharyngeal the (Fig. longitudinal of wall three The muscles the from cartilaginous the tube are for of palatopharyngeus named soft origins—stylopharyngeus the is part Greek and according from styloid palate. to Table their process pharyngotympanic “tube”), 8.203 the 8.18) the of (salpinx temporal salpingopharyngeus from and bone, origin, of descend muscles pharyngeal sites these and attach wall. From into their the

pharynx or being through food muscles pull during and esophagus. wall and The elevate of a swallowing, wall, moved pharyngeal pharyngeal over the into longitudinal bolus the up the the

(Fig. The muscle stylopharyngeus cylindrical styloid the base of originates out pharyngeal on, between surface process fan deep the with, of the blend middle of superior the medial muscles temporal to bone wall. 8.203A) descends constrictor of the surface and from the and and the [IX]. by is nerve glossopharyngeal It innervated the

The (Fig. salpingopharyngeus pharyngotympanic the aspect wall. the the inferior and is of from blending originating muscle tube, deep 8.203B) on, of small a the surface into, pharyngeal descending innervated [X]. vagus It is nerve the by

The (Fig. palatopharyngeus is also muscle of of palate pharynx, to in (see being addition muscle pp. the 8.203B), a soft a the 1098–1099). of inferiorly and surface wall. with blend pharyngeal and upper posteriorly to passes palatine It the of is deep the to aponeurosis, the attached the surface

(the in arch). an palatopharyngeus fold palatopharyngeal forms the The mucosa important overlying wall. finding on is cavity it oral the for This palatine through tonsil, anterior the the arch which and oropharyngeal to a landmark is visible is immediately

addition palate oropharyngeal elevating palatopharyngeus to isthmus by the depressing toward the the closing palatopharyngeal fold the pharynx, the midline. and participates in moving the In

is the [X]. innervated The nerve palatopharyngeus vagus by

two layers, pharyngeal muscles which the into separated is them: pharyngeal sandwich between fascia The

coats the 991). is pretracheal outside the layer (see (buccopharyngeal part component the of wall cervical a layer of p. thin the fascia fascia) of and of A muscular

lines thicker surface. layer fascia) much inner (pharyngobasilar A the

where the wall muscle reinforces deficient. fascia pharyngeal The is (Fig. superior This formed above level evident pharyngeal the of wall almost is particularly where fascia is the entirely the constrictor of 8.203). part soft This reinforced palatini). the is externally wall by muscles palate (tensor veli the levator of and of

wall structures the pharyngeal through and them in Gaps passing

neurovascular provide muscles for important pharyngeal of muscles tissues and wall Gaps (Fig. the between routes 8.204).

pharyngeal Above the deficient margin and fascia. pharyngeal superior of completed wall by the muscle in constrictor, the is

fascia. from the tensor and and veli the soft skull of of palate base to levator descend lateral palatini The muscles initially are the the pharyngeal this position, wall: In reinforce the pharyngeal they

to levator fascia enters and pharyngeal soft pharyngotympanic The the palate. veli passes the inferior palatini tube the through

buccinator of the the veli around enter the palatini palate. medially soft origin passes through tensor The hamulus and of muscle the to the turns pterygoid tendon

pharynx largest most the which the of of forms mouth wall important the middle border is muscles pharyngeal in the constrictor mylohyoid the (Fig. apertures between posterior floor of One superior and the and and the of the muscle, 8.204). triangular-shaped not to allows stylopharyngeus This the only the to particularly lateral slip cavity, nerves, pharyngeal gap muscles, triangle) the oral pass the into wall, vessels and pharyngeal between but and the to tongue. regions (oropharyngeal wall to also enables

aperture inferior constrictor the the laryngeal allows internal vessels enter the the and between membrane nerve to gap to muscles in middle and The thyrohyoid the access larynx.

inferior nerves the cartilage larynx vessels and margin constrictor horn the inferior the inferior inferior of laryngeal recurrent of thyroid The to to deep laryngeal posterior muscle. the the accompanying enter

cavities level of the nasal the The of and behind (choanae) the (Fig. posterior the soft above palate apertures is nasopharynx 8.205). and the basal of skull the of occipital by the and of the of sloping part of bone sphenoid bone. the ceiling consists the body part posterior formed base the is Its domed walls that top the of ceiling The is form the nasopharynx pharyngeal lateral the and a of always vault open. at cavity

the of is cavity the isthmus. below cavity with nasopharynx pharyngeal the The oropharynx continuous of the at pharyngeal isthmus by pharyngeal position a the the palatopharyngeal the on of wall fold mucosal of superior The sphincter, part is caused is underlying marked which muscle. constrictor by the

isthmus oropharynx. during nasopharynx soft from the separates swallowing constriction the palate of palatopharyngeal and Elevation pharyngeal of and the the the sphincter closes

roof tonsil) the covering a the of pharyngeal large is in tissue collection (the lymphoid the mucosa There of nasopharynx. so through cavity nasopharynx this adenoids, only tonsil, then the is the of that can breathing occlude possible as known oral (Fig. Enlargement 8.205A).

features pharyngotympanic muscles. pharyngotympanic adjacent wall the most nasopharynx of and of the elevations tube, opening lateral prominent and folds tube mucosal of each and on pharyngeal are: end The covering the the the the

posterior and of to of above tube and the (Fig. palate, soft slightly is The palate level top opening the lateral pharyngotympanic of the hard the to the 8.205A).

posterolateral an direction, Because bulge or tube the wall. elevation nasopharynx projects forms the a posterior pharyngotympanic into on its from rim pharyngeal the (torus a is elevation deep recess recess) Posterior tubarius) (pharyngeal to (Fig. this tubal 8.205A).

vertical Mucosal muscle, surface from palatini and continues of just palate, salpingopharyngeal broad elevation levatorius) the tubal related the the folds fold small and soft the pharyngotympanic overlies to which and upper include: veli or of muscle. the tube pharyngotympanic to salpingopharyngeus under levator opening emerge the onto the fold, descends tube, elevation the that a (torus appears from the overlies medially

epiglottis to soft oral the the inferior cavity, is upper palate, superior oropharynx the to margin posterior to of The the (Fig. the of and level 8.205). each The cover palatoglossal boundary cavity folds oral the on oropharynx. the palatoglossal side, muscles, between the and one (arches), mark the that isthmus. folds oropharyngeal opening is arched the two between the The to one palatopharyngeal another that and side, the folds folds, each of Just overlie on these posterior medial pair muscles. are folds (arches), palatopharyngeus the

one-third part anterior of wall upper part of the The of tongue. the the or is isthmus inferior posterior oropharyngeal to oropharynx pharyngeal formed the by the Large tissue collections covering tongue. lymphoid lingual mucosa (the the tonsils) this in part of are the of one to formed (valleculae), the tongue the pouches between folds and lateral base of are each a midline, the two that fold the of of midline pair epiglottis, on tongue the epiglottis. between depressions mucosal and side connect A mucosal

tonsils The of on walls are palatine the oropharynx. lateral the there of lymphoid between in superior On the palatoglossal and constrictor the and each mucosa the muscle side, large arches. palatopharyngeal a is collection tissue lining ovoid folds. The palatoglossal posterior the through are just oral cavity tonsils palatine visible the to

solids soft cavity, tongue, holding liquid by When movement of or the the depression oropharyngeal isthmus folds. back palatopharyngeal and palatoglossal midline palate, the the toward the is oral closed of elevation and the the of in of person in cavity. a or the manipulating This breathe chewing allows to material while oral

the cavity isthmus is is directed laryngeal the is into palate food oropharyngeal the the the esophagus. On and swallowing, is elevated, closed, liquid or opened, breathe time person at and and because pharyngeal isthmus larynx. is the the same sites, cannot closed the swallow at airway the A two

the The (Fig. of at margin from of esophagus the superior the laryngopharynx epiglottis top of CVI the the vertebra to level extends 8.205).

laryngopharynx. laryngeal wall opens the the into of The anterior inlet laryngeal posterior aspect the the wall the of inlet, Inferior to of larynx. the consists anterior

the mucosal recesses of lateral the of another of central the pair cartilage. between more the thyroid and There larynx fossae) is lamina part (piriform solids esophagus. and and oral cavity fossae the from inlet the direct laryngeal that The liquids the piriform around into form raised channels

openings nasal body’s ring) part of pharynx the of oral are of cavities in mucosa and defense the lymphoid (Waldeyer’s the surrounding system. tissue the tonsillar the of Collections collections distinct these of The largest masses (tonsils). form occur mainly (Fig. in areas three Tonsils 8.205):

enlarged, when midline the is pharyngeal as known The in tonsil, on of the adenoids the nasopharynx. roof

palatoglossal oropharyngeal tonsils The the posterior palatine palatopharyngeal are just side oropharynx the isthmus. arches on and the each between of to through when are visible tonsils is the patient depressed.) palatine of (The a open the tongue mouth

refer to the lymphoid tonsils lingual nodules one-third The posterior of collectively numerous tongue. the on

pharyngotympanic tube in occur and on surface soft nasopharynx, upper the Small the of nodules near also the opening into lymphoid its palate. the

wall pharyngeal Numerous the (Fig. vessels supply 8.206).

include: parts maxillary the pharyngeal supply that branches ascending palatine the tonsillar artery, numerous artery, the and facial the of of Arteries and the lingual branches pharynx upper and arteries. ascending the of

are carotid these All artery. vessels the external from

subclavian the from pharyngeal artery, of thyroid the originates lower inferior the parts thyrocervical that which the branches pharynx of trunk Arteries include supply artery. from the

of the constrictor palatine the major which tonsil muscle. facial superior supply blood from penetrates The tonsillar artery, the to is the branch

in facial infratemporal Veins plexus (Fig. which jugular plexus, fossa, a pterygoid pharynx veins drains the and into the superiorly the and into internal inferiorly the form of 8.207).

(Fig. nodes vessels (between nodes cervical vertebral Lymphatic the column), drain paratracheal, the and include and infrahyoid from nasopharynx the and retropharyngeal deep pharynx into 8.207).

wall belly the vein muscle). internal the drain drains (and where inferior jugular the posterior through into to the the facial tonsils of palatine in The jugulodigastric vein region into nodes the digastric the pharyngeal

region) nasal [IX] (except the wall of in plexus pharynx vagus a most nerves, glossopharyngeal branches of and (Fig. is outer [X] for the of pharyngeal form the through the sensory mainly the and fascia Motor innervation which 8.208A).

plexus from external the branch of laryngeal the of nerve nerve the branches formed by: pharyngeal pharyngeal laryngeal vagus [IX]. is superior [X], of pharyngeal branches vagus branch [X], from the glossopharyngeal nerve nerve and the the The

superior [X] part pharynx. origin is the above its upper branch the of motor the the from originates major pharyngeal of the ganglion nerve nerve nerve The the and vagus of laryngeal of inferior

of the (Fig. are muscles stylopharyngeus, is the innervated [IX] for except by pharynx nerve plexus, the vagus the by which a branch the All nerve of through glossopharyngeal directly innervated pharyngeal [X] mainly 8.208B).

pharynx Each of the sensory a has innervation: different subdivision

[V2] in bone through roof pharynx. originates that The pterygopalatine passes the to the in a palatovaginal nasopharynx maxillary branch canal fossa of nerve of the the and pharyngeal sphenoid reach the innervated the by is

oropharynx pharyngeal The by is [IX] plexus. via glossopharyngeal nerve innervated the the

vagus [X] the the The the internal laryngeal is superior by nerve. nerve of via branch laryngopharynx innervated

The the to cranial nerve is related pharynx [IX] glossopharyngeal course its most throughout outside cavity. the of

on the foramen, the nerve [IX] descends jugular skull posterior surface After stylopharyngeus muscle the the (Fig. glossopharyngeal through the of exiting then the 8.208B), the eventually muscles (oropharyngeal constrictor, through reach the onto and anteriorly stylopharyngeus, posterior the the and to superior of constrictor, of gap middle passes mylohyoid passes triangle) surface lateral between tongue. aspect the

it [IX] deep nerve of on is constrictor, under lying the the just As of the passes the the edge inferior the to constrictor. superior glossopharyngeal superior surface tonsil palatine free

the the among are and plexus originate Pharyngeal branches to motor pharyngeal to the in branches glossopharyngeal that a the neck. from muscle stylopharyngeus branch [IX] nerve the by gag the tonsil this “In and of [IX], also (see palatine the reflex 889). the nerve of is glossopharyngeal sensory carries sensory Because the from nerve innervation innervation on oropharynx afferent clinic” limb is the p.

with the cartilaginous a structure lower a is musculoligamentous The tract. respiratory larynx that framework hollow caps

to immediately continuous the larynx tongue The inferior pharynx and the (Fig. and of cavity isthmus) opens opening slightly oral cavity below the the (oropharyngeal with is above trachea, posterior of into the and the posterior 8.209A,B).

sphincter) both the to lower tract, The produce close respiratory and valve is a (or an sound. to instrument larynx numerous cartilages corniculate, and pairs and of fibro-elastic and muscles. epiglottis), cuneiform), and a intrinsic smaller (cricoid, three thyroid, is of: membrane It composed (arytenoid, cartilages large three unpaired

hyoid bone and the to attached ligaments. above larynx the The below from membranes and suspended is by trachea the that down action extrinsic by backward can and and of attach in the muscles be bone. to forward highly to It is neck the mobile moved larynx and up or hyoid the either itself and

upward and the inlet of the facilitate During movements dramatic the forward swallowing, laryngeal the opening closing larynx and esophagus.

the innervation nerve the [X]. and vagus sensory larynx of is provided Motor by

and is of completely cartilage cricoid encircles laryngeal most the cartilages inferior the (Fig. airway The the 8.210). signet is posterior like with broad cricoid cricoid arch airway narrower a and circling much cartilage to a the cartilage a anteriorly. ring of of It shaped lamina

the characterized surface depressions by posterior by is lamina a separated of vertical shallow The oval two ridge. the to depressions esophagus ridge muscles. and crico-arytenoid attachment the the is posterior attached of for are The

cricoid cartilage with cartilages: side facets on two articulation laryngeal has for each other articular The

the is superolateral of arytenoid and the surface cartilage. on articulates One of with the lamina an facet base sloping

on base lateral the medial its of inferior thyroid articulation lamina surface surface near cartilage. the of The is the the with and horn facet of the for is other

thyroid The cartilage (Fig. is of 8.211) laryngeal the cartilages. the largest left a and but lamina, widely separated join anteriorly. converge is posteriorly, are and by which right formed It a fusion the (Adam’s the of forward projects superior site laryngeal of The most prominence the apple). flat as laminae point between two broad between women acute prominence than men laminae is angle The in men more two apparent women. (120°) the in is the so laryngeal in more (90°) than

separates laryngeal as the notch they laminae superior two thyroid diverge superior Just the the to laterally. prominence, the Both in the palpable superior notch landmarks neck. prominence thyroid and the laryngeal are There midline cartilage. in notch the distinct base inferior the of less is along thyroid thyroid the a

to horn thyroid each is of the posterior margin an and horn: cartilage inferior form elongated superior The of lamina a

surface facet The of the cricoid medial articulation has the a cartilage. inferior horn with for

end horn to ligament the greater bone. connected of a The of superior hyoid by horn the lateral is the thyrohyoid posterior

along is the little the superior The surface which (the short inferior to lamina midway the horn a of of margin line), base of curves ridge the a of from lamina. marked each anteriorly by oblique thyroid lateral

of and thyroid The the superior ends form expanded line are oblique inferior tubercles. to extrinsic constrictor). the the larynx oblique for is site thyrohyoid, a line muscles (sternothyroid, attachment inferior of of The and

posterior the the aspect The the cartilage is stem angle epiglottis (Fig. a by at cartilage attached thyroid of its leaf-shaped to thyroid the 8.212) its projects to attachment and posterosuperiorly cartilage. from laryngeal approximately The ligament the prominence inferior and via midline in thyro-epiglottic thyroid the is between the notch. midway attachment the the behind of tongue. the epiglottis of is part upper margin pharyngeal The the

is an form The inferior tubercle. half slightly the raised of epiglottic to epiglottis surface the posterior of

cartilage are a and The three cartilages of base surfaces, pyramid-shaped cartilage of cartilages arytenoid two (Fig. arytenoid an apex arytenoid with 8.213):

superolateral facet of articulates base the The lamina sloping the with cricoid concave cartilage. of the articular is surface on and

apex articulates a The cartilage. corniculate with

each cartilage surface faces medial The other. the of

surface has separated depressions, The ligament and ligament) for by (vestibular (vocalis) two attachment. ridge, a anterolateral muscle

arytenoid is the by transverse Fig. The surface (see muscle posterior covered 8.223).

process vocal base which of is anterior the is ligament into angle vocal a elongated the The to attached. of attachment process elongated muscular into similarly for the lateral muscles. posterior and a The lateral angle is crico-arytenoid

The corniculate cartilages (Fig. cartilages articulate small the of cartilages. bases arytenoid the two are conical whose apices with 8.214) project Their each toward other. posteromedially apices

two small cartilages These club-shaped (Fig. to suspended cartilages part lie arytenoid of the are attaches the and anterior larynx fibro-elastic the cartilages of the 8.214) of the epiglottis. the that corniculate in margin lateral to the membrane

The tough above superior thyrohyoid bone and below ligament a is cartilage hyoid the the between thyroid (Fig. margin that spans fibro-elastic the of membrane 8.215). the superior adjacent these posterior margin the the body of to to of to medial laminae superior the to thyroid the of margins and and greater It bone the ascends horns, margins the and superior hyoid horns attach is of anterior to structures. attached

laryngeal each superior superior artery, thyrohyoid branch nerve, side and of laryngeal is lymphatics. the part internal aperture the for An membrane the in the on the lateral of

to thickened The thyrohyoid membrane of thyrohyoid ligaments. borders form the lateral the are posterior in membrane form thyrohyoid to is median The also midline thickened ligament. the anteriorly the

(triticeal in each lateral is ligament. cartilage) a thyrohyoid small Occasionally, cartilage there

(Fig. The ligament hyo-epiglottic hyoid the extends the of of to epiglottis, anterosuperiorly from 8.215) the bone. body the midline

cricotracheal (Fig. ligament The the to the 8.215) upper lower cartilage. of the from cartilage border adjacent of runs tracheal border the cricoid first

Fibro-elastic the larynx membrane of

of laryngeal the fibro-elastic membrane laryngeal and framework links together the larynx architectural the cartilages cavity. the The of completes quadrangular upper lower elasticus and parts—a of conus an is composed membrane. It two

elasticus (Fig. The conus in superiorly to to cartilage attached within the thyroid a 8.216) margin the by cartilage. is and end enclosed cricoid upper extends free the of arch space free processes this thyroid each the margin cartilages. cartilage, to On to side, upper posteriorly anteriorly and vocal arytenoid the of the attaches:

these points which (true under between The free the is to thickened vocal the larynx. cord) vocal of form ligament, vocal fold two attachment is margin the of

spans elasticus anteriorly in a the which is the conus to the distance adjacent the arch between to cricoid also vocal median thyroid deep and the midline of of notch cricothyroid distinct thyroid ligament, attachment of surface ligaments. and thickened form the cartilage The the up inferior cartilage

of In median airway. when be situations, perforated is establish above emergency an ligament the the the vocal can to blocked cricothyroid level airway folds, the the and occasional few median the the of there thyroid skin. for and structures vessels cricothyroid pyramidal lobe are a between ligament normally small presence Except of gland,

same membrane arytenoid the margin the (Fig. epiglottis on of anterolateral between lateral side the on surface cartilage the runs of quadrangular The and each side the 8.217). arytenoid of articulates is It the also attached the cartilage, corniculate which with cartilage. apex to

and a Each the has the corniculate free of upper margin. top free epiglottis margin, cartilage, and between the membrane quadrangular lower a is (false The the thickened larynx. ligament vestibular fold cord) to under lower margin the the form vocal vestibular free of

ligament depression to the attachment is and angle just of the posteriorly superior anterolateral superior the The to cartilage the on thyroid the anteriorly the attached arytenoid to vestibular ligament. vocal surface of

a the below ligament quadrangular is side, vestibular the ligament On by of the separated from the each vocal of ligament cricothyroid gap. membrane attaches from ligament lateral ligament to vocal the the viewed the cartilage above when the to cartilage, ligament and of vestibular vocal of the ligament to the surface vestibular same anterolateral the (Fig. is process vocal the arytenoid Because attaches 8.218).

synovial. cartilage, thyroid between cartilage arytenoid and joints cartilages and horns cricoid are The cartilage the cricoid between the the and of inferior the a surrounded is associated ligaments. capsule and by reinforced by Each is cricothyroid thyroid The and the to move tilt enable joints forward downward (Fig. cartilage on cartilage cricoid the 8.219).

and the ligaments. thyroid rotation the posterior the vocal of that downward forward cartilage the ligaments sit and on between lamina movement thyroid the on pass the angle Because vocal cartilage cartilages cartilage, aspect effectively tension lengthens puts and of cricoid of the cricoid arytenoid on the

facets that or of cricoid cartilages bases away articular cartilages the either to on the toward joints The each the other arytenoid the arytenoid pivot and the so between vocal slide of from surfaces cartilage crico-arytenoid the the and toward rotate superolateral midline. away or enable to processes abduct (Fig. the movements vocal and ligaments adduct These 8.220).

Cavity of larynx the

The of larynx the (Fig. cavity central 8.221) tubular is lined by and mucosa. is laryngeal by it the to larynx by which fibro-elastic architectural of and support attached. cartilages is Its provided the membrane the

anterior The pharynx the the just of cavity and superior tongue to the (laryngeal posterior (Fig. into aspect aperture opens below of inlet) the 8.221A):

margin of the formed by epiglottis. covering superior mucosa Its is border the anterior

enclose corniculate margins and posterolateral borders side margin mucosal of folds), the tissues, laryngeal are which more the each membranes the on tubercles of formed the cuneiform the soft and quadrangular of the inlet adjacent underlying by folds superior (ary-epiglottic lateral two mark cartilages. Its on positions and

mucosal corniculate notch) the is formed fold that midline posterior a border by tubercles. Its a forms two between the (interarytenoid in depression

The encircled inferior pharynx. the is laryngeal points the continuous of lumen the the the opening cricoid cartilage, trachea, completely into unlike horizontal and posterosuperiorly is is which is in of oblique the by and position inlet, cavity with laryngeal open, inlet the inferior addition, by laryngeal In downward movement be is opening closed epiglottis. can the continuously of the whereas

three into a from vestibule, lateral vestibular and and laryngeal it the regions—the constrict walls which and pairs folds, of the folds, Two cavity, the project it divide mucosal (Fig. middle cavity major the of infraglottic vocal chamber, medially 8.221B):

laryngeal folds, inlet of is and the chamber the vestibule tissues. the the encloses and cavity laryngeal ligaments the upper The which vestibular vestibular associated soft between

is of cavity between vocal very The middle part and above is the folds below. thin folds the vestibular and laryngeal the

vocal the of most of between encloses and the the opening infraglottic vocal The tissues) laryngeal ligaments larynx. is inferior and and chamber soft is folds inferior (which the the space the cavity related

bulges side, produce (a On ligaments of the to the cavity gap ventricle) (Fig. vestibular the laterally laryngeal space and an between trough-shaped the through middle expanded each mucosa vocal 8.221A). and saccule) vestibular the the of An the high between anterosuperiorly (laryngeal as cartilage. and of thyroid tubular each reach thyroid extension ventricle cartilage top elongate fold may projects as saccules these the mucous of Within numerous are walls glands. laryngeal folds. lubricates saccules into Mucus the secreted vocal the

viewed When (Fig. above from adjacent laryngeal vestibuli) vestibular is opening the the entrance cavity. middle between (the 8.221C,D), a two of folds there the triangular rima chamber at the to is opening and apex The the of is the cavity. posterior anterior laryngeal its of by the wall base formed

arytenoid lateral vocal but two the cords) a opening the vocal the mucosa-covered triangular and folds vocal adjacent cartilages rima vestibular to of (true folds, (the the of glottidis form adjacent walls Inferior parts narrower, the similar, between folds). cavity the opening This below. middle separates infraglottic the from chamber above (interarytenoid bottom triangular of of notch. of the at opening formed base interarytenoid this by fold mucosa the The fold) is the

be glottidis rima membranes. closed and arytenoid associated opened movement the cartilages the Both the fibro-elastic rima by can and vestibuli of and

the close dimensions vestibuli, glottidis, of laryngeal and muscles of the close 8.19) intrinsic larynx rima the of rima the and vestibule, vocal the adjust open facilitate The inlet. tension the closing (Table inner the in control ligaments, vestibular and quadrangular arytenoid on tissues adjusting cartilages, the epiglottis do on cricothyroid by: associated distance soft between membranes directly the the and and the pulling acting They the with and ligaments, joints, vocal crico-arytenoid forcing toward ligaments midline. this mainly the

superiorly to attached fan-shaped expand to of and cricothyroid thyroid muscles anterolateral surfaces and the arch The to of posteriorly cartilage the the cartilage attach cricoid the (Fig. are 8.222).

part muscle part: a an Each oblique straight and has

oblique the in part arch cricoid of from posterior to the a inferior direction The thyroid cartilage runs the of horn cartilage. the

margin the vertically from straight of the part runs The of to more the the posteroinferior cricoid arch thyroid lamina. cartilage

The the cricothyroid muscles cricothyroid joints. move it the down to the cartilage cricoid pull relative rotate They thyroid cartilage. forward and folds. actions lengthen These vocal the

of muscles nerves the innervated laryngeal are only muscles of branches the intrinsic cricothyroid [X]. the the vagus superior The larynx by muscles branches [X]. other are by vagus intrinsic laryngeal of nerves the All innervated recurrent the

There posterior (Fig. is a muscle right left crico-arytenoid a and 8.223). laterally a surface superiorly shallow and of to cartilage, run originate each and on The the arytenoid depression the muscle from fibers muscular posterior large lamina processes cartilage. of the of of converge the cricoid on the

abduct opening muscles rotate externally posterior cartilages, arytenoid glottidis. rima The the thereby crico-arytenoid the (laterally) and of primary These folds. the the are muscles abductors vocal They branches the are laryngeal recurrent vagus innervated [X]. of by nerves the

insert posteriorly each of arytenoid (Fig. cartilage muscular the upper to crico-arytenoid of of and The side from muscle runs on originates process the the superiorly lateral cricoid arch and on the the cartilage, surface 8.223).

arytenoid the The crico-arytenoid muscles cartilages. lateral internally rotate result These folds. (closed) vocal movements in adducted

lateral are crico-arytenoids the [X]. laryngeal The the recurrent by nerves innervated vagus of branches

distance margins lateral of muscle surfaces between and the The arytenoid cartilages transverse covers (Fig. the posterior of adjacent arytenoid single spans cartilages these the 8.223). [X]. the It vagus adducts the branches nerves by the is cartilages laryngeal and innervated of recurrent arytenoid

cartilage muscular two oblique arytenoid runs to other of Each the (Fig. side process surface the muscles of on arytenoid of from of the the apex the one cartilage posterior arytenoid the 8.223). continue they and into where arytenoid around continue margin part muscle of the ary-epiglottic fibers Some the of as fold of ary-epiglottic the the the cartilage muscle (Fig. laterally the 8.224).

arytenoids narrow the The oblique cartilages constricting arytenoid distance the epiglottis. between can the and the by laryngeal inlet of They innervated the vagus [X]. recurrent by nerves laryngeal the are branches

The parallel elongate ligament each (Fig. are muscles vocalis muscles and with vocal to running lateral 8.223). to ligament anterolateral on to anteriorly of the angle. of vocal surface fibers muscle thyroid are insert along adjacent the cartilage, the in length posteriorly and lateral The the arytenoid and the surface each the depression vocal the process of attached

recurrent laryngeal adjust the vocalis tension the muscles innervated of by branches in nerves the vocal vagus [X]. are and The folds

laryngeal two ventricles membrane of and muscles saccules to fibro-elastic broad and larynx the muscles The are (Fig. the thyro-arytenoid flat the lateral 8.224). vertical of external anterolateral the a to runs of lower angle surface and half line the on from the cartilage. surface the ligament of arytenoid origin adjacent Each of cricothyroid muscle the thyroid fold fibers the epiglottis. of ary-epiglottic continue the and may into margin of the the reach Some are thyro-epiglottic part fibers muscle. These the of the

to tissues the lateral as by and are medial muscles muscles sphincter broad the midline. to they thyro-arytenoid the pushing vestibule the membrane, quadrangular toward of soft Because the a act toward the also pulling forward epiglottis simultaneously by narrow pulling arytenoid cartilages. The laryngeal inlet muscles arytenoid while the the the cartilages

thyro-arytenoid innervated are branches the [X]. recurrent the vagus nerves laryngeal by muscles of The

Function of the larynx

the larynx is sphincter provides for an and tract The mechanism producing elaborate a lower for sounds. respiratory rima the of from the the of the larynx of (Fig. changes rima result size the cavity the inlet in the Adjustments the glottidis, dimensions central laryngeal vestibuli, and of vestibule, 8.225). muscle from result actions changes and laryngeal These mechanics.

and rima the vestibule, rima quiet laryngeal are open. inlet, respiration, glottidis vestibuli, During (Fig. and rima the arytenoid are abducted is shaped The cartilages triangular glottidis 8.225A). (Fig. forced inspiration During the of rotated posterior are laterally, muscles. cartilages action the the by 8.225B), crico-arytenoid mainly arytenoid glottidis a shape, of folds rima into a the vocal and diameter result, As abducted increases rhomboid the widens airway. the effectively laryngeal which the are

rima and is cartilages arytenoid (Fig. vocal closed glottidis phonating, forced and the air When adducted the folds through are 8.225C). then can airway which by parts against folds be each This upper oral cavity. vibrate the produce of modified and the other action sounds, causes and to the vocal the vocal vocalis Tension adjusted folds by the muscles. and cricothyroid be can in

of larynx closure Effort the (Fig. during in for occurs mechanism part heavy the lifting, the example the cavity of trunk, thoracic stabilize retained 8.225D) pressure. as air is to increasing for or intra-abdominal when rima vestibule. the is rima the glottidis closed, is and the parts closure, as of During lower effort vestibuli completely result the shut airway. completely and is to forcefully The

and rima During the glottidis, and inlet the laryngeal vestibuli, closed rima vestibule narrowed. is swallowing, are up In addition, the larynx moves forward. and the the close downward to swing and cartilages epiglottis action causes inlet to laryngeal toward This (Fig. the arytenoid or narrow effectively 8.225E). esophagus, opens also cartilage. aspect the of posterior is larynx the the of forward cricoid movement and lamina the the to The attached which up of through these All and the actions prevent from fossae and esophagus. the movement liquids their airway together into solids entry into facilitate the piriform

major larynx arteries to (Fig. inferior The blood the laryngeal the by supply superior and is 8.226):

originates thyrohyoid the laryngeal the thyroid and the accompanies larynx. branch nerve laryngeal thyroid The artery, membrane internal superior superior branch upper the external to of near margin the of superior cartilage of through artery from the the the reach carotid

pharynx. in trachea—it artery by trunk the from enters the deep ascends constrictor the the larynx of low subclavian esophagus the passing the the artery inferior margin laryngeal laryngeal in muscle thyrocervical together originates and the of recurrent the the groove to of inferior and, with inferior thyroid of branch neck the between The nerve,

draining larynx the the Veins arteries: accompany

superior drain turn which veins veins thyroid in veins, into into internal Superior (Fig. laryngeal the jugular drain 8.227).

left drain Inferior laryngeal inferior vein. veins veins, the into thyroid which brachiocephalic into drain

above below regions drain vocal the folds: Lymphatics and

with associated folds follow vocal Those artery nodes carotid in the superior of the cervical artery. the terminate the above and common laryngeal bifurcation deep

nodes associated front cricothyroid thyroid associated with the with with ligament drain inferior trachea. nodes the artery or folds the upper Those of the below vocal or deep into

branches the nerves is of (Fig. the and of by the two larynx vagus superior nerves and motor Sensory nerves laryngeal [X]—the recurrent laryngeal innervation 8.228).

(Fig. neck laryngeal from originate superior inferior the high vagal in ganglia the nerves The 8.228). medial the and the artery carotid side, descends to superior nerve branches of into the external the hyoid internal bone: of horn and the level On just above internal each divides

of muscle. The (external of descends penetrate supplying along the the pharynx nerve) pharynx the the ends lateral by inferior branch and to external laryngeal and cricothyroid supply constrictor the wall

branch is laryngeal (internal internal of passes the vocal mainly cavity The folds. penetrate down sensory membrane—it the to to level the nerve) laryngeal thyrohyoid anteroinferiorly and the supplies

nerves The are laryngeal (Fig. recurrent all for of except cricothyroid. the 8.228): of and muscles cavity intrinsic folds, laryngeal vocal the sensory to to the motor below the larynx level the

root neck. in the right originates originates the thorax, nerve the The of recurrent recurrent laryngeal in nerve the left laryngeal whereas between the the the in generally and constrictor. esophagus of the groove Both the margin inferior to neck and deep ascend in enter larynx nerves trachea the medial each and cricoid pass the ligament the to which may through thyroid the attaches thyroid to, lateral lateral of or trachea the lower the cartilage part gland side. on of gland, to, They

the uppermost contain nasal cavities two are receptors. tract of the and parts olfactory The respiratory the apex and (Figs. a narrow superior are large wedge-shaped spaces a with They elongated inferior base mainly 8.230) cartilage. held are bone a open of by 8.229 and framework and consisting and skeletal

central the whereas more enclosed cavities skull. the anterior smaller posterior The regions are the are of regions nose, larger external the within by cavities onto of anterior apertures are the which the open of inferior The nares, the nose. nasal surface the which choanae, apertures the The posterior open nasopharynx. into the are

midline each The the by the by from and separated: hard above cavities nasal a the parts of below nasal from from sphenoid and are cranial ethmoid, the other frontal, bones. cavity palate, oral by septum, cavity

the to cavities Lateral nasal orbits. the are

and floor, nasal lateral wall a has medial cavity (Fig. wall, Each roof, 8.230A).

nasal medially cavity project The and (conchae), the of lateral inferiorly wall bone characterized curved by (Fig. are the one shelves which and above across is other three 8.230B). and are free. The anterior, medial, margins conchae the posterior of

(Fig. channels air conchae four nasal into The each divide cavity meatus nasal a between and a and middle superior nasal between meatus and between roof. an recess floor, nasal concha, nasal superior middle nasal the a between middle and 8.230C,D): the concha and concha concha, the inferior the inferior meatus superior the spheno-ethmoidal the inferior

of contact area tissues and conchae the of respired air. surface increase lateral These between the wall the

and of that extensions roof sinuses, (Fig. childhood bones on openings which of the during The the paranasal the are are wall the the cavity erode nasal nasal of lateral cavities and surrounding adulthood, into early 8.231). cavity. of wall into the tears the duct, addition, drains nasal from which the eye contains the the opening nasolacrimal In also lateral

and respiratory regions—the the Each vestibule, the three consists nasal general (Fig. of region, cavity nasal region olfactory 8.232):

internal lined skin dilated space the is hair by vestibule The a to naris and small that contains just nasal follicles. is

epithelium part by cells. nasal and and largest lined is is neurovascular respiratory of the The has composed a of mucous respiratory the ciliated rich supply, region cavity, mainly

the olfactory nasal The region receptors. by at is small, cavity, contains olfactory lined of the olfactory and is apex is epithelium, each

humidity vestibule capturing temperature blood the through action filtering the remove a material and particulate hair nasal smell mucus. matter in by receptors of adjust by the by of the rich foreign respired supply, for In air in trap cavities housing of airway the and (olfaction), and the addition sense air abundant the to from and is on by cells moved normally The cavities posteriorly mucus nasal epithelial swallowed. in cilia and is the

three Innervation by of nasal nerves: cavities cranial the is

Olfaction [I]. the olfactory nerve carried by is

[V], trigeminal [V1], General the ophthalmic region sensation the anterior by nerve the the maxillary nerve [V2]. the is nerve posterior region by and carried by

the pterygopalatine nerve (greater [VII] petrosal maxillary fossa. join [V2] facial in nerve nerve), the glands are All in by fibers branches of parasympathetic the innervated which

from are Sympathetic derived the fibers ultimately

cord T1 level. spinal postganglionic synapse branches nasal vessels, blood the They or fossa. pterygopalatine mainly cervical the in sympathetic the ganglion, of fibers along the nerve in maxillary cavities by and [V2] superior joining reach

artery, branches the of artery, of carotid the maxillary and which terminal external Blood and carotid originates the artery. arteries, cavities supply the originate the from ethmoidal internal which ophthalmic from is nasal branches by: to facial

cavities to the that and vomer and sphenoid, ethmoid, bones the framework Bones the and lacrimal palatine, of the maxillary, skeletal nasal bones, include: paired inferior frontal, and contribute nasal, unpaired conchae.

key Of ethmoid associated element. the all the the a nasal with cavities, is bones

ethmoid bones is the bone skull. The most of the complex single one in lateral of wall It medial cells both wall, to sinuses). and cavities, ethmoidal contains roof, (ethmoidal contributes and the the nasal

The ethmoid shape (Fig. bone overall in is cuboidal cribriform box- side, across perforated midline the rectangular a and of composed is one of 8.233A) each (the superiorly on labyrinths, plate). ethmoidal shaped by united sheet bone two second septum. descends the (the perpendicular vertically part of sheet from of A plane the nasal median form bone plate) to sagittal cribriform in plate the

Each delicate which labyrinth composed them two bone, ethmoidal sheets of the ethmoidal sandwich between of cells. is

(the medial bone of part orbit. and The the wall of forms lateral of the plate) sheet is flat orbital

bone nasal the forms of the is and cavity processes the characterized part upper (Fig. two and sheet lateral of swelling medial The by wall of a of origin the project and curved to nasal (the free inferior wall the concha, are cells middle two cavity a while medial prominent labyrinth. of conchae), margins, medial the shelves middle bulla), across in the downward and processes ending of superior ethmoidal 8.233B)—the (the the bulge form bone which on middle the curve ethmoidal

Extending labyrinth groove and just from ethmoidal ethmoidal penetrates under frontal channel anterosuperiorly a (the form the sinus. which infundibulum), narrows and is opens upward, continues a the into that the to bulla is drains frontal channel frontonasal which the sinus. duct, This for the

usually articulates the completes roof bone. the with maxilla surface the bone, The ethmoidal articulates of the labyrinth of which superior anterior cells, process frontal while surface ethmoidal the with of the with the the frontal and lacrimal The articulates inferior surface margin of maxilla. upper the the with medial

projection of irregularly articulate ethmoidal of on inferior process) wall large of the medial uncinate (maxillary A labyrinth concha. the in the across the delicate a posteroinferiorly to defect (the the inferior hiatus) surface the with anterior extends maxilla shaped aspect

(Fig. the ethmoidal notch is plate the fills at the The frontal cribriform nasal bone the of and cavities in apex the and above. cavities below the cavity nasal 8.233) separates cranial from in bone the [I] allow Small nerve olfactory pass to the fibers the between regions. perforations two the of

of a crista cerebri) triangular the galli) the large process cavity. fold in surface mater cribriform midline on dura the anchors plate cranial (the the (falx superior A of at

perpendicular the in median and the the midline bone The forms part quadrangular of descends in is nasal the upper plate, the ethmoid shape, plate from of (Fig. cribriform septum 8.233). frontal vomer. sphenoid and with and between with the articulation articulates: cartilage site anteriorly inferiorly spine the It with crest nasal the the the body of of bone the bones, septal the on the on the anteriorly the nasal bone, two with sphenoidal posteriorly posteriorly midline with and at and

The cavities front that (Fig. onto of nasal face the they nose nares and the the external point downward the so extends positions 8.234). in with shape pyramidal anterior is its It in apex position. angle The of nose the the is openings continuous the upper the orbits of forehead. with between

nasal by of the cavities bone regions, mainly the open a and partly composed Like which found the anterior nose posterior are of cartilage: within of parts is framework, skeletal held

the are nasal bony maxillae the The and frontal provide the and where parts bones parts support. is skull—here nose the bones continuous with of

midline minor three and the major cartilage, single lateral septal by the cartilages, of or anterior processes part septal support Anteriorly, alar provided on septum. and forms of in each side, nasal the a alar four the that is and cartilage

air paranasal (Fig. There and sphenoidal, the sinuses ethmoidal sinuses—the frontal four cells, are and maxillary, 8.235A,B). to the named which in is found. is bone according Each it

develop from and surrounding the bones. outgrowths The the erode nasal cavities sinuses paranasal into as the open and which innervated paranasal is ciliated [V]. by nasal All are mucus cavities, and sinuses: the the trigeminal mucosa, into of nerve branches lined respiratory of secreting, by are

the side, each one frontal and superior size variable sinuses the sinuses, most on are in are (Fig. of The 8.235A–C). in part Each of and under triangular the frontal the is the forehead. bone in shape is orbit. is of in and The apex each of upper the oriented of base approximately margin sinus bone along nose the the way the midline above is bridge the vertically one-third of the triangular the at laterally the

infundibulum of the the and at ethmoidal the the sinus ethmoidal which labyrinth of meatus duct, lateral Each onto wall semilunar via end the drains hiatus. continues the frontonasal penetrates the frontal front as middle

from of branches ophthalmic nerve nerve by innervated the are the The supra-orbital [V1]. frontal sinuses Their supply arteries. branches the anterior is from of blood ethmoidal

the side (Fig. The fill ethmoidal ethmoidal cells on labyrinth each 8.235A,B). of the medial labyrinth, the ethmoidal cavity ethmoidal and from cluster the nasal separated labyrinth. cells by from of plate orbital the by thin orbit is wall the of Each the

ethmoidal are of number on apertures posterior are location cavity: cells the nasal of middle, into on The based which divided and ethmoidal lateral the a air cells individual anterior, by variable their chambers, formed wall of the

ethmoidal open cells infundibulum ethmoidal into anterior the duct. or frontonasal The the

this lateral the onto the above ethmoidal middle just or open onto bulla, cells wall ethmoidal structure. The

wall nasal the onto open the ethmoidal superior meatus. posterior lateral of The cells

ethmoidal Because by cells often maxillary, the and sphenoid, palatine completed the lacrimal, erode bones labyrinth, the boundaries of be bones. their ethmoidal walls may into frontal, beyond the

the pterygopalatine [V2] branches and nerve posterior the ganglion. orbital branches of cells maxillary innervated nerve are ethmoidal from the the The anterior from and via [V1], nerve ethmoidal by: nasociliary ophthalmic the

arteries. of the ethmoidal through anterior ethmoidal receive branches The their supply posterior cells blood and

and sinuses, the maxillae completely The of maxillary each (Fig. sinuses fill largest side, bodies the of are the one the paranasal on 8.235A,B). deep Each laterally the and with apex of in wall adjacent pyramidal the shape cavity. the nasal is base the lateral directed to and wall that by bone The by of the concha inferior or is base of and the overlie medial maxillary the hiatus. formed sinus palatine the maxillary parts maxilla,

of maxillary the base, hiatus, the nasal in middle The of meatus. near the lateral the of center of which the the the top sinus wall is grooves opening semilunar

of the maxillary Relationships are follows: as sinus

is the (roof) above orbit. surface to superolateral The related

the to roots the premolar and anterolateral below teeth face. molar front The related is surface to in the of upper and

is The fossa. to posterior infratemporal the wall behind related

and The of from innervated alveolar sinuses [V2], receive nerve are superior by maxillary maxillary maxillary arteries. blood the the branches of the infra-orbital branches through and branches infra-orbital alveolar their and

on on one open the the the of the of cavity The recess wall into (Fig. either sinuses, sphenoidal the body within apertures nasal the side spheno-ethmoidal via sphenoid, posterior roof of 8.235C,D). the on anterior high are walls apertures of sphenoid the The sinuses.

related: to above the particularly the sphenoidal cranial cavity, chiasm, the pituitary and laterally, cavernous The gland to below cranial to and to and the to optic cavity, particularly in front, nasal the the sinuses, are cavities. sinuses to

into sphenoidal below hypophyseal the nasal cavities be the of the separate of from anteroinferior the Because the the fossa. cavities passing the by above, of top only sphenoidal roof gland shelves surgically bone of thin the sphenoid fossa the and aspect sinuses nasal can bone through through sphenoid first pituitary hypophyseal sinuses bone and approached into and the the then through

Innervation [V2] the the maxillary branches the from is branch orbital nerve nerve of of via the posterior provided ganglion. sinuses ophthalmic and [V1], pterygopalatine by: ethmoidal sphenoidal the

The branches of sphenoidal are maxillary arteries sinuses by supplied the the from pharyngeal arteries.

roof floor, and Walls,

the sagittal which cavity the thin plane nasal and the separates each of medial is wall surface vertically nasal septum, median cavities left and is other. The right mucosa-covered of nasal in oriented from each the

The (Fig. nasal septum small of palatine the consists crest plate bones, nasal of the rostrum and ethmoid anteriorly, the the mainly by of: nasal 8.236) of sphenoid and the contributions in where crests of maxillary bones the and by the bone, bone, midline, nasal meet the vomer nasal spine septal bone, the the frontal incisor the and of contributions the posteriorly, cartilage perpendicular they and the maxilla.

nasal (Fig. The floor each cavity of much wider smooth, the is and concave, roof. than 8.237) maxilla the of which process palate. the the of of the soft and the the and hard horizontal bone, together of tissues nose, plate palatine upper It of: surface external form palatine consists the

naris into is the the incisive septum superior lateral immediately the palate. floor, anteriorly the to The of opens nasal aperture the mucosa canal deep near the to hard of the front and

is regions it the in plate central the of roof where by cavity is highest formed bone The cribriform the and is ethmoid of nasal (Fig. narrow 8.238).

nasal and nasal the slopes the septal bones, external of plate the the the major nose. the to the spine lateral to inferiorly alar the cartilages frontal and is formed and bone and the processes of cribriform roof by: nares of Anterior cartilage

vomer and of of is the sphenoid bone, choana slopes the the the plate of process by: inferiorly process. palatine surface adjacent formed cavity the and process to anterior bone, vaginal sphenoidal the ala pterygoid each the of and roof medial the of the Posteriorly, of the

by a separate and ethmoidal the openings anterior mucosa, openings for the in superiorly roof by Underlying nerve foramen cribriform vessels. and is the the these perforated plate, to anterior

sinus of on roof. between opening the sphenoidal and spheno-ethmoidal recess The slope the the posterior the is

of tissues. bone, and cartilage, and by lateral The is wall is each soft cavity complex nasal formed

lateral the wall support for Bony (Fig. the perpendicular the middle the and bone, medial by: the surfaces of of ethmoidal the medial of labyrinth, process, the bones bone, concha provided and the concha, superior plate palatine 8.239A) the lacrimal sphenoid plate and is uncinate concha. maxillae, pterygoid inferior

cavity minor septal cartilage of tissues. by cartilage and (lateral wall alar external cartilages) In and major the supported lateral by is of process the the the and soft nose, nasal of contour The the and three irregular conchae. the by interrupted is lateral wall in surface is

(Fig. superior middle, The conchae inferior, and across cavity, medially an superior and inferior, spheno-ethmoidal 8.239B) nasal the it separating and air middle, meatus channels, a extend into recess. four conchae nose. forward the external extend into do The not inferiorly curves end to end form of of related anterior that a overlies each concha the meatus. lip the The

inferior to and attachment ethmoidal wall anterior middle the dome-shaped elevates to the (Fig. of bulla form of to concha, the the lateral the of meatus midpoint the concha Immediately the just middle 8.239C). the medial This which formed wall of labyrinth. the is by ethmoidal the underlying ethmoidal cells, middle expand

mucosa the formed the is above as bony (the the the ethmoidal defect gutter hiatus), below. semilunar bulla which between ethmoidal bulla the by it covering spans Inferior is a a to process curved wall the uncinate in and wall lateral

the upward frontonasal sinus. frontal of a labyrinth infundibulum), and the the as (the semilunar anterior the ethmoidal duct The to curves end which open into of part ethmoidal channel anterior through forms continues the hiatus

nasal sinuses the (Fig. and the The onto of the open most lateral wall duct nasolacrimal of paranasal cavity 8.239C):

tears at on conjunctival the lacrimal inferior inferior into under opens of lateral from of nasolacrimal the eye and duct inferior onto wall the lip the of sac The end orbit. sac the the drains the meatus originates nasal the the cavity the nasal of anteromedial anterior the concha—it of wall

the of into middle frontonasal duct drain frontal semilunar (in or into drains the blindly infundibulum frontal the nasal via the anterior the frontonasal some of sinus nasal ethmoidal meatus—the The frontonasal and on the and meatus duct ends the anterior drains ethmoidal cases, ethmoidal anterior the the cells). sinus wall cells lateral in ethmoidal hiatus into the anterior middle duct end directly infundibulum the of end

onto open The just or cells ethmoidal bulla. middle ethmoidal above the

meatus. the usually of The posterior nasal cells open superior wall ethmoidal the onto lateral

the sinus. roof large opening just center ethmoidal opens semilunar sinus of near inferior bulla—this the to usually of is the the the maxillary hiatus, maxillary The into

cavity that nasal does the paranasal nasal sphenoidal cavity. onto not opens which onto is sinus the wall posterior sloping sinus, of lateral only the the the usually of drain The roof

external are the the aspect openings nose inferior apertures The and on cavities (Fig. of the nasal oval the nares are anterior of 8.240A). and nasal by adjacent the cartilage, They alar held by of inferior open cartilages margins and surrounding maxillae. septal are spine the and the

of superioris by the Although nasi muscles; depressor nasi, they nares can the related action be further expression (nasalis, levator widened muscles Fig. and labii open, facial are septi continuously the alaeque of 8.240B).

are oval-shaped the (Fig. the nasopharynx between nasal openings and choanae cavities The the 8.241). the are bone, of the by by the of borders of posterior openings medial margins which the pterygoid are medially nares, tissues, plate choanae flexible and formed: vomer. by palatine and plate soft and surrounded margin completely by laterally have rigid the the of of posterior the inferiorly cartilage of border the process, posterior the Unlike the their border horizontal bone,

and roof vaginal of of the bone. and body is process the plate the formed: pterygoid choanae anteriorly of the by vomer ala of by medial posteriorly of the The the the the process, sphenoid

tissues enter vessels and and each a (Fig. by which nerves the of There nasal lining routes soft cavity number are leave plate, in sphenopalatine and cribriform and small around and wall, these the nares. foramina the include lateral 8.242), incisive canal, the of the margin foramen,

plate. enter The in of cavity the olfactory the the through cribriform exit perforations fibers nasal the cavity nerve and [I] cranial from foramina nerve the cavity. cribriform ophthalmic bone nasal the small down cavity anterior and plate addition, the the accompanying In surrounding branch of vessels and then the pass [V1], into a nerve, between orbit and the cranial allow ethmoidal to into

between is midline foramen between of the sagittal individuals cavity foramen in connection prominent some there frontal crista In in a the and superior and sinus addition, cranial a through the galli bone. cecum) nasal veins the (the

sphenopalatine the of the of leave One cavity most posterolateral nasal meatus. superior in the and important which vessels foramen and nasal is enter nerves by routes the wall the in sphenoid end formed the attachment to bone. This and and the the the by sphenopalatine palatine of just superior foramen the nasal bone of the is body the notch posterior of concha middle is

nasal the fossa. of sphenopalatine the route a cavity and pterygopalatine The is communication between foramen of through [V2], maxillary superior of sphenopalatine branch are: structures maxillary of the the nasopalatine nasal the nerve artery, the [V2]. branch Major passing and the maxillary the foramen nerve branches

the Another each leave is nasal which route canal nasal the cavity. of cavities in the floor incisive enter by and structures through root of the and lateral is nasal in incisor septum the the This central the to immediately maxilla. posterosuperior to just canal both transmit: cavity cavity. greater artery nerve the incisive terminal roof the side, into from oral The and on oral two from cavity, the the the in nasal into into each unpaired cavity open the palatine nasopalatine single end of nasal canals, and the the cavity oral the of fossa the incisive one

foramina lateral wall Small in the

Other nares wall: vessels into lateral the by include of routes get foramina nerves the small in and the nasal out and cavity which and

of the the face. from the loop infra-orbital facial nasal around cavity of gain the of maxillary artery the branches of nasal [V2] Internal margin to alar the the wall entry nerve artery naris the from lateral the nerve to branches of and nasal

the the by small wall. maxillary wall foramina lateral of palatine passing nerve palatine [V2] cavity nasal the from Inferior the branches branch of enter through the canal on nasal the greater lateral from

supply altering nasal for the respired vascular air. cavities humidity a have temperature and of The rich region, described tissue related “erectile” flowing or In the system. respiratory particularly enlarges and shrinks to depending the is “cavernous” often of submucosa septum, the on because that or amount the into the fact, of the blood as conchae

nasal (Fig. Arteries originate that carotid and external the the cavity arteries that include supply both internal from vessels 8.243):

external that nasal palatine, labial, sphenopalatine, the artery of lateral from branches include carotid superior Vessels arteries. and the greater originate

ethmoidal artery from originate arteries. anterior internal of and branches carotid are the the that posterior Vessels

the artery vessel The cavity sphenopalatine nasal (Fig. the largest supplying is of the fossa. branch is the artery the maxillary pterygopalatine in which terminal 8.243), by the cavity. of lateral through the and nasal the foramen pterygopalatine the enters passing onto medially cavity It wall sphenopalatine fossa and nasal leaves the

branches anastomose nasal with branches ethmoidal lateral with Posterior of and and large facial part supply wall and anteriorly arteries, from anterior the nasal artery. a lateral branches the lateral the posterior of

the septal medial onto the Posterior wall. the the branches to over contribute and of cavity the nasal supply the of pass roof artery blood where septum of sphenopalatine they the and branches One branches the continues to nasal septum artery of the septal greater with artery. anastomose terminal forward labial superior end palatine latter of down these the of

terminal end passing up floor oral palatine the cavity incisive the the the cavity artery (Fig. nasal aspect by The of anterior from through of enters canal roof the the of the of greater 8.243).

artery, artery. branch the pterygopalatine as maxillary greater sphenopalatine Like the the fossa a in of arises artery the palatine cavity first palate, reach the then passing oral aspect posterior and up the palate, cavity. the the down forward palatine of on passes and through palatine of of to the roof undersurface greater to the fossa onto the canal of incisive through canal and the the It by floor the passes nasal foramen septal adjacent regions with the of floor and anterior of nasal the anastomoses greater the artery. wall artery sphenopalatine of and the cavity, palatine The supplies medial branch

and artery artery the The of from the facial labial the on face. nasal the artery superior lateral originate front

the lip, lateral giving lip the The and nasal to nose the in that fissure and and oral artery artery the of supply from facial originates supplying cavity. passes labial superior near the end branches rise the medially nasal cavity the naris a the and branch of of branch alar septum. around An passes aspect the septal anterior and lateral supplies supplies nasal the the region into regions

the external originates lateral the external margin from and blood the of nasal nose with the artery in facial supply nose. of The the contributes to artery association the branches nasal the vestibule. of supply pass lateral margin and the Alar around naris

anterior posterior The and arteries ethmoidal (Fig. in the the branch which from artery, a cavity 8.243) internal cranial as artery. originates the carotid major the ophthalmic in originate of orbit superior of in supply canals between immediately orbit ethmoidal adjacent cribriform bone, the sinuses, cranial paranasal and then through the the wall the the enter labyrinth and to pass the and medial They cavity lateral frontal plate.

cavity the The descends the lateral parts and to ethmoidal plate artery upper the into of through nasal posterior walls. branches cribriform has medial the and

The passes to plate descending accompanying anterior anterior on in lateral the by forward, ethmoidal groove foramen nasal immediately slit-like enters artery a cavity and the with nerve, cribriform through a ethmoidal crista the galli. the cartilage on the gives skin the branches bone, the nasal cavity and branch nasal the surface medial between rise adjacent lateral as nasal continues external emerge to (septal) forward and terminates passing external of and the nasal deep of wall by to lateral then nose bone and supply that to nasal supply tissues. the on It and the

extensive that with the Vessels nasal cavities each anastomoses form supply other. of in is medial evident and close This are and anastomoses there greater arteries, particularly the the the the branches (Fig. vessels wall superior labial, relatively sphenopalatine, palatine, where to anterior surface ethmoidal the anterior region are of where between 8.243B). This major nosebleeds, of area is epistaxis. or the site

nasal the (Fig. arteries cavities draining generally follow the Veins 8.244):

drain the infratemporal veins in ultimately plexus of the that from the pterygoid originate with Veins that branches pass fossa. into artery maxillary

anterior Veins nasal regions of cavities join the the from vein. facial

cecum), the superiorly bone nasal the foramen frontal some additional individuals, anterior galli, anterior of and crista vein midline a in end an sagittal through aperture In to superior with passes the (the joins the sinus. classified vein it vein. sinus emissary extracranial an this nasal connects veins, Because venous intracranial is as an with are veins Emissary general regions can in peripheral into which cavity. cranial the routes from infections track by

ophthalmic of fossa. that the of superior is hypophyseal into and one the the ethmoidal side the accompany tributaries emissary sinus arteries veins of drains on largest Veins posterior the anterior vein, are cavernous which and either

(Fig. the Nerves cavities nasal innervate that the are: [V1] sensation. [I] for nerve maxillary nerves ophthalmic for general olfaction, and branches [V2] of 8.245) the and olfactory

branches maxillary the fossa. nerve pterygopalatine by [VII], mainly and Secretomotor in from mucous glands is sinuses the the fibers innervation of paranasal cavities nerve join of in [V2] nasal the facial parasympathetic which

of epithelium nasal cavity. olfactory in the each nerve [I] receptors top at composed is from axons olfactory of The the pass in with the neurons the bulb the through of to superiorly in axons plate Bundles of perforations synapse these olfactory cribriform brain.

ophthalmic nerve [V1] the Branches from

nasociliary innervate posterior from nerve nasal cavity anterior the that in which the Branches ophthalmic ethmoidal from the the nerve the [V1] and nerves, originate orbit. are

(Fig. anterior ethmoidal The nerve artery with bone. labyrinth leaves and frontal a travels through anterior and the canal the ethmoidal the 8.245) between the orbit ethmoidal cells superior plate. cribriform to the ethmoidal frontal It cavity the immediately adjacent and supplies and lateral then enters the and through and passes cranial sinus, It nasal plate forward the travels to descending the on and slit-like immediately galli. cribriform cavity then by crista the lateral groove in a enters foramen through a of It the then and has nasal branches the bone. on lateral and the forward continues the wall cavity undersurface of nasal medial to lateral then bone nose. the by onto nose cartilage, on and nasal the the nasal and which the vestibule, as around supplies the nasal nasal and It naris, external of surface skin in between traveling passes the terminates the of external the tip nerve,

anterior the ethmoidal ethmoidal a the nerve in through canal orbit. wall the leaves nerve, medial the posterior Like the of similar orbit not It the terminates the ethmoidal by sphenoidal the sinus and into supplying and nasal of cavity extend cells does mucosa itself. normally

maxillary from the [V2] nerve Branches

nerve nasal from of the the nasal number A maxillary [V2] branches innervate cavity. branches Many nasal of these (Fig. the nasal through in sphenopalatine enter just or lateral passing the in the pterygopalatine originate the the and wall: foramen wall by cavity, smaller nasal which is the of foramina cavity fossa leave the to lateral fossa, to 8.245) through lateral medially

superior forward A the nasal nasal nerves) and on pass lateral of of wall number these cavity. lateral (posterior nerves the supply

the to and roof septum medial nerves) (posterior nasal these the superior nasal cross both regions. supply Others

and incisive teeth. by roof the nerves oral canal cavity The and posterior terminates the supplying largest of oral is down pass the through the nasopalatine incisor these the onto the nerve, cavity, to of to nasal the medial the which passes of mucosa wall forward

the nasal bony from the foramina and from nerve, originate cavity. just lateral the cavity, in pterygopalatine innervate to descending nasal inferior pass fossa to the palatine nerves) of wall small palatine canal the nerves lateral through nasal greater (posterior the Other nasal

nerve branch alveolar the anterior of near originates the lateral inferior supply maxilla through passes nasal medially small end the superior from the the concha. also to and the nerve A of infra-orbital anterior wall

cavity the petrosal the greater Secretomotor mucosa the in paranasal and nerve facial glands innervation nasal is the of parasympathetic in preganglionic sinuses carried branch fibers of of [VII]. by (see fibers enter pterygopalatine These the fossa in synapse and the ganglion pterygopalatine Fig. 8.157 pp. and 986–987). branches and [V2] to reach ultimately fibers the glands. Postganglionic of maxillary leave nerve join parasympathetic then the fossa target

flow regulating cord level Sympathetic innervation, in blood mainly spinal with the nasal is from involved T1. mucosa, sympathetic sympathetic ascend to sympathetic the superior trunk Preganglionic cervical and ganglion. synapse in the fibers enter cavity, deep onto pterygopalatine pass form sympathetic the the greater internal of carotid which [VII] leave cranial nerve carotid joins Postganglionic fossa nerve and internal artery then and artery, the petrosal to enters nerve, fibers the (see facial the Figs. the enter petrosal the 8.156 and 8.157 pp. and 984–986).

nerve into maxillary fibers the nasal cavity. follow branches the sympathetic Like of parasympathetic [V2] the fibers, the

of cavities onto the forward the nares margins anterior Lymph around the from face (Fig. regions drains passing the of by nasal 8.246). lymphatics ultimately nodes. with submandibular These connect the

the nodes. cavity the nasal paranasal and posterior of deep into drains sinuses upper from Lymph regions cervical first through retropharyngeal passes the of Some lymph nodes. this

oral The cavity to (Fig. is cavities inferior the nasal 8.247A). walls, the of and oropharyngeal pharynx face is lateral through continuous oral with opens and the has cavity It the floor a onto the isthmus. the and fissure, at roof

The cavity of the of oral hard the palates. soft roof and consists mainly is the include tissues, which floor of tongue. The muscular and a diaphragm formed soft of cavity). lips the walls anterior lateral the surrounding are the (the The muscular oral opening anteriorly oral with (cheeks) merge fissure and

into part oropharyngeal pharynx. the The the of the posterior oral of which the oral aperture opens cavity isthmus, is

upper the is (Fig. dental that bone by lower cavity and teeth of the The and regions arches into consisting them separated two alveolar supports oral 8.247B):

by and muscles the and arches the is by expression, horseshoe of fissure it the shaped, lips—the surfaces between can oral deep jaw. dental cheeks opens is be The vestibule, outer and of opened the facial closed and lower oral which of and movements into

The proper is by dental cavity oral inner the enclosed arches.

and of separation temporomandibular lower at lower depressing degree the jaw upper The between elevating by the joint. the or established (mandible) is arches

palate the by back can of oropharyngeal proper opened The soft include at closed soft be tissues, tongue. cavity and the surrounding and the oral isthmus which

has The cavity multiple oral functions:

It processing initial with inlet secretions by the system digestive the food, salivary of the is from which glands. for is involved aided

the produced of larynx one outcome this It and speech. by sounds manipulates is

food air. because common a can the used pharynx, be which opens It breathing for for it pathway is into and lower used by dams” from esophagus access pharynx to the and the cavity “rubber passing this to or the use be For oropharyngeal through reason, can the oral dentists as the airway, physicians and airway. fragments into debris such either tooth isthmus prevent lower

innervate oral cavity nerves Multiple the

nerve General innervation trigeminal branches sensory of the carried [V]: predominantly by is

the and by the teeth, branches upper of [V2]. including the cavity, the The palate of parts innervated maxillary nerve upper are

[V3]. and mandibular the of including the of are oral tongue, branches part nerve by The lower innervated the teeth parts,

trigeminal by (special [V]. the nerve branches distributed branches which [VII], nerve [SA]) or anterior of the of facial from carried afferent Taste join two-thirds with is and are oral the of the tongue part

fibers the branches Parasympathetic facial the within oral with carried nerve [V]. also trigeminal branches distributed are [VII], of of which glands by to cavity the the nerve are

trigeminal spinal fibers from the branches T1, synapse sympathetic to cord are level distributed or ganglion, superior in the eventually of cavity the in oral Sympathetic blood come oral directly and vessels. ultimately nerve the cervical [V] cavity along along

hypoglossal palatoglossus, the the which vagus the are except [XII], nerve of the [X]. innervated tongue All is muscles by by nerve innervated

mandibular are [X], for the innervated of nerve the a the innervated is muscles branch palatini, vagus veli tensor nerve All palate which soft by the by except [V3]. from of innervated cavity nerve forms mandibular that floor (mylohyoid) [V3]. the the oral also muscle is The the by

are contribute related skeletal that of sphenoid, include: and and unpaired to mandible, structures or hyoid the the in the of framework palatine, oral bones. to Bones cavity bones, paired the cavity temporal and anatomy the maxillae, the oral

palate. the related of aspect of the are the tubes to of skull inferior the the base In muscles parts of pharyngotympanic of attachment addition, on cartilaginous soft the the

of substantially the cavity. roof of to maxillae architecture the the contribute The oral two the processes alveolar and palatine parts involved are (Fig. The 8.248A).

the process maxilla. a surface that The from horizontal palatine of each shelf is medial projects side. extends superior at to the where to the aspect medial suture, midline process joined, other is process a the from the the alveolar originates with it just and It of palatine two-thirds Together, hard the anterior palate. the two form processes palatine the of

at small end hard single suture fossa of a the In (incisive is incisor the and inferior anterior fossa) teeth. of just palate the on midline surface the the intermaxillary behind the the from cavity. posterosuperiorly nasal Two on this fossa onto to one floor of canals, roof the each open of the extend incisive side, the greater passage and palatine nerves. The of canals allow the vessels fossae and nasopalatine

pyramidal The the to plate oral L-shaped cavity horizontal that and the of parts are the palatine of process roof each the (Fig. contribute bone 8.248A).

medially joined its in by partner The and, aspect from inferior plate the on the process horizontal the the with maxilla of projects bone same midline is to of side, the palatine the palatine and sutures anteriorly.

and single horizontal the palate. the A posterior from spine plates projects of where two midline the margin is at join the backward hard formed nasal of the The posterior margin of nasal posterior associated spine attachment soft palate. and the plates are the with horizontal

laterally by plate the palatine the the and palatine aspect bone The mainly by horizontal the onto formed plate. of adjacent part the of opens foramen, greater completed maxilla, posterolateral of the horizontal pterygopalatine foramen This the nerve palatine the to transmits inferior vessels of greater is and opening palatine and which palate. canal, the into continues the superiorly fossa the

opening bone foramen. palatine the the Also palatine onto is lesser soft the which opening palatine canal, palatine and palatine foramen of short to branches nerve This the palate. inferior lesser and lesser canal from is the the transmits greater vessels the

the space of posteriorly between pterygoid fills the and pyramidal medial process bone. of and inferior sphenoid of plates the the process The projects lateral ends the

the palate, and spines The bone of (Fig. processes cavity roof oral related the structures part to of with the of sphenoid the associated soft are forms which pterygoid 8.248A).

from lateral the processes on The pterygoid each descend, one sphenoid of body side, the of bone. aspect the process medial Each and lateral a plate. a has of the process. the vertically aspect plates posterior project These oriented two from V-shaped two inferiorly is occurs The between bone. the process pyramidal filled the the of that by plates palatine gap

structure posterolaterally process (the the medial of elongate plate hamulus). hook-shaped the pterygoid from of inferior is pterygoid the an margin Projecting immediately and posterior is margin This to arch hard hamulus the the palate. inferior the of alveolar behind palate, attached “pulley” end the is soft pharynx of superior the the attachment cheek. is: site joins the of to of muscles pterygomandibular for mandible below constrictor a upper and the of the muscle the the buccinator the of and which and palatini) one for raphe, It the together (tensor veli

fossa skull the medially pterygoid plate process root descends medial base small medial process medial and the just fossa), of and of which of a the the of foramen ovale to to of begins anteriorly on the (Fig. (scaphoid plate canoe-shaped At the the is root the pterygoid the 8.248A). palatini). of is attachment the the fossa the one for (tensor muscles soft of veli of This palate

the on vertical sphenoid, the (Fig. greater each The of the inferior bone the of are projections sphenoid one side, wings surfaces of spines from 8.248A). Each posteromedial spine to immediately spinosum. is the foramen

tensor soft the for spine the attachment part provides of veli palate. of the muscle The of medial aspect the lateral most palatini

the palate, with for provide attachment styloid petrous and part inferior of the aspect tongue bone and the temporal muscles associated soft process respectively. of The

temporal the The from bone. underside of projects process the styloid anteroinferiorly It cm) ligament is as attached as toward can long horn (Fig. be of it to points stylohyoid hyoid which inch 1 by the the (2.5 lesser bone the and 8.248B). process to is stylomastoid the of immediately foramen. and the root to The styloid jugular lateral foramen the anterior attaches of the The styloid the process. styloglossus anterolateral muscle of to tongue the surface

aspect to (Fig. anteromedial area of triangular immediately canal the carotid temporal The of roughened the the inferior opening bone has a 8.248A). muscle attached soft is of here. levator palate the palatini The veli

part pharyngotympanic tube the Cartilaginous of

of of the of the part petrous the The between the anterior posterior the (Fig. greater of groove of pharyngotympanic trumpet-shaped sphenoid part temporal cartilaginous wing tube the margin in bone margin is the a and 8.248A).

of wall of the walls pharyngotympanic formed medial fibrous membranous are as lamina. lateral known of and cartilage, is more the mainly The more inferolateral tube part cartilaginous is whereas the the and

The the the of to part laterally tube the in bony cartilaginous the of of the temporal connects bone. part opening pharyngotympanic apex

of expanded end plate of The medial the nasopharynx. pharyngotympanic cartilaginous of to immediately the opens medial the into and tube is the pterygoid part of posterior process margin upper the the

attachment of is the of palatini medial to muscle and cartilaginous of spine veli part levator the to the the The sphenoid. tube pharyngotympanic the lateral part, lamina. veli in attached, palatini The the tensor membranous muscle to is

of The lower (Fig. the mandible is bone jaw the 8.249). (mandibular midline the a consists body of two It rami. fused which left and symphysis), anteriorly parts, in right are and of small visible the particularly as the midline. fusion of surface external the a on ridge in site of The bone vertical is

the alveolar upper mandible The of arch (Fig. surface the of the body bears and which a (Fig. on lower small is side mental its 8.249B), surface foramen each teeth, on external anchors the 8.249B).

the of two mandibular the above immediately are pair spines, other Posterior pair. to pairs internal the on symphysis surface of mandible the small one spines These and mental inferior inferior genial (superior spines) and superior (Fig. are the pair and of a pass the of the connect for and mandible the muscles tongue a to hyoid bone. sites into are 8.249A,C), muscles that attachment pair that

(the (Fig. originating the mylohyoid and is the Extending line line) inferior a midline mental from or raised spines to ridge the runs along and posteriorly last of the molar below end of of each of 8.249C), body which the tooth. the superiorly side level mandible surface the just to internal

a the is one-third line Above (the shallow mylohyoid fossa) of sublingual anterior the depression (Fig. of and (Fig. is posterior line another the depression 8.249C), mylohyoid two-thirds below (the the fossa) submandibular 8.249C).

Between is for last and the groove a shallow lingual tooth nerve. the mylohyoid molar the line

the last is Immediately (Fig. triangle) the the posterior upper mandible molar the surface to a body on small of triangular medial of depression tooth (retromolar 8.249A,C). raphe of The here the triangle hamulus this from and apex pterygomandibular medial just to the extends attaches to of tip the pterygoid above.

and oriented The one side, shaped of each mandible, the is quadrangular the on sagittal ramus in plane. On inferior ramus (Fig. for vessels foramen the nerve medial large transmission the is of a the mandibular alveolar surface and of 8.249C).

bone bone between neck small the in is the The U-shaped mandible. hyoid larynx the a and which and (Fig. large superiorly bone greater an the from side, each two of horns, It one anterior on hyoid has posteriorly body body project and 8.250). join two lesser are the There where with superior horns body. small horns greater the surface conical the on ligaments lesser the horns. apices The to attach stylohyoid of the

the the the is neck in hyoid in the key bone The below. it and a cavity larynx because of floor front the behind with pharynx connects bone oral

cheeks Walls: the

oral the of cavity The walls the by formed cheeks. are

sandwiched between Each and layer of cheek and externally oral internally. fascia consists mucosa a muscle skeletal skin of principally skeletal cheeks thin muscle the of the The within is buccinator layer muscle.

the expression (Fig. one of buccinator is of muscles The muscle facial 8.251). the is of It plane pharynx. the same muscle the constrictor as superior in above margin bone which muscle hamulus the constrictor posterior the sphenoid behind and runs of mandible below. of of roughened the the margin anterior muscle molar pterygomandibular the the tooth bone of immediately superior In fact, to buccinator raphe, on is by the the area the joined last tip the of between pterygoid a

and provide superior walls The cavities. of and buccinator therefore the constrictor the oral between muscles pharyngeal continuity

to maxilla. of raphe, from originating the in part alveolar from pterygomandibular mandible directly the the and originates alveolar of The process addition the muscle, buccinator also

its muscle those blend the and with side. the buccinator From oris connective tissue modiolus, of which a run muscle of of forward the into muscles cheeks orbicularis and of to to interface between three sites of origin, on at the button-shaped the small the fibers insert lips nodule each the is

food muscle against arches chewing. cheeks the between holds the The alveolar teeth when buccinator the and keeps

by buccinator The innervated of [VII]. nerve buccal is branch the facial the nerve the [V3]. oral General of of skin carried the buccal is cheeks and mucosa from sensation by mandibular branch the the

is formed in body of the of paired mandible above muscles; muscles. tongue, the bone mainly hyoid fills muscles cord-like and to which which the of and mylohyoid of from the superior which structures: composed the between diaphragm, behind; the three and U-shaped floor a left is sides gap the geniohyoid the two the mandible oral The diaphragm, to the muscular front is cavity the geniohyoid right by run proper

ducts. floor Also and glands proper their present the the of in are salivary cavity oral The gland side, part glands, submandibular of on and largest sublingual the the oral each gland. these of the are

muscular diaphragm muscles inferior two oral form mylohyoid The defines the floor cavity (Table together 8.20), a on limit of side, the thin that one each the of (Fig. 8.252A). its is forward. with apex pointed muscle triangular in shape Each

body the mandible. on is of each the of side medial triangular line the lateral the of to attached margin mylohyoid The muscle at joined together other slightly run those the to the partner midline side here, muscle downward are the where a From on of raphe. fibers with fibers their margin medial the muscle by the in the the aspect raphe body of hyoid extends from front the mandibular the to behind. posterior bone The of symphysis

posterior the of each hyoid bone. The mylohyoid is small to except for a margin medial attachment muscle free

when during the the in swallowing, mylohyoid participate cavity, the open the pulling elevating structural floor initial hyoid the therefore mandible attached larynx, oral support the position, and hyoid the and of is in The bone fixed and forward muscles: depress mouth. the and of to stages contribute bone,

[V3]. muscles mandibular the by nerve the the muscles of Like mylohyoid are innervated mastication, the the mylohyoid muscles the inferior branch to innervates alveolar nerve from mylohyoid the specific that nerve. is The

muscles the mental (Fig. mandibular hyoid of the body from to of on on (Table muscles spines bone the are surface of run, midline, the the side the that cord-like of the The 8.20) anterior one geniohyoid either symphysis inferior paired posterior surface 8.252B,C). form tongue. in inferior and are the immediately floor They the to the of muscles the superior to the of mouth root the genioglossus muscles mylohyoid part that of

mouth. from swallowing; because bone, to and to can geniohyoid hyoid the depress with the The and forward open the they larynx, muscles they mandible attached the and bone, the pass mylohyoid hyoid fixed, the bone pull the the muscles: up hyoid and is posteroinferiorly when during mainly act mandible therefore

along cavity. which joint, by Unlike the C1, at from the [XII] a of are move that hypoglossal geniohyoid muscles innervated branch the oral muscles other floor the temporomandibular the “hitchhikes” cervical the nerve of mandible into nerve neck the

oral of into floor the Gateway the cavity

forms a a cavity side margins structures (Fig. border lower on aperture pass in defining three infratemporal the large structures the floor the is triangular the and which oral fossa one to the of triangle), of by posterior the the of route neck free to of head mylohyoid cavity, upper of in limit the and each the In the from of oral muscle which (oropharyngeal addition major of floor 8.253). margins muscles The complete the other of middle pharynx. that the of constrictor the aperture two the superior and are muscles

artery the include through associated pass aperture styloglossus), and that lymphatics. the structures are and muscles (lingual, vessels (hyoglossus, [XII], tongue nerves glossopharyngeal [IX]), hypoglossal vein), (lingual Most and with

passes gland free and margin muscle around through of “hooked” large A opening. therefore (the the the also salivary the posterior is mylohyoid gland) submandibular

The oral part tongue muscular anterior a cavity floor is of of the the (Fig. forms the wall that the part and structure of of oropharynx 8.254A). the part Its apex is triangular in blunt cavity somewhat and anterior shape in is a the with tongue. of oral behind anteriorly immediately The incisor teeth. directed the sits and is apex hyoid to tongue the attached and mandible is root The the the bone. of

the oriented anterior two-thirds in of is The or oral horizontal tongue the plane. superior surface the of

The vertical or and pharyngeal oriented plane. curves posterior becomes surface inferiorly more the tongue one-third in of the terminal oral are surfaces by of a the V-shaped pharyngeal tongue. and sulcus separated The margin terminal oral pharyngeal of This forms the isthmus between inferior the and the oropharyngeal sulcus cavities. the thyroid embryo foramen sulcus epithelium apex (the the tongue), gland. the marks which where small to site of V-shaped the depression invaginated in the cecum of the form the At is a neck. thyroglossal tongue cecum people gland in the some a the thyroid with In and foramen on duct connects persists the the

surface of covered The part of papillae tongue hundreds of the superior the is oral by (Fig. 8.254B):

papillae points. that one Filiform the are small end cone-shaped projections or of mucosa in more

the the in larger are the papillae rounder than Fungiform papillae, along to be of tend and shape filiform and concentrated margins tongue.

12 are anterior line the tongue’s to papillae, tongue. papillae of the V-shaped surface—there a the in in largest are single about only immediately the sulcus terminal vallate which The the invaginations 8 of vallate to cylindrical blunt-ended are papillae papillae

of of linear of terminal mucosa the sulcus sides on the papillae Foliate folds the are near tongue tongue.

oral cavity. surface of the general papillae of the tongue between the increase The contents the and in of the area contact papillae except buds their taste on have surfaces. filiform All the

tongue Inferior of surface

of oral does tongue the of of number but folds the lacks a The Fig. undersurface linear have papillae, mucosal part (see 8.265). the continuous of sagittal floor is the right the a lower median cavity, overlies with septum, the left internally (the midline and which of mucosa fold the tongue. tongue) separates margin oral of and the of the A sides frenulum single covering fimbriated vein, each of a frenulum lingual rough is and lateral vein a the side to On is fold. each

the The small is pharyngeal many mucosa in covering tissue the of contour of the submucosa. irregular surface tongue nodules lymphoid of in the because the collectively These nodules are tonsil. lingual

the surface. are There papillae on pharyngeal no

(Fig. tongue the is bulk of The composed muscle of Table 8.254 and 8.21).

connective into right tongue halves is of completely a The tissue. composed by sagittal median divided and left septum means muscles of This all paired. are tongue that the are intrinsic extrinsic There lingual muscles. and

by the vagus palatoglossus, the innervated the hypoglossal are tongue of nerve nerve the which Except [XII]. muscles for innervated by all [X], is

intrinsic the (Fig. The muscles tongue of and insert tongue. of 8.255) originate the substance the within into tongue shape They and and uncurling surface. inferior flattening vertical and transverse, curling and superior longitudinal, apex edges, lengthening shortening its it, and and the they longitudinal, the divided by: and its rounding are of muscles, alter

muscles tongue in of of one and at speech, contribute the for tongue Working or required a swallowing. eating, side to precision intrinsic the time the pairs movements

Extrinsic tongue the of muscles (Fig. and into the tongue from and insert 8.21) structures 8.255 tongue. Table outside originate the genioglossus, hyoglossus, on the extrinsic and palatoglossus. four side, major styloglossus, each are muscles There elevate and the protrude, depress, These tongue. retract, muscles

the tongue. structure of The substantial to muscles contribution genioglossus a the fan-shaped make thick midline They that right on the tongue. the halves of left septum and separates of side occur either

(Fig. the originate immediately the spines symphysis origin posterior muscles superior of surface mandibular from to geniohyoid the inferior mental on genioglossus spines muscles superior the The the mental of from the 8.256). superiorly. and this small of From expands each posteriorly origin, site muscle most to inferior The bone. fibers the attach hyoid tongue. The superiorly intrinsic blend out the the entire muscles spread fibers of with remaining along the length virtually to

stick anterior protrude and muscles: tongue part of the genioglossus of the The fissure the central tongue out the the (i.e., the part depress out). oral tongue, of

[XII]. the by hypoglossal muscles genioglossus nerves of most innervated tongue, Like muscles the are the

as can the your be [XII]. test used a to patient Asking “stick a hypoglossal tongue for out” nerves protrude evenly the are tongue the functioning the midline. normally, nerves in should If one side. tongue functional, fully to point tip nerve not If the is the on side the will of that

hyoglossus The lateral muscles thin the quadrangular are (Fig. genioglossus to muscles muscles 8.257).

and body of of the originates hyoid the greater entire horn adjacent from bone. muscle hyoglossus the the the part length Each of from to the is middle constrictor of the attachment At its the hyoid muscle lateral of the origin hyoglossus the bone, pharynx. muscle constrictor, and The tongue genioglossus gap passes the mylohyoid to insert through the superior styloglossus. lateral to to between constrictor, (oropharyngeal triangle) muscle the the into and and middle the anteriorly superiorly medial

the The the innervated [XII]. hypoglossal nerve tongue and depresses hyoglossus by muscle is

An landmark. important muscle landmark cavity: oral The the the an of in floor is important hyoglossus

the to genioglossus. carotid artery the the from enters external hyoglossus, neck and lingual the the artery deep between tongue hyoglossus in The

mandibular external and and lingual nerve head, surface nerve enter the respectively, (branch fossa the the the of the the hypoglossal from neck of The [V3]), of nerve hyoglossus. infratemporal on tongue [XII]

of The the the anterior bones. from temporal of originate surface processes muscles the styloid styloglossus and to the constrictor, triangle) constrictor, between the with the the (Fig. the blend margin and surface with superior through the and here, hyoglossus gap lateral of inferiorly where the mylohyoid of each enter superior passes muscles From they medially (oropharyngeal muscle tongue intrinsic middle muscles 8.258).

back tongue muscles superiorly. and tongue of the The styloglossus the pull retract the hypoglossal innervated They are by the nerves [XII].

are palate muscles of The soft tongue. and the palatoglossus muscles the the of palatine side tongue the the from anteroinferiorly and originates to the of lateral Each passes (Fig. aponeurosis undersurface 8.259).

muscles: of back move The and the depress palatoglossus palatoglossal tongue, of arches the midline, mucosa soft toward palate. elevate the the the

the oropharyngeal oropharynx. oral from These the separate the isthmus as result facilitate and a closing of cavity movements

muscles are the of innervated other muscles other the soft to [X]. but palatoglossus the palate, nerves the tongue, vagus by similar most of Unlike muscles

is tongue artery major artery the the (Fig. lingual The of 8.260).

the horn adjacent artery the external from lingual tip the On to neck in of hyoid originates bone. side, greater the the the each of artery carotid and and It upward downward mylohyoid, triangle) aperture an the hyoglossus margins enters deep accompanies the pass floor forms oral muscle the muscles, superior by through cavity. and constrictor constrictor, to then and formed muscle, and (oropharyngeal loops the the of forward middle to bend the of the

travels forward genioglossus The muscles the lingual and between in the to of then tongue. the the apex artery plane hyoglossus

the the supplies the cavity. gingiva, of tongue, to and lingual gland, artery mucosa the oral oral in In floor addition the sublingual

lingual and lingual is (Fig. The dorsal tongue by deep veins drained 8.260).

deep are veins tongue. through undersurface the the on lingual mucosa visible The the of the parts from lingual accompany by arteries the arteries posteriorly in they they tongue, the anterior become separated Although muscles. the hyoglossus of surface constrictor, of the the oral out muscles. of with and On aperture of side, muscle the nerve passes the the deep hyoglossus external travels on hypoglossal by the floor the margins formed each the lingual constrictor and [XII] (oropharyngeal of mylohyoid, the vein triangle) middle superior cavity through the neck. the It joins jugular vein internal in

dorsal jugular and, in vein artery follows vein, the the between the vein into neck. deep genioglossus drains the lingual hyoglossus The internal muscles the lingual like lingual and

Innervation complex and of (Figs. of number tongue the a involves nerves is 8.260 and 8.261).

pharyngeal nerve tongue (SA) the the carried glossopharyngeal general are part [IX]. and by of sensation Taste the from

the surface and skull [IX] of the The foramen descends posterior the glossopharyngeal stylopharyngeus leaves nerve jugular the through along muscle. (oropharyngeal the then between triangle) of around and constrictor, mylohyoid the stylopharyngeus through superior lateral constrictor, surface of the passes gap the slips the and posterior It aspect muscles. middle on of of hyoglossus the forward oropharyngeal the wall the the tonsil passes part nerve muscles. the styloglossus enters then inferior to and deep pole the pharyngeal just tongue and below The palatine tongue branches taste general In carry to of the the papillae. terminal general (SA) creep anterior taste vallate tongue, the on to one-third the the sulcus sensation of addition posterior from and and to sensation

which the the part anterior carried [V3]. nerve is innervation by mandibular sensory or of of oral nerve, major from the is lingual branch two-thirds tongue General a the and constrictor, by passes and middle into through floor fossa the It anteriorly originates of in superior oral (Fig. the triangle) cavity the constrictor mylohyoid, the muscles between (oropharyngeal infratemporal the gap passing 8.262). deep inferior surface to As it gap, adjacent molar it forward gingiva. the mandible through to and of continues mandible the of passes attachment superior the the the the to the travels the medial immediately constrictor on and last to tooth a the In oral bone the placing into cavity. by be can the this finger nerve palpated position, against

the The external muscle. surface anteromedially superior and duct, continues floor into oral of hyoglossus lingual the loops under on ascends nerve and across the the of the tongue then the submandibular cavity,

gingiva the floor lingual of mucosa the sensation tongue, oral on general from part the associated general the carries the sensation and also teeth. the the from nerve oral In with cavity to lower addition of the carries facial The taste and fibers of part nerve tongue [VII]. the nerve parasympathetic are part oral also that of lingual the from

[VII]. by nervous the of part the tongue system the facial into central (SA) Taste is carried oral nerve from the facial tongue of of the Special nerve cavity oral leave as lingual the sensory (SA) part and the [VII] nerve. fibers fibers the in that infratemporal then the enter lingual a The nerve which nerve chorda is the fossa tympani (Fig. joins branch the of facial nerve, [VII] see also p. 976). 8.262;

the All by which the nerve hypoglossal muscle, is palatoglossus innervated vagus [X]. are [XII] nerve muscles tongue the innervated by for of the except

[XII] nerve hypoglossal angle the the (Fig. to a hypoglossal just skull leaves level mandible below almost neck canal the in the the descends The and of through vertically 8.263). around forward, the of one-third continues carotid forward to branch it surface the crossing Here of of loop hyoglossus the occipital the sternocleidomastoid the and of muscle. crosses angles external the external lingual artery, the artery, lower artery, sharply the reach

the to tongue. follows between mylohyoid and [XII] the gap through constrictor, the muscles (oropharyngeal The nerve constrictor, hyoglossus middle triangle) muscle reach superior the hypoglossal

C1 branch upper ramus from the [XII]. joins neck, In hypoglossal a the of the anterior nerve ansa the hypoglossal cervicalis nerve as [XII] the leave (Fig. root Most fibers C1 superior the these of of 8.263). in hyoglossus to leave the the geniohyoid, branch, nerves: nerve Near the the and thyrohyoid the border muscle, into form two passes oral cavity geniohyoid. hypoglossal of remaining floor posterior the [XII] to the the which the the branch innervate the neck to remains fibers which of thyrohyoid muscle, and the innervate

chain into All ultimately vessels cervical the of internal jugular vein: deep tongue the from the nodes drain lymphatic along

of the deep node directly pharyngeal the the cervical mainly into jugulodigastric The the part through wall chain. drains pharyngeal tongue of

both drains through into and and part tongue into The the into mylohyoid muscle nodes, and indirectly first of cervical directly deep the submandibular passing submental these oral the nodes by nodes.

inner nodes cavity between floor and aspect of to the are nodes muscles The submandibular the muscles, digastric below submental margins inferior along the the the of the oral the of the inferior while mylohyoid mandible. are

chain. the the the submental tongue of mainly deep into The into nodes and muscle node then of cervical the drains jugulo-omohyoid mylohyoid tip the through

glands oral or secrete Salivary are glands that open cavity. into the glands small and open or small the mucosa ducts. of epithelium cavity oral are and lining the or tongue, into oral lips, in the directly Most submucosa palate, via the cheeks, larger glands. and small glands the these which are to paired In sublingual glands, submandibular, much include addition parotid,

gland pp. parotid (see The the the cavity in 900–901) entirely boundaries (Fig. a trench of shallow oral on is triangular-shaped outside each side the posterior the and mandible muscle arch. of is the of by: behind, aspect zygomatic trench in formed base external the front, the and ramus meatus superiorly, the by 8.264) the of the formed sternocleidomastoid acoustic

and posterior digastric inferiorly anteriorly muscle. masseter gland muscle, of the extends The normally over belly the over the

second muscle buccinator passes to adjacent crown the the penetrate The the parotid the upper of duct molar and the open masseter turns oral and surface cheek medially external to anteriorly cavity muscle the tooth. then of across the of into

the retromandibular The the vein, the [VII]. the parotid carotid origin the facial of gland part and external nerve of encloses extracranial artery,

elongate are the larger glands submandibular glands the than parotid smaller sublingual but glands. than The hook (Fig. Each is shaped 8.265A,B):

the the mandible to inferior of hook forward on plane muscle arm the oral and larger horizontal below the impression mylohyoid is cavity—this a shallow the gland of outside directed medial the mylohyoid of therefore the fossa) larger in part (submandibular superficial the against is of directly boundaries line. is the side The

the it to on lie muscle the surface of oral the lateral mylohyoid hyoglossus to the of the the enter lateral muscle. of and (or within of The of root hook smaller part) is deep where gland posterior the margin loops of around the the cavity the arm floor tongue

the cavity from sublingual (papilla) open base of the small forward The the oral on passes emerges frenulum gland the duct in deep beside to the of the of caruncle tongue the part the a side of summit medial submandibular of (Fig. and 8.265C,D).

ascends the submandibular the duct, of as the into anteromedially The nerve loops under nerve lingual the first descends cavity crossing tongue. then side oral duct, floor through side the and the the medial and the then of lateral

three major of glands. salivary The the the are smallest sublingual glands paired in submandibular floor immediately oral lateral the shaped almond the cavity is to nerve (Fig. is and of associated duct lingual Each and the 8.265).

to a (sublingual against medial sublingual mylohyoid one-third the fossa) shallow where mandible the superior of forms Each gland the surface the anterior it groove directly line. lies of

midline to of the beside the the from of fold), the sublingual of of mucosa aspect the tongue raises margin of at which floor (Fig. posterolateral anteriorly sublingual papilla superior oral (sublingual the the the elongate base the cavity frenulum The of an gland extends fold 8.265D).

the crest open The of into ducts numerous cavity small oral (minor gland sublingual sublingual which the sublingual ducts), via drains onto fold. the more caruncle. that with gland Occasionally, part the the (major the duct sublingual is duct) duct the on a together drained by sublingual opens anterior of submandibular

that Vessels from external that originate carotid artery gland. are the supply the from parotid adjacent to and branches the its gland and sublingual lingual submandibular by branches and supplied facial arteries. of are The glands the

submandibular gland glands and from parotid the Veins into those vein, lingual and sublingual jugular and from drain external the drain veins. into the facial

on drain Lymphatic vessels gland. that or gland the into the in from nodes parotid are then cervical nodes. and superficial deep parotid These into drain nodes

deep mainly submandibular nodes, into the into from Lymphatics nodes and particularly cervical submandibular then node. jugulo-omohyoid the glands drain and sublingual

[VII], to by the join cavity of mandibular of nerve branches Parasympathetic [V3] the is branches all salivary reach facial target glands innervation in destinations. [V2] which oral and their the nerves to maxillary

nerve The infratemporal eventually from the gland, cavity, that which the entirely innervation of receives [V3] traveled branch fibers parasympathetic nerve parotid glossopharyngeal (Fig. in mandibular oral in outside its is the initially [IX], fossa join a which the 8.266).

the all [VII] above nose lacrimal in salivary branch mucus the gland glands are and the All (Fig. fibers fissure, the of carried of the innervated the in petrosal well greater by oral as glands level in as orbit, the facial parasympathetic nerve 8.266). formed branches the pterygopalatine carried parasympathetic in Preganglionic parasympathetic of with the in fibers nerve nerve the ganglion fossa enter fibers around maxillary and synapse [V2]. postganglionic pterygopalatine this of for to oral as the sensory general destined palatine target parasympathetic the join Postganglionic roof cavity, nerves, the such the nerve, their maxillary fibers branches glands. reach of

chorda larger the the the the fissure, All oral the by glands cavity, the parasympathetic branch are glands glands, carried level those the of of include the in floor sublingual the fibers small nerve and tongue, in and which submandibular facial [VII] below lower lip, and (Fig. of in in oral innervated tympani 8.266).

[V3] infratemporal nerve passes of and the in tympani the the into cavity. The it fossa chorda with the mandibular lingual joins oral branch the lingual appears surface the fibers leave aspect nerve ganglion, to parasympathetic On the to postganglionic submandibular with off preganglionic nerve hyoglossus hang lingual synapse of parasympathetic (Fig. the which in of fibers inferior the muscle, external the 8.267). glands. fibers with to ganglion target parasympathetic others while glands submandibular branches nerve the back and the onto lingual lingual directly and nerve the travel to and pass sublingual hop leave of the Postganglionic

Sympathetic cord level T1. glands spinal to the is from salivary innervation (Fig. Preganglionic cervical the the superior synapse sympathetic and fibers in to sympathetic enter ascend ganglion trunk sympathetic 8.268). to nerves the and hop adjacent blood fibers glands. onto vessels Postganglionic reach

cavity roof The the the oral palate and a palate has palate, consists hard two parts—an anterior posterior soft which of of (Fig. 8.269).

cavity the nasal separates oral cavities. The the palate hard from covered above mucosa: It a by below consists of and plate bony

covered is the by cavities. and Above, it the respiratory floor forms of mucosa nasal

cavity the of it layer a roof the mucosa of oral is bound tightly of covered forms and oral by Below, much (Fig. 8.269).

of maxillae of the the anterior the palatine form palate. hard The three-quarters processes bones The of the plates palatine posterior one-quarter. the horizontal form upper arch palate hard In cavity, the oral the borders the laterally. anteriorly alveolar and hard the soft with is continuous palate Posteriorly, the palate.

numerous transverse palatine papilla). (palatine folds and the (incisive longitudinal possesses rugae) raphe), palate ends in a hard elevation of which small oral in the (palatine a mucosa anteriorly ridge cavity The median oval papilla incisive (Fig. The the incisive maxillae immediately the incisor between overlies of formed plates 8.269) teeth. horizontal the fossa behind the

palate (Fig. The soft can oropharynx. acts close to separate oropharyngeal the to 8.269) the the valve hard elevated continues and depressed from as a from palate nasopharynx and isthmus, that help posteriorly the be:

lining soft formed pharynx by by and is The moved and that is is oral the and nasal continuous mucosa with palate and the muscles four mucosa covered cavities.

small muscular tear-shaped from The the the margin uvula. the soft posterior palate projection free of that hangs is

soft Muscles palate of the

the each palate. movement to and contribute soft the formation side muscles on of 8.22) (Table Five tensor veli levator palatini and the palatini, Two of palate into descend skull. base from of the the the veli these, the palate the palatoglossus and others, into respectively. tongue Two the palatopharyngeus, pharynx, and ascend from last musculus the The uvula. uvulae, associated is the with muscle,

are palate muscles pterygoid). is medial mandibular the the by which the vagus nerve [V3] the innervated except palatini, the All to by tensor innervated nerve for of the [X], (via veli nerve

the palatine veli aponeurosis and Tensor palatini

palatini aponeurosis muscular two more palatine tensor part, and The horizontal which part a muscle composed parts—a of forms is vertical (Fig. the veli fibrous 8.270A).

and is its pointed triangular skull the the of attached palatini and vertical apex tensor with shape part inferiorly. its veli The in thin base to is the The near along scaphoid the spine the bone. bone membranous along line oblique at process of pharyngotympanic continues pterygoid part the an of attached that fossa to medially the sphenoid the the of root sphenoid of begins tube base and laterally the

vertically The tensor the of fibers along converge pharyngeal pterygoid wall descends palatini lateral to form hamulus pterygoid process the plate (Fig. tendon where a surface medial the small and the the to veli of 8.270A).

The of to it expands does, part the origin penetrating medially buccinator fan tendon pterygoid loops around and horizontal a muscle 90° the of the as fibrous like the form the hamulus, muscle. side part the is the midline This on aponeurosis. the continuous other form to fibrous across palatine partner with its

palatine to the is aponeurosis margin. The in unattached is hard of but posteriorly free anteriorly palate, the attached where margin a ends it palate major palate the the to of the aponeurosis attach. which structural muscles This soft other expansive of the is element

more tensor other the tube. yawning firm) tenses palate of to can when moves the and pharyngotympanic its membranous the soft (makes part pharyngotympanic a of result the palate superiorly to muscles opens palatini: swallowing the as attached attachment and the The effectively, palate that work so during tube veli the

is innervated palatini the nerve tensor nerve by the veli mandibular medial to The [V3]. from pterygoid the

the palatini palatine aponeurosis and descends The the of to surface levator originates of muscle (Fig. veli skull from the upper the base 8.270B). the temporal skull, immediately it on the to bone of of roughened carotid the On part anterior petrous canal. originates area the a opening from the also originate Some fibers the tube. adjacent parts pharyngotympanic of from

pharyngotympanic and fascia of veli aponeurosis The through tube, the wall, passes medial anteroinferiorly the to levator onto palatini pharyngeal (Fig. passes palatine inserts the 8.270B). fibers on veli other midline at the the side. palatini of those interlace levator the with Its

the palatini course Unlike muscles, skull palatini palatine base aponeurosis. not the muscles pass the each tensor but the the the veli levator hamulus, directly of to surface of upper veli pterygoid around do from can elevate only isthmus the between palate the Therefore, neutral muscles position the oropharynx. they and and the that are above pharyngeal close nasopharynx the

nerve is the vagus to veli pharyngeal palatini pharyngeal [X] plexus. The through branch by the levator innervated the to a normally, “ah.” patient side be levator the can by If Clinically, say evenly each the midline. elevates is veli palate functioning the the in muscle on asking palatini tested palate functioning, abnormal the side. from the away If is side deviates not one

become originates of longitudinal of the descend the palatopharyngeus margin superior from wall over the one The aponeurosis (Fig. its muscle muscles passes pharyngeal surface of the and posterolaterally palatine and to 8.270C). by levator separated veli attached the palatini by the muscle. is palatine to It flat two aponeurosis lamellae hard to the palatine the of to more anterior two is and lateral as aponeurosis. posterior as margin these of well the attached palate The lamellae

two side, palatopharyngeus wall. on underlie palatopharyngeal arches the on The muscles, the oropharyngeal each one and oral when palatopharyngeal to through palatoglossal viewed (Fig. lie posterior The medial cavity arches anteriorly the the arches 8.271).

each is oropharyngeal tonsil the between palatoglossal and (Fig. side, wall the lateral arches palatopharyngeal the on palatine On 8.271A).

like palate help oropharyngeal pharynx the palatopharyngeal curtains—both move the The the actions during depress toward swallowing. isthmus; elevate the and palatopharyngeus midline close and muscles: the these arches

pharyngeal is by [X] The the plexus. the innervated pharyngeal through palatopharyngeus to nerve vagus the branch

inferiorly aponeurosis into passes and palatoglossus and of attaches lateral inferior The anteriorly of muscle surface surface (oral) to the tongue the the the (Fig. palatine 8.272).

mucosa from fold arches to that palate muscle the a the soft palatoglossus underlies tongue. The of These are the of palatopharyngeal lateral each arches, on one isthmus the palatoglossal the lateral arches anterior side, and (Fig. and margins oropharyngeal to define 8.271A).

palatoglossal lateral palatopharyngeal on arches the and between The oropharyngeal palatine the (Figs. is tonsil wall 8.271 and 8.272).

midline the like palatoglossal palatoglossus The the elevate move muscles back the of arches depress curtains, toward the and tongue. palate, the close actions the These isthmus. oropharyngeal help

plexus. through The pharyngeal pharyngeal the [X] nerve innervated the to palatoglossus vagus the by branch is

to directly spine of the the into the posterior of underlying nasal of and the uvula (Fig. uvulae connective from musculus hard on aponeurosis the over passes dorsal the posteriorly aspect margin insert tissue palate mucosa posterior the The originates palatine 8.272). of the palatopharyngeus to levator two attachment the veli the of palatini. It passes superior lamellae the between with other on the partner musculus the blends its uvulae the Along midline, side.

musculus and uvulae the elevates retracts The uvula. thickens part of the action and helps and levator This soft central the pharyngeal nasopharynx isthmus muscles veli the palate palatini the the close between oropharynx.

The pharyngeal innervated vagus the pharyngeal nerve musculus branch [X] plexus. the by to the through uvulae is

branch pharyngeal the the facial the of of Arteries artery. of palatine ascending palate artery, of the and the maxillary palatine branch the ascending artery, palatine branch the greater include the carotid external from maxillary, facial, ascending the arteries branches and all that artery (Fig. in The neck pharyngeal are arise 8.273).

facial artery the palatine ascends external ascending the along of of the artery pharynx. surface The the the the pharyngeal superior over and the muscle palatini medially the of fascia constrictor The palatine levator to follow levator loops palate. penetrate palatini soft pharynx the to the of muscle veli veli branch top with

the artery branch artery vessel. replace may palatine course the follows as from the ascending and branch of the facial ascending the palatine artery of the pharyngeal same The palatine

pterygopalatine the from in artery The originates palatine artery fossa. greater the maxillary and continues the small palatine gives origin canal foramen inferior the hard It it branch, a of lesser where to greater the palate palatine descends then (Fig. into palatine surface through the onto 8.274). palate it cavity palatine wall palate passes canal nasal superiorly and enter to the hard medial forward incisive greater through where the on artery then leaves the the terminates. The of the is artery the major of artery palate. palatine the The greater hard supplies gingiva. also palatal It palatine contributes the lesser The supply and passes to lesser palate. posterior the the vascular palatine of branch palatine to foramen, the just greater through foramen soft

in plexus and (Fig. ultimately palate of into the the from generally the Veins pterygoid fossa follow drain veins the arteries infratemporal pp. also see 8.275; or facial into directly veins of palatine associated veins the drain or into with plexus pharyngeal tonsil, of into the a the which vein. network 980–981),

vessels into deep (Fig. from drain Lymphatic cervical palate the nodes 8.275).

and palatine nasopalatine greater lesser by nerve nerves palate and supplied the is (Figs. the The and 8.274 8.276).

the originate maxillary from fossa nerve the [V2]. pterygopalatine in

nerves facial [VII] sympathetics derived a branch do from the join fossa, the pterygopalatine vessels) cord in ultimately (mainly the from fibers the T1 blood to nerve of spinal level. as palate) the

pterygopalatine fossa descend and palatine (Fig. greater nerves the reach lesser the canal palatine to and The palate through 8.276):

nerve the greater the gingiva turns as palatine greater supply as travels anteriorly to first palatine and The far palate through and the hard premolar. foramen

The to supply the nerve palate. lesser soft passes posteromedially palatine

into originates pterygopalatine but the also passes the nerve medially The fossa, nasal in cavity. nasopalatine the reach wall, in the to canal and incisive incisive descends nasal down medially through inferior of the the floor, the and (Fig. anteriorly the to to surface It reach fossa wall then the the reach over the cavity and anterior continues roof obliquely canal medial hard palate of 8.276).

mucosa adjacent to gingiva and nerve and supplies nasopalatine The incisors canine. the

is the the vestibule The the fissure (Fig. opening between oral the connects outside that oral lips slit-like to 8.277). altered by of and with facial and the the can lips It movements opened surrounding (mandible). expression jaw regions, the the of and by associated be muscles movements lower and shape in of closed,

(Fig. lips tissues The of entirely composed are soft 8.277B). are covered They by oral internally and by mucosa lined externally skin. lips face surfaces deep as of the the onto an and lips. Externally, mucosa covers thicker that overlies the to of transition the from oral the that there continues skin of thinner skin the margins the area is

and a lips. border where surface are the the is skin there closer to the of consequence Blood the as areas is margins covers vermilion vessels in a that thin

sandwiched two elevated upper ridges vertical external on a between surface its has The groove (the (Fig. lip skin of shallow philtrum) 8.277A). medial of philtrum embryologically The formed processes. the by are fusion ridges nasal and

On gum. of (the fold connects labial both the inner the mucosa lip surface of median frenulum) adjacent lips, to the a

The neurovascular the labial and oris enclose tissues, lips glands (Fig. orbicularis muscle, 8.277B). and vestibule. oral into The pea-shaped the glands labial small and the muscle open between tissue the mucosa are oral

of control and A shape expression size the of number facial the fissure. muscles oral of and is most a of muscle, oris orbicularis acts orifice the The sphincter. as these which important encircles the the the fissure. number other expression blend into or oris adjust contours facial of orbicularis and of tissues other A oral muscles of the lips of open the or labii labii and anguli anguli platysma zygomaticus oris, and (see superioris, oris, buccinator, major pp. minor, levator inferioris, These levator depressor depressor the include 897–899).

(see opening isthmus the the is Fig. oropharyngeal the oral The oropharynx cavity and between 8.271). of the soft oral sulcus surface (anterior that tongue the of by laterally two-thirds) It the superiorly surface from by the (posterior inferiorly the palatoglossal divides arches; terminalis tongue by palate; the pharyngeal formed: is and one-third). the

midline. the of depression the the of The aspect palatoglossal be the isthmus can toward arches palate, elevation medial posterior of of and tongue, movement the by oropharyngeal closed

palatoglossal to Medial isthmus. arches and closing of in medial the palatopharyngeal is involved also the movement the arches oropharyngeal posterior while can in breathing. the oral closing isthmus, By the cavity oropharyngeal liquid food or be held

sockets (alveoli) attached in elevated the The the arches are of two (alveolar above and below mandible maxillae to arches). teeth on bone the removed, arches the the alveolar bone and If are disappear. resorbed is teeth

The adjacent cover mucosa that and alveolar oral are gingivae of of specialized the teeth bone. surround regions (gums) the the regions

of The different basis and function teeth of types on distinguished (Fig. are morphology, the position, 8.278A).

there lower jaw. In the 32 jaw upper in adults, and 16 are teeth, 16 in the molar one teeth. two premolar, maxillary three in arches two both and incisor, are On and each side canine, mandibular

have which teeth” chisel-shaped root are the teeth one The and crown, a “cuts.” and incisor “front

The are longest cusp, crown the a with teeth, and “grasp.” canine incisors, teeth the pointed a have to are posterior single

cusps, the root on and premolar upper generally (cheek) may premolar have teeth one the palatal two and “grind.” a buccal the two), (tongue) side other next lingual crown pointed side, the on (palate) with canine or have have one tooth to the (but (bicuspids) The of first the

premolar teeth “grind.” behind crowns to and three five the have teeth, cusps, molar roots The and three with are

teeth) sets deciduous Two humans, develop teeth of in successive (“baby” teeth (Fig. teeth). 8.278B) permanent and (“adult” teeth from of and age. years gingivae the emerge six deciduous at between teeth two The months to to deciduous at into years, and six teeth age and teeth can emerge the emerge around adulthood. Permanent continue replace begin

incisor, of each the deciduous and on 20 The side two lower consist one teeth of upper molar and two teeth jaws. canine, These are permanent teeth by replaced incisor, the the of teeth and teeth. canine, premolar deciduous The and molars elongate require forward jaws erupt them. teeth permanent to molar accommodate to the posterior to the

All maxillary from supplied teeth by (Fig. either vessels that the are branch artery indirectly directly or 8.279).

from infratemporal artery, fossa. by inferior the the which lower teeth maxillary All supplied originates are in the artery alveolar the The anteriorly mandible, branches. mental opposite bone vessels first to the of into supplying and in teeth, passes posterior and the premolar divides canal the vessel more enters incisor mandibular supply branch adjacent continues while leaves teeth The and bone the the branch chin, supply to to the the foramen structures. mental in mental incisor anterior

upper superior All and are by arteries. supplied posterior teeth alveolar anterior

the maxillary fossa alveolar the through maxillary fissure. posterior pterygopalatine The and pterygomaxillary superior the it artery from the artery after enters the fossa leaves originates just artery to premolar the the the bone enters It of posterolateral maxilla, and branches, and molar canals surface supply small the on descends teeth. in

artery, alveolar from pterygopalatine superior infra-orbital artery fossa. the maxillary the from the artery which originates arises anterior in The of the inferior infra-orbital in fossa floor fissure artery pterygopalatine leaves inferior orbital groove canal orbital and the orbit. enters and through the the the The artery superior artery the in from canal. the originates The anterior alveolar infra-orbital infra-orbital teeth. and through bone supply to branches the and incisor canine passes It

side buccal or side tooth vessels the side source the are the cheek side), each palate or by is—the which the side): vestibule multiple and of palatal (lingual tongue or or supplied or (vestibular The the gingivae on depends oral facing gingiva facing

supplied lingual the gingiva artery, by the branches alveolar lower of supplied inferior lingual teeth is side the tongue. of the from the artery is branches whereas Buccal by from

the and anterior arteries. teeth branches of of alveolar by supplied the posterior gingiva superior upper is Buccal

(premolar arteries. greater gingiva and molar branches teeth) and by (incisor nasopalatine is the from supplied canine palatine teeth) Palatal and

the generally (Fig. arteries from upper teeth Veins lower the and follow 8.279).

some superior in Inferior although may pterygoid veins facial alveolar via of upper veins tributaries the mainly veins alveolar from of and drain the teeth, the vein. plexus the infratemporal into from from be the anterior the fossa, teeth drainage lower teeth

veins. of and retromandibular jugular system The ultimately the vein maxillary vein the plexus into into drains and mainly pterygoid cavernous connect small In pass pass the through base communicating emissary cranial skull vessels the of superiorly, plexus, addition, foramina small the with to the the cavity. in in from and sinus in Infection teeth can veins. cavity these cranial through small originating the into the track emissary

with pass vessels also drainage through can Venous teeth the connect vein. be foramen facial the the from via mental to that

the the plexus follow the Veins facial gingivae veins. arteries or into and ultimately into pterygoid from the vein drain also of

Lymphatic and and drain the gingivae cervical vessels into deep from nodes teeth submental, submandibular, mainly (Fig. 8.280).

of innervate the teeth gingivae [V] are branches that and (Figs. nerve All nerves the trigeminal and 8.282). 8.281

lower innervated the mandibular fossa all are in the which originates inferior nerve by from alveolar (Figs. nerve, [V3] The branches from infratemporal the teeth 8.282). and 8.281 mandibular the travel accompanying of through enter alveolar the ramus foramen medial in the on of The vessels nerve the the and mandibular mandible the anteriorly its inferior canal. and surface bone directly teeth Branches the back from the nerve. inferior alveolar originate to

premolar nerve the branches: to alveolar and inferior mental first the Adjacent divides incisive into tooth,

The vestibular the incisor together with gingiva. incisive and innervates associated branch (buccal) teeth, the first premolar, the canine, the

innervates and lower through foramen The mandible and the nerve mental exits mental the the lip. chin

middle, Anterior, superior and posterior

the nerves, nerve [V2] the or All maxillary which anterior, (Figs. indirectly superior and by upper innervated from alveolar posterior teeth originate middle, directly are and 8.282). 8.281

descends maxillary posterolateral fissure, exits fossa, surface superior posterior in from through the originates maxilla. and directly pterygopalatine nerve of the fossa on pterygomaxillary the the nerve pterygopalatine [V2] the alveolar The the a last through foramen the sinus. fissure passes the small the midway tooth, approximately and between enters maxillary and through the bone of the It wall in maxilla pterygomaxillary molar the and the through The innervates then by nerves. anterior superior nerve molar alveolar teeth plexus alveolar the middle, formed posterior, alveolar posterior superior the

anterior infra-orbital and in the of the [V2] nerve from originate The orbit: middle superior of maxillary alveolar floor the branch the nerves

sinus, the in from passes wall teeth maxillary The and infra-orbital nerve bone through nerve groove, arises the superior the the infra-orbital lateral premolar plexus. the innervates middle in the via superior alveolar alveolar of the

anterior sinus, teeth. maxillary originates superior the maxilla passes the canine supplies infra-orbital alveolar wall plexus, and the of in nerve alveolar The in through nerve superior the via the infra-orbital from incisor anterior the the canal, and

Innervation gingivae of

nerves the Like nerve that [V] the the by trigeminal from are gingivae ultimately originate (Fig. innervated teeth, 8.282):

maxillary upper the innervated with by is from associated nerve derived teeth branches [V2]. Gingiva the

of teeth associated Gingiva the nerve mandibular branches innervated is the with lower by [V3].

The adjacent alveolar the of superior gingiva by teeth also is anterior, side the and buccal innervated nerves, upper middle, the on teeth. the which innervate the (lingual) side greater palatal the palatine same the of the Gingiva is innervated on by teeth nasopalatine nerves: and

associated nasopalatine incisor canine with gingiva nerve and innervates The teeth. the

supplies gingiva the greater nerve The remaining palatine with teeth. associated

gingiva alveolar by side mandibular the nerve. incisor, teeth innervated branch inferior of the with the of is premolar and the (buccal) The mental associated canine, is mandibular buccal the teeth infratemporal which innervated mandibular from buccal the Gingiva molar on originates in the nerve the side fossa of nerve, by [V3]. the the innervated of Gingiva lingual by nerve. surface lingual to the all is teeth adjacent lower

for used the locating and locating for landmarks are Skeletal and in airway. neck head muscles, of blood and glands, vessels, to major points the access

by is upper and function the cranial out neck. nerves and carried head of assessing Neurological examination the cervical in

by surface speech. status about evaluating cavity, of and the be oral health general information features, the can eye the characteristics In and of often addition, body obtained the

head position Anatomical of the

head the orbits same is of The inferior anatomical the margins are the superior (Frankfort and margins plane bony horizontal plane). position meatuses the the when external the acoustic in of in

to other external head mandible, orbit, the that the In zygomatic bone, the of occipital features acoustic and addition zygomatic margin include (Fig. bony the the of mastoid are meatus process, external arch, and protuberance palpable 8.283).

the anterior of the inferior of to end is to behind head external ear the zygomatic arch. posterior and and The mandible the found is the into and back as closing the of respectively. palpating and mandibular fossa, and the by then forward moves It tubercle mandible best opening head the the articular onto jaw it

prominence of anterior the opening inferior from margin joint The zygomatic the forward forms of to lateral temporomandibular the bone, the orbit. a the the bony zygomatic of region extends arch which to

to meatus. inferior posterior the a process is protuberance large mastoid The aspect is bony of palpable external the that acoustic easily The the the attaches of to muscle mastoid process. sternocleidomastoid superior end

of skull curves the forward. posteriorly the The in where occipital palpable the external midline contour is protuberance sharply This the where the the head. back superficially of landmark neck joins the point marks

clinically vertex. is of feature head useful Another the the on is position of cranial to This scalp. where the the approximate scalp of from anatomical in innervation point the highest is point the cervical the the marks there head transition and a innervated by face [V]. Anterior vertex, nerve scalp the the to the are trigeminal and the Posterior vertex, innervated cervical branches is to spinal by from scalp the nerves.

CIII/CIV vertebral levels at structures the and CVI Visualizing

with anatomical Two levels neck (Fig. features vertebral are the important associated in 8.284).

into disc artery external bifurcation and intervertebral of carotid vertebrae internal is same common carotid in as the horizontal the the The and the arteries. CIV between the CIII plane level the cartilage. margin upper of thyroid approximately This at the is

to marks to from trachea. transition level the pharynx larynx CVI and Vertebral esophagus vertebral and The the at ends trachea CVI of margin approximately the esophagus is level marks superior of the inferior of cricoid cartilage. the therefore the and level

the to and posterior anterior neck triangles the How of outline

muscular posterior readily The the are triangles the each of visible easily anterior on using bony neck established landmarks boundaries and (Fig. and of side 8.285).

the base neck, the The margin and of posterior anterior mandible, the each sternocleidomastoid is margin border triangle anterior the anterior is inferior midline of the of is of the the the margin muscle. each triangle of anterior the The at points inferiorly apex notch. is suprasternal and

triangles tract, and the with and thorax airway associated and head. The such between the nerves are digestive pass vessels structures as and anterior that They are associated the glands. with parathyroid and thyroid also

base middle posterior of The of one-third clavicle. triangle the is each the medial anterior the margin the border muscle, posterior the sternocleidomastoid is of margin lateral the the is border of The trapezius muscle. and apex the immediately to and posteroinferior process. mastoid is The points superiorly

posterior and with pass triangles associated out into limbs. The vessels are that upper and nerves of the

to cricothyroid How locate the ligament

in median structure neck An is important to (Fig. the ligament locate cricothyroid the the the 8.286) access of to the penetration when above airway vocal of airway membrane is level folds provide emergency can the upper this lower situations because blocked. artificial in

can found landmarks. ligament easily of the palpable The be as features using larynx

superior the over feel thyroid the angle. laryngeal cartilage thyroid move surface prominence margin notch in and of thyroid midline, Using and a finger inferiorly first the gently down of the anterior finger then to laryngeal in the the structures find the the the hard. crosses of the the midline, soft which the finger before onto the thyroid finger inferior depression felt a margin the cricoid cartilage slides is of the arch in is cartilage, As

The thyroid lower cartilage soft the the median cricothyroid position the the ligament. of depression of of is arch the cricoid and the margin between

just position larynx. airway ligament the the cricothyroid the through folds enters tube of the the median inferior passed to A vocal of

between and cross vessels, respectively. that and skin the lobe thyroid the the midline gland include Structures in may ligament cricothyroid the small or pyramidal occur of the median

upper trachea cartilage, cricoid of the of that to the be palpated crosses cartilage Inferior the can anteriorly. above level gland the sometimes the larynx of the the thyroid isthmus

cartilage similar in men more however, women. angle because in cricothyroid finding for used the prominent The men a men, structures in in acute at meet and are ligament laminae the women; thyroid landmarks the the than of more are

thyroid find the How to gland

on and the of of The the lower the thyroid airway and thyroid gland in line triangles the position digestive the left side tract the the in of to neck lobes right (Fig. inferior cartilage either are oblique anterior of 8.287). the the fact, gland of upward neck. lines, to the lie anterior to lobes muscles, in from the superiorly lobes and which thyroid In oblique the sternothyroid moving prevent attach the

arch cartilage can then lobes larynx. be the cricoid by thyroid of posterolateral most prominence the and gland and the of the easily palpated to finding thyroid feeling The

to in and arch of trachea the isthmus the gland of palpated anterior the inferior the thyroid upper can midline to crosses end of cricoid. be easily the the The

palpating isthmus in The tracheal the makes the neck. difficult of cartilages gland the the of presence thyroid to the airway the Also, of the anteriorly difficult the found the it and trachea. crossing and in the vessels artificially enter makes the isthmus midline associated through presence thyroid of gland procedure, This a tracheostomy, surgical a procedure. is

of the the middle Estimating position

meningeal artery The (Fig. middle the artery maxillary the a is in 8.288) of infratemporal branch fossa. cavity. the dura skull spinosum foramen It the the through is cranial the and mater enters within lining

and head extradural not if treated. can lateral leading death ruptured, artery eventual middle to the blows the meningeal to be In hemorrhage

the of the often most vessel branch middle is the meningeal The part artery of torn. anterior head, the external superior This of region of upper in part approximately pterion the the branch the orbit the temple the region. between ear midway in the is and of margin together. enclosing of skull come area the circular bones pterion sphenoid, and is parietal, where a temporal the region frontal, the small The

outer skull of the meningeal layer tear fracture artery head to Lateral dura and in the is table bone the can the cranium. the middle of mater of the to that fused blows internal progressively the out a extradural bone, under and larger the leaks of dura from forming Blood separates pulsatile vessel gradually hematoma. arterial the pressure

features the Major face of

The oral and orbit, the the nasal the features those openings of are face (Fig. major cavity the the to of anterior cavities, related 8.289).

and and lower closed. be fissures eyelids between opened palpebral upper are the and The can and opened also fissure The gap and lower lips the and be closed. upper the between is oral can

palpebral muscles are respectively. orbicularis of oris muscles, sphincter and the orbicularis The oral fissures and oculi the innervated the These [VII]. by are muscles nerve facial

open. and apertures anterior nasal cavities the nares The are continuously of the are

groove upper the midline nose and the the lip external between is the The in philtrum. vertical

of innervation trigeminal carried face Sensory the is nerve by the [V]. on the The ophthalmic [V1]), represented anterior are anterior the can [V2]), mandibular nerve the divisions (the over forehead nerve (the by tested nerve be of body cheek mandible three and skin face maxillary the (the of and this nerve the touching [V3]).

and apparatus lacrimal The eye

and the include Major features iris, pupil of the eye cornea, sclera, (Fig. 8.290). the covering The sclera and external region is which cornea and the iris continuous of of pupil is visible. circular clear through are eye the the with the is white. transparent is sclera not normally The and

fissure. eyelids the upper each palpebral them The and lower enclose between eye of each The of palpebral together side eyelids on medial the eye. either at commissures lateral and come

medial structure of the palpebral fissure is the a side tissue small triangular lateral medial the palpebral (the commissure lacrimal to and At lake). soft

is of medial is elevated sclera lateral lacrimal overlying the lacrimal the caruncle, the fold. the margin side lacrimal on tissue lake of and the the mound The

and ducts the lacrimal of consists cavity. the them of lacrimal gland channels the that nasal system into and tears The collects apparatus the and drain the transparency Tears maintain cornea. the of hydrate and

roof the is in orbital orbit a in and is gland lacrimal the with just depression The of posterior the margin. to lateral eyelid upper the small associated ducts conjunctival of cornea. eyelid open the thin of small margin which the surface the the into of sac, upper is multiple the gland deep the gap between and The the

in lower are lacrimal lake. puncta), eyelids one each blinking medially near on swept by the (lacrimal upper are and the openings the collected small and of over Tears eye

lacrimal tissue is on of lacrimal small mound the and (a canal is raised canaliculus) small of with that (lacrimal a punctum the a Each connects papilla), opening sac.

sac the of on medial orbit. fossa the is lacrimal in the side lacrimal The cavity. the From duct into nasal lacrimal sac, the the tears nasolacrimal via drain

ear external (Fig. The of auricle acoustic the the and consists external meatus. 8.291) skin. by by is and cartilage The supported covered is auricle the is external auricle. near acoustic of anterior meatus the margin The

a eminences, folds. and auricle of characterized is depressions, The by number which is auricle margin ends outer helix, as the folded the The lobule. the of inferiorly

the antihelix) smaller (the depression the scaphoid by helix it (the separated fold from and A a of parallels fossa). contour is

tragus the The anteroinferior meatus. a external small eminence to is acoustic the and antihelix Opposite is another the of eminence (the end the at tragus antitragus). The the between and tragus incisure. antitragus depression the is intertragic

deepest The the into bracketed meatus. the antihelix depression acoustic and by (the is concha) leads external Other depressions conchae. cymba fossa the and triangular the include

four head can be pulses felt at and locations neck (Fig. Arterial in the 8.292).

triangle or be the common artery can neck. pulse—the the carotid of Carotid external palpated anterior in the of pulses This one body. strongest the is in bone of margin artery obtained The artery the can the the either pharynx of between the common midway the carotid above. superior by greater the lateral carotid immediately horn posterolateral thyroid be cartilage to palpating pulse the larynx hyoid and below or external the to

of anterior muscle. inferior immediately Facial be adjacent palpated margin the pulse—the the crosses facial the it of artery border the mandible can masseter as to

pulse—the artery temporal posterosuperior anterior to temporomandibular and immediately the position the of palpated to superficial the Temporal be ear joint. can

be superficial fascia process frontal lateral passes temporal the scalp. anterolateral temporal into of as the regions bone it posterior anterior zygomatic pulse—the and of Temporal palpated to the the can the artery branch to of pulsations seen the In superficial the temporal some of through can individuals be artery skin.

Fig. the and 8.1 head neck. compartments of Major

Fig. head Areas 8.2 to of the another. from one transition compartment of

fossaMaxillary processMandibular ofpterygoid plate nerve mandible Infratemporal [V2]Ramus fossaLateral nerve [V3]Pterygopalatine of

Fig. face. of the Muscles 8.3

Fig. of the neck. Boundaries 8.4

processSuperior of lineAcromionManubrium Vertebra CVIIMandibleMastoid nuchal sternumClavicle

Fig. Major compartments the of neck. 8.5

Fig. Specialized neck. the structures 8.6 of A. Conceptual view. view. B. Anatomical

Fig. 8.7 Skull. A. Bones.

Sutures. B. and suture. lambdoid C. Fontanelles

Fig. 8.8 vertebrae. Cervical A. Typical features. CI view). Atlas—vertebra (superior B. C. (anterior CII Axis—vertebra view). Atlas and (anterolateral D. axis view). (posterior view). joint E. Atlanto-occipital

processDensAnterior cruciform bandof longitudinal archBodyAtlas facetfor facetBodyTransverse boneApical articular bandof condyleOccipital (CII)Articular surface Foramen tuberclePosterior massSuperior ligament)Posteriorlongitudinalligament densLateral of membrane facetfor longitudinal partof ligamentTransverseligament tubercleArchSuperior posterior ligamentsETectorial longitudinal occipital ligamentInferior archArticular (CI)Axis articular processSpinous (upper ligamentof cruciform densSuperior transversariumAnterior densABCDForamenmagnumOccipital condyle)Posterior (for atlasAlar

Fig. 8.9 Hyoid. A. Bone. B. Attachments.

constrictor constrictor of pharyngeal muscleInferior muscle)Thyrohyoid hyoid ligamentMiddle of membraneStylohyoid muscleEpiglottis mouth ABLesser (mylohyoid boneFloor pharyngeal hornBody hornGreater

Fig. palate. Soft 8.10 A. Position. B. Muscles.

Fig. and thoracic 8.11 aperture axillary inlets. Superior

Fig. CV/CVI. levels—CIII/CIV and 8.12 Important vertebral

Fig. neck. associated structures Larynx and 8.13 the in

Fig. parasympathetic nerves innervation. 8.14 Cranial and

Fig. Cervical nerves. 8.15 A. Structure. B. Dermatomes.

T1)Cervical (C2 nervesAnsa Phrenic C4)External [V3]Anterior cervicalis (C2 plexus(C1 to to to musclesAC3C4C2C2C3C4Ophthalmic tostrap C4)Cutaneous nerve ClavicleAcromionPosterior occipital C4) nerve [V]Maxillary rami [V2]Mandibular nerve nerveBrachial plexus(C5 nerve to [V1]Trigeminal protuberanceB rami

Fig. Larynx, soft oropharyngeal epiglottis, isthmus. 8.16 and palate, A. Overall design.

B. breathing. Normal oral with cavity. or liquid C. the food in Breathing D. Swallowing. E. a In child. newborn

of inletClavicleSuperior and thoracic inletLarynx with isthmusOral cavityEarsChoanaeNasopharynxCVI TIOropharynxLaryngopharynxLaryngeal Soft laryngeal palate(opens other larynx)Epiglottis(opens inlet)Oropharyngeal closesoropharyngeal folds(together sternumTracheaVocal cavityNasal cavitiesOrbitsARib soft and aperture(thoracic and of closes tissuestructures inlet)Manubrium IVertebra open closecavity vertebral levelPharynxEsophagusScapulaAxillary isthmus)Cranial

forwardresulting Laryngeal elevated,palate depressedOropharyngealisthmus closedby cavityEEsophagusSoft overlaryngeal andhyoid in palateSoft closedLarynx between oftongue neutral of openingthe soft and parts openBack nasal palatein inletOropharyngealisthmus inletand pharynx laryngealcavity positionMilk openOpening pulledup pathwayTracheaNasal andoral palateLaryngealinletBCD esophagusEpiglottisclosed

Fig. and triangles of posterior Anterior neck. 8.17

Fig. Anterior view skull. the 8.18 of

of frontal process spine notch(foramen)Zygomatic foramenMental part lineMandibleMental foramenInferior archSupra-orbital mandibleAnterior tubercleMental protuberanceAngle apertureAlveolar nasal of mandibleZygomatic of boneSuperciliary mandibleAlveolar mandibleBody (of maxilla)Infra-orbital (of boneFrontal boneFrontal of maxilla)NasionNasal GlabellaNasal processRamus nasal process(of process bone)Zygomatic conchaMaxillaOblique crestPiriform

Fig. the 8.19 skull. of view Lateral

sutureGreater ofzygomatic mandible)Condylar sutureCoronal part sutureFrontal temporal (of of zygomatic Ramus process part bone)Alveolar mandibleTemporal of processAngleZygomatic processTympanic temporal boneOccipitomastoidsutureOccipital of boneLacrimal part Sphenoparietal bone)Nasal temporal bone)Mastoid boneAsterionLambdoidsutureParietomastoidsutureParietal deep wing(of surface process processMastoid bonePterionSphenosquamous foramenBody bone)Coronoid bone) (of sphenoid mandibleStyloid boneMaxillaMental bone)ZygomaticofacialforamenZygomatic boneZygomaticotemporalforamen(on sutureSquamous process temporal part(of (of boneSquamous (of

Fig. view Posterior skull. 8.20 the of

Fig. skull. 8.21 of the view Superior

Fig. 8.22 Calvaria.

Fig. skull. the of view 8.23 Inferior

part pterygoidprocessVomerBody archPosterior nuchal boneAlveolar sphenoidArticular palate foramenHamulusLesser canalMastoid of (maxilla)Hard occipital bone)Posterior magnumPharyngeal (of processMastoid spinosumPetrous tubercleHypoglossal lineOccipital canalInferior oftemporal auditory pterygoid (choana)Pyramidal boneStyloid lacerumGroove plate for nuchal wing aperture palatine boneForamen plate foramenJugular canalPterygoid of of palatine nasal pterygoidprocessMedial Incisive foramenCarotid part (palatine process sphenoid notchBasilar of processStylomastoid foramenLateral palatine occipital part fossaHard occipital spine oftemporal ovaleForamen processScaphoid bone)Greater fossaPterygoid nasal tubercleMandibular fossaForamen boneSquamous lineExternal of protuberanceSuperior crestForamen of fossaGreater palate condyleExternal tubeOpening

Fig. Roof of cranial cavity. the 8.24

Frontal artery middle crestGroove arteryCoronal for for for boneFrontal anterior sutureLambdoid sutureGroove branch boneGrooves of sutureOccipital meningeal boneLambdaParietal foveolaeSagittal sinusBregmaGranular middlemeningeal superiorsagittal

Fig. cranial 8.25 fossa. Anterior

of (sphenoid)Frontal of ethmoid sphenoid)Anterior wing (of plateBody (of crestOrbital plate bone)Lesser part cecumForamina clinoid bone)Crista galliCribriform cribriform process frontal Foramen (of

Fig. Middle cranial fossa. 8.26

fossaPosterior greater arteryForamen spinosumForamen eminenceTrigeminal nerveArcuate canalSuperior processPrechiasmatic for canal clinoid hiatus for (of rotundumGroove carotid tympaniDorsum clinoid lacerumTegmen of petrosal wing Optic sphenoid)Foramen and lesser for impressionOpening sellaeHypophyseal ovaleForamen hiatus nerveGroove and middlemeningeal sulcusTuberculum processGroove petrosal sellaeMiddle fissureGreater orbital

Fig. Posterior 8.27 cranial fossa.

meatusJugular border of inferior sinusInternal Superior canalForamen for part magnumClivusJugular occipital petrosal transverse for boneInternal temporal tubercleGroove sinusGroove sigmoid foramenHypoglossal crestInternal for acoustic of sinusGroove petrous protuberance occipital

Fig. 8.28 and foramina which the enter through cavity. major and structures fissures of leave cranial Summary A. cavity. Floor of cranial

which communicates. or each Also the between regions are foramen indicated fissure B. of cranium. aspect Inferior

Vertebral nerve)• cranial Roots cord cord Abducent acoustic veinABForamen life)Jugular from canal:(middle nerve• [XI] of [X] cranial pass [XII] [VIII] arteryHypoglossal Facial of nerve spinosum:(middle vein foramen)• cavity nerveCribriform [V] [V2] [III] division cavity foramen nerve• Internal magnum:• fossa/neck)• [V1] [X] Middle fossa/neck)• fossa/orbit)• rotundum:(middle [V] Vagus Superior then neckvia canal:• fossa)• accessory Glossopharyngeal the arteries jugular foramen:• [VI] jugular nerve• spinal of foramen:(posterior Labyrnthine nerve• canal:(posterior ovale:(middle Facial Foramen cranial fossa/infratemporal fissure:(middle spinal Accessory Ophthalmic [II] cartilage arteryHypoglossal cranial [IX] nerve• meningeal of carotid Hypoglossal cord• spinosum:• nerves [IX] ophthalmic and nerve• Optic (trigeminal [V] arterySuperior fossa/pterygopalatine division jugular plate: pass region from nerve cranial magnum nerve• cranial Vertebral nerve• nerveCarotid Ophthalmic [V] fossa/neck)• the foramen:• Internal artery region foramen cranial of [VII] Spinal through Mandibular in cranial nerve arteryCarotid veinForamen Glossopharyngeal [V3] the cranial the foramenForamen upper Foramen stylomastoid cranial the fossa/ear, and then nerve• cranial the division through leave nerveInternal fossa/infratemporal meningeal nerve• cranial [XI] lacerum(filled fossa/orbit)• veinForamen through Internal the Vestibulocochlear into jugular (trigeminal division accessory canal:• nerve)Jugular canal:(middle [XI] Olfactory fossa)• magnum nerve• [XII] nerve)Foramen Internal upper Spinal the leave [VII] Trochlear magnum:(posterior nerve)Foramen fossa/neck)• [IV] foramen (trigeminal Maxillary orbital of cavity of cranial [V3] cord• through cavity)• cranial Middle ovale:• Vagus into [I] (trigeminal Hypoglossal [XI] arteries arteryStylomastoid cavity fossa)• carotid Accessory fossa/nasal meatus:(posterior (anterior and Oculomotor Optic cranial of Roots with Mandibular and

Fig. skull a position). radiograph (patient seen Skull fracture on in 8.29 supine

Fig. Ultrasound 8.30 scans. A. bifurcation. Normal carotid B. carotid artery stenosis. Internal

Fig. meninges. Cranial 8.31 A. Superior coronal view. Continuity B. with spinal the meninges.

materSpinal materInner dura layer cerebri)SkullDura extradural spaceVertebra materSkullPeriosteumSpinal of periosteal materArachnoid materForamen dura materSubarachnoid layer CI (falx magnumPeriosteal structure(superior spaceABMeningeal partition meningeal of materDural materPia venous of layer dura layer sagittal sinus)Outer Intracranial dura dura of

Fig. partitions. 8.32 Dural A. Diagram. B. Dissection.

Fig. Dural 8.33 supply. arterial

branch(from arteries(from artery)Meningeal meningeal arteryMaxillary arteryAnterior artery)Meningeal carotid artery(from occipital arteryAscending arteryExternal pharyngeal ascendingpharyngeal of branch(from branch(from pterionMeningeal arteryOccipital meningeal arteryPosition meningeal artery)Middlemeningeal artery)Posterior ascendingpharyngeal Middle ethmoidal arteries) vertebral

Fig. innervation. 8.34 Dural

of nerve division Ophthalmic division trigeminal [V3]Cervical nerve trigeminal nerve [V2]Mandibular nerve trigeminal of nerve[V1]Ophthalmic cerebelli)Maxillary division divisionof oftrigeminal [V1](tentorium [V1](falx cerebri) of nervesOphthalmic trigeminal division

Fig. 8.35 the of Arrangement spaces. and meninges

Fig. the of view brain. Lateral 8.36

Fig. of the brain. 8.37 section Sagittal

Fig. brain. the to 8.38 supply Arterial A. Diagram. B. showing arteries. angiogram normal resonance vertebral and Magnetic carotid

vessels. Enhanced CT carotid scan of C.

Fig. the Arteries 8.39 brain. on the of base

Fig. evaluate to a used imaging modalities Different 8.40 stroke (arrows). A. scan. CT T2weighted Diffusion-weighted image B. (DWI). C. CT. Apparent D. diffusion (ADC). coefficient image

Fig. tip aneurysm. Basilar 8.41 scan. A. Three-dimensional CT cranial cutaway of aneurysm. Magnified view B.

Fig. communicating Anterior aneurysm. 8.42 A. Left carotid angiogram. B. angiogram Left carotid after embolization.

Fig. sinuses. 8.43 venous Dural

Fig. dural and venous Veins, sinuses. 8.44 meninges,

sinusRight sinusSuperior cerebral Sigmoid of sagittal transverse veinConfluence petrosal petrosal plexus sinusSigmoid petrosal of veinPterygoid sinusSuperior sinusesStraight sinusInferior sinus sinusBasilar sinusSphenoparietal sagittal sinusCavernous sinusOphthalmic sinusGreat veinsSuperior sinusInferior sinusIntercavernous

Fig. 8.45 sinuses. Cavernous

nerve of sellae nerve nerve division glandInternal materAbducent [III]Diaphragma trigeminal nerve [V1]Trochlear of [IV]Oculomotor division (venous) trigeminal sinusesSphenoidal sinusesOphthalmic arteryDura carotid [V2]Cavernous [VI]Maxillary Pituitary (paranasal) nerve

Fig. layer to cavernous of right of dura meningeal removed Lateral show with view sinus contents. 8.46

pituitary nerve edge clinoid nerve dura nerve nerve ganglionMandibular [VI]Abducent [III]Infundibulum nerve [III]Oculomotor [V1]Trigeminal [IV]Trigeminal nerve nerve of [III]Trochlea materMaxillary gland)Anterior arteryOptic [IV]Abducent [VI]Oculomotor nerve (stalk [V3]Internal [V2]Ophthalmic Trochlea nerve processPosterior nerve [V] processTentorium clinoid carotid cerebelliCut of nerve

Fig. 8.47 meninges. and Scalp

layer.• majornerves bundleV1V2Connected this In togetheras into carotidarteryDiploic structural boneresults the easily layer (danger the layerArachnoidSubarachnoid hematoma. Infection resulting and (blood tissue:contains extradural separation scalping spread into sinusCavernous forward spread tissue the of infection scalp layer a “black cavityConnective artery in trauma inner connective hemorrhage area)• the in can can spacePiaEmissary occurs.• fracture in meningeal spread by this fromthe in of table Blunt can in arteryInternal unitSkinAponeurosisPeriosteum1234BoneOutertableInnertableDiploëAnterior tractsDuraPeriostial vesselsof the eyes”).Rupture of injuries, middle scalpFractureLoose (branches) which result in sagittal can is this Neurovascular cerebral vein: the layerMeningeal veinSuperior face, cranial sinusOptic subarachnoid where aneurysms sinus pressure, bone.Aneurysm• the from crosses dura of the and it hemorrhage blood dura space of cerebral can enter venous to to cerebral result vein hematoma. arterial Ruptured subdural into vessels Under CSF.Tear the progressively directly circle separates in cranial the periosteal dura from The a layer. which remains that to tearseparates of meningeal thin attached layer the dura. the limiting part derived is membrane a result, an inner meningeal covered As from of thehematoma by hematomaVIIVIII1234 ExtraduralhematomaSubdural

Fig. Extradural 8.48 hematoma. Axial of CT brain. scan

Shift hematoma cerebriExtradural the of falx

Fig. subdural 8.49 Chronic (low-density) hematoma. Axial of brain. scan CT

Fig. 8.50 hemorrhage. Subarachnoid CT Axial scan brain. of

Fig. enhancing tuberculosis left MRI lobe temporal the lesions brain shows cerebral in and of peduncle. peripherally the 8.51

Fig. Chiari magnum, to of cerebellar reveals 8.52 tonsils giving the the herniation I the the MRI with foramen malformation cone rise an shape. of a through brain incidental

Fig. cranial 8.53 Cranial nerves exiting the cavity.

Fig. of brain. on Cranial base nerves the 8.54 the

Fig. Facial 8.56 muscles.

Fig. 8.57 Orbital of group muscles. facial

Fig. of group 8.58 muscles. Nasal facial

Fig. group of 8.59 facial muscles. Oral

Fig. Buccinator muscle. 8.60

Fig. 8.61 muscles. Auricular

Fig. Parotid 8.62 gland. Lateral A. view. B. section. Cross

Fig. parotid 8.63 gland. in Tumor CT Axial scan.

Fig. Trigeminal [V] 8.64 the nerve leaving skull.

Fig. 8.65 distribution Cutaneous trigeminal the nerve [V]. of

nerveZygomaticofacial C2)Supratrochlear auricular(from occipitaland Third nerveZygomaticotemporalnervesSupra-orbital ramusof C2 occipital cervical cervical(from nerveTransverse of nerve [V1]Maxillary and plexus)Great [V2]Mandibular nerve occipital(from nerveMental ramus great nerveInfra-orbital C3)Lesser of anterior posteriorramus C3)Lesser and anterior nerveOphthalmic nerveAuriculotemporalnerveGreater nerveBuccal posterior occipital(from nerve auricular of C2 [V3]External C3)Transverse ramus nasalnerveInfratrochlear cervical nerve(from

Fig. 8.66 [VII] the face. on nerve Facial branches. A. Terminal B. before gland. the entering Branches parotid

Fig. of Vasculature the 8.67 face. A. Lateral view. B. artery. Branches of maxillary the

Fig. 8.68 venous connections. Intracranial

Fig. drainage 8.69 of the face. Lymphatic

Fig. 8.70 SCALP.

Fig. of scalp. Layers 8.71 the

Fig. Occipitofrontalis 8.72 muscle. A. Frontal belly. B. belly. Occipital

Fig. 8.73 Innervation the of scalp.

Fig. scalp. Vasculature of the 8.74

Fig. drainage of scalp. Lymphatic the 8.75

Fig. of the orbit. Bones 8.76

boneMaxillaInferior canalFrontal Optic fissureLesser foraminaEthmoid boneEthmoidal wing sphenoid of boneLacrimalgrooveLacrimal sphenoidSuperior bonePalatine of orbital wing boneGreater orbital fissureZygomatic

Fig. Eyelids. 8.77

muscleOrbicularis glandof levator glandOrbital muscle)Tendon tarsal PeriosteumLevator oculimuscle septumSuperior palpebrae fornixConjunctivaTarsusSebaceous muscle(smooth conjunctival muscleSuperior eyelashTarsal palpebraesuperioris superioris of

Fig. Orbicularis muscle. 8.78 oculi

Fig. septum. Orbital 8.79

palpebrae levator of PeriosteumOrbital septumOrbital superioris septumPeriosteumTendon muscle

Fig. Tarsal plates. 8.80

palpebral crestMedial tarsusAnterior palpebral ligamentInferior ligamentOrbital septumLateral superioris of levatorpalpebrae lacrimal septum tarsusOrbital muscleSuperior Tendon

Fig. of 8.81 the eyelids. Vasculature

Fig. the Innervation eyelids. 8.82 of

Fig. Lacrimal anterior 8.83 view. gland,

palpebrae muscle sacNasolacrimal of levator superioris ductLacrimalcanaliculiLacrimal glandTendon MedialPunctaLacrimal

Fig. Lacrimal and gland 8.84 palpebrae levator superioris.

nervePalpebral septum superiorisOrbital oflacrimal vessels lacrimal part oflevator of glandTendon part Orbital glandLacrimal palpebrae and

Fig. sac. 8.85 The lacrimal

Fig. sac. lacrimal 8.86 Position of

Posterior lacrimal muscleOrbital part crestLacrimal of sacAnterior orbicularis oculi lacrimal palpebral Medial crestPeriosteumAnteriorPosteriorLateral ligamentLacrimal septum

Fig. 8.87 lacrimal Innervation the gland. of

canalGreater preganglionic postganglionic fibersParasympathetic petrosal [V2]Pterygoid zygomaticotemporal nerve glandForamen Lacrimal nerveLacrimal petrosal nerveNerve nervePterygopalatine nerveZygomatic fibersSympathetic rotundumMaxillary arteryBranch fibersParasympathetic nerveDeep ganglionSensory fibersZygomaticotemporal plexusInternal of postganglionic carotid canalSympathetic nerveZygomaticofacial ofpterygoid nerve

Fig. orbit. into 8.88 Openings bony the

canalInferior Optic fissure canalFrontal of boneGreater orbital wing sphenoid bonePalatine boneMaxillaInfra-orbital sphenoidSuperior of grooveZygomatic foraminaEthmoid boneEthmoidal boneLacrimal Nasolacrimal orbital fissureLesser wing

Fig. Optic superior fissure. canal orbital and 8.89

orbital nerveOptic nerve [IV]Superior nerve ophthalmic branch ophthalmic nerve orbital oculomotor canalInferior [III]Abducent branch the branch fissureInferior ophthalmic fissureLateralMedial ophthalmic of Lacrimal nerve [III]Superior of veinSuperior nerve [V1]Nasociliary [V1]Frontal [V1]Optic branch [VI]Trochlear nerve the of branch oculomotor arteryInferior of of ophthalmic nerve veinOphthalmic

Fig. Periorbita. 8.90 A. view. Lateral B. Common ring. tendinous

Fig. 8.91 of the eyeball. sheath Fascial

Fig. ligaments. 8.92 Check view. A. Anterior B. Superior view.

rectus muscleInferior rectus of medial of rectus sacAB muscleLateral rectusmuscleCheck sheathFascial rectus oblique lateral ligament ligamentCheck muscleMedial check sheathPeriosteumPeriorbitaLacrimal check ligamentSuspensory muscleLateral rectus ligamentSuspensory muscleMedial rectus muscleLateral ligament Medial ligamentSuspensoryligamentFascial muscleInferior

Fig. eyeball. 8.93 Movements the of

Fig. 8.94 of the Axes eyeball and orbit.

of of eyeballAxis orbitMedial Axis

Fig. of 8.95 eyeball. Muscles the A. Superior view. B. Lateral view. resonance eye. image C. Coronal magnetic the through

Fig. muscles of the of 8.96 Origins eyeball, coronal view.

nerveNasociliary superiorisInferior nerveFrontal obliqueLevator nerve oculomotor orbital nerveLateral division orbital nerveOptic rectusInferior veinOphthalmic ophthalmic nerve oculomotor [III]Superior arteryInferior nerve division of Superior nerve [III]Abducent rectusSuperior fissureLacrimal rectusSuperior [IV]LateralMedial palpebrae of fissureInferior [VI]Trochlear rectusMedial

Fig. eyeball. of of Actions the muscles 8.97 A. muscles individual action). of (anatomical Action B. Movement muscle specific testing). testing of when eye (clinical

laterally testingmuscleSuperior testedDirection laterally mediallyLook when to rectusInferior and obliqueLook rectusLateral laterally medially Look rectusMedial upwardLook AbductionAdductionElevationDepressionInferiorobliqueSuperiorobliqueSuperiorrectusInferiorrectusLateralrectusMedialrectusMuscle medially and upwardLook moveeye obliqueSuperior rectusInferior and downwardABMedialLateral downwardLook and

Fig. 8.98 The “H-test.”

rectus rectus [III]Superior [VI]Inferior oblique [III]1.2.3.4.5.6.Medial oblique [III]Left [IV]Lateral rectus rectus eyeLateral eye142635 rectus Right [III]Inferior rectus [III]Superior oblique [III]Superior [IV]Inferior rectus [III]Inferior oblique rectus [VI]Superior [III]Medial

Fig. the supply Arterial to eyeball. and 8.99 orbit

Fig. and Venous drainage 8.100 orbit eyeball. of the

Fig. 8.101 the eyeball. Innervation of orbit and

oculomotor [III]Superior [V1]Frontal nerve of nerve nerve branch ringLateralMedial oculomotor of [IV]Common ophthalmic of branch canalInferior [V1]Optic branchof nerve veinSuperior arteryInferior nerve ophthalmic ophthalmic [VI]Trochlear [V1]Nasociliary [III]Abducent nerveOptic nerve branch of ophthalmic Lacrimal ophthalmic veinOphthalmic tendinous branch nerve

Fig. nerve its [III] divisions. 8.102 Oculomotor and

Fig. 8.103 nerve in the [IV] Trochlear orbit.

Fig. its divisions. Ophthalmic 8.104 nerve [V1] and

Fig. 8.105 divisions of [V1] the muscles of the Relationship eyeball. to nerve and its the ophthalmic

Fig. in (from the 8.106 the nerve orbit. nasociliary of Course [V1])

nervesShort nerve[VI]Inferior rectus glandLacrimal of oculomotor ciliary rectus ganglionAbducent nerveInfratrochlear muscleNasociliary Long Ciliary [III]Medial branch [V1])Lateral [III]Superior nerveLateral ciliary (from nerve ethmoidal nerve ethmoidal nerve branch [V1])Posterior nervesLacrimal the nerve nerveAnterior of (from oculomotor the

Fig. 8.107 ganglion. Ciliary

Fig. 8.108 Eyeball.

Fig. eye. Ophthalmoscopic 8.109 of view the of right posterior chamber

Fig. 8.110 Ciliary body.

Fig. eye. the 8.111 healthy in of a Layers retina a HD-OCT A. scan of healthy eye. Schematic an eye. of of healthy B. retina on layers HD-OCT scan a the the indicating illustrating the the layers retina. Diagram of C.

Fig. High-definition coherence 8.112 (HD-OCT). optical tomography eye. Diseased A. B. Healthy eye.

Fig. ear. Right 8.113

Fig. 8.114 Auricle.

Fig. innervation the auricle. Sensory 8.115 of

nerve themandibular nerve nerve auricular (C2) nerve(C2,C3)Facial [X]Lesser Auriculotemporalbranch of [V3]Great occipitalnerve [VII]Vagus

Fig. External meatus. 8.116 acoustic

Fig. Middle ear. 8.117

Fig. 8.118 membrane (right Tympanic ear). A. Diagram. B. view. Otoscopic

ofmalleusUmboCone foldLateral process(of malleus) ABPars lightAnteriormalleolar foldHandle flaccidaPosteriormalleolar of

Fig. the 8.119 Parts middle ear. of

Fig. the ear. Boundaries right of 8.120 middle

plexusInternal window musclePharyngotympanic veinPromontoryRound tympani nerve the glossopharyngeal semicircular [VII]Chorda branch of from tomastoid nervePyramidal plexusSympathetic tympaniTensor tympani jugular of [IX]Internal petrosal nerve facial eminenceAditus canalOval tympani carotid antrumProminence Tegmen tubeLesser internalcarotid arteryChorda nerveTympanic canalProminence lateral of windowFacial nerveBranch

Fig. antrum 8.121 Mastoid bone. surrounding and A. Diagram.

B. temporal CT scan of ear left High-resolution bone). (petrous

to mastoid air earExternal earMastoid BAditus cellsMastoid tubeMiddle recessPharyngotympanic auditorymeatusMastoid antrumA cellsMastoid processCochleaMiddle antrumTegmen air tympaniEpitympanic

Fig. 8.122 tube. Pharyngotympanic

Fig. Auditory ossicles. 8.123 A. Malleus. B. Incus. C. Stapes.

of limb malleusLateralprocessIncus malleusNeck processHandle limbBody of ofmalleusABCAnterior limbMalleus articulationShort stapesAnterior of limbHead Head articulationLong of stapesPosterior ofincusBase

Fig. (right auditory associated ossicles the 8.124 Muscles with ear).

ofstapedius tympani muscle stapesTympanic tubeTensor membranePharyngotympanic eminenceTendon MalleusIncusPyramidal muscleFootplate of

Fig. 8.125 the Innervation middle of ear.

musclePromontoryLesser lateralsemicircular plexus(caroticotympanic nerve)Tympanic of [IX])Tympanic glossopharyngeal canal canalTensor windowStapesProminence nerve(from of carotid facial nerve tympani plexusRound from nervePharyngotympanic petrosal Prominence tubeBranch internal

Fig. lesser nerves. Grooves greater for petrosal the and and hiatuses 8.126

Fig. in temporal of internal ear 8.127 bone. Location the

Fig. Internal 8.128 ear.

Fig. 8.129 Bony labyrinth.

ductStapes membraneVestibuleUtricleAmpullaAnterior cochlear and canal and aqueductLateral semicircular in tubeRound and oval windowOpening of canaliculusTympanic window vestibuliPharyngotympanic materCochleaCochlear ductPosterior semicircular SacculeHelicotremaDura tympaniScala semicircular canal canal ductScala ductVestibular

Fig. 8.130 Cochlea.

modiolusCochlear nerveSpiral ductLamina ModiolusScala ganglionHelicotrema vestibuliScalatympaniCochlear of

Fig. Membranous 8.131 labyrinth.

Fig. cross labyrinth, section. 8.132 Membranous

modiolusScala vestibuliModiolusLamina tympaniBasilar membraneScala of Vestibular organ membraneSpiral ligamentSpiral

Fig. nerve temporal Facial the bone. A. in 8.133 bone. temporal B. the tympani in Chorda

Fig. sound. Transmission of 8.134

Fig. infratemporal Temporal fossae. and 8.135

arteryRamus middletemporal muscle fossaMasseter acousticmeatusSupramastoid archArticular fossaGroove tubercleMandibular Zygomatic mandibleExternal for crestTemporal of fossaInfratemporal

Fig. 8.136 and fossae. related Bony features to infratemporal the temporal

arteryMandibular plateSpine tubercleForamen crestGroove for sphenoidStyloid processTympanic of crestForamen boneMaxillary fossaArticular spinosumInfratemporal deep plate wingof fissureSquamous oftemporal maxillaZygomatic Greater ovaleInfratemporalsurface acousticmeatusSupramastoid of process ofzygomatic of ofzygomatic bonePalatine pterygopalatine surface bone processPterygomaxillary boneFrontal sphenoid fossa)PterygoidhamulusExternal pterygoidprocess fissure(leading middletemporal boneZygomaticofacialforamenZygomaticotemporalforamen(on sphenoid boneFrontal bonePterygopalatinefossaTympanomastoidfissureMastoid part into of maxillaAlveolar surfaceof ofzygomatic bone)Posterior foramenPetrotympanic boneLateral process

Fig. 8.137 Mandible. left of A. view side. Lateral of B. left Medial side. view

Fig. 8.138 joint. Temporomandibular A. closed. Mouth B. Mouth open.

jointLateral fossaForward of ABUpper joint movementat onarticular upper joint discand discArticular pterygoidmuscleProtrusionDepressionHinge tubercleFibrocartilage lower joint movement at mandible surfaceCapsuleLower cavitySynovialmembraneMandibular cavityArticular

Fig. associated 8.139 Ligaments with joint. the temporomandibular

Fig. 8.140 temporomandibular Movements joint. of the

and Temporalis, Posterior by Gravity• geniohyoid, masseter, Digastric, medial pterygoid medial pterygoid and part musclesElevation• deep digastricDepression• and Protrusion• mylohyoid temporalis, pterygoidRetraction• of of fibers assisted Lateral geniohyoid masseter,

Fig. Masseter muscle. 8.141

Fig. fossa. Temporal 8.142 view. A. Lateral showing view fossa. infratemporal B. Lateral the

Fig. muscle. Temporalis 8.143 Lateral view.

Fig. temporal arteries the and of 8.144 Nerves fossa.

infratemporal [V3]Deep [V2])Deep temporal temporal arteriesMandibular temporal in nervesZygomaticofacial arteryMiddle maxillary muscle fasciaZygomaticotemporal carotid fossaExternal artery arterySuperficial nerve nerve nerve(branch Temporal of temporal nerveInfratemporal arteryTemporalis crestMaxillary

Fig. fossa. Borders the 8.145 of infratemporal

of crestForamen foramenLateral mandiblePetrotympanic and veli constrictorPharynxSpine sphenoidHead of neck surface palatiniAlveolar ovaleTensor fissurePterygomandibular plate boneMasseterMylohyoidHyoglossusMiddle sphenoid processPterygomaxillary wing pterygoid into fissure(leading of constrictorSuperior raphe fossa)Posterior fossaGreater veli of spinosumInfratemporal of pterygopalatine maxillaPterygopalatine palatiniLevator Foramen

Fig. 8.146 pterygoid muscle. Medial

palatiniLevator spinosumInfratemporal fissureLingulaMandibular pterygoidSuperficial veli Foramen sphenoidPetrotympanic of palatiniDeep pterygoidSpine headmedial headmedial canalSphenomandibular ligament veli crestForamen ovaleTensor

Fig. 8.147 pterygoid Lateral muscle.

head medial head pterygoidCapsuleArticular pterygoidSuperficial crestUpper headmedial pterygoidDeep pterygoidLower headlateral discSphenomandibular of ligament lateral Infratemporal

Fig. [V3]—anterior 8.148 Mandibular trunk. nerve nerve branch to Meningeal pterygoid. and medial

to pterygoidBranch pterygoidMasseteric (cut trunkDeep to palatiniMeningeal to headmedial pterygoidTrigeminal (cut )Nerve head nervesBuccal tensor to tensor pterygoid temporal lateral Deep )Lower head branchPosterior nerve pterygoid lateral nerveNerve trunkBranch veli medial tympaniAnterior lateral ganglionUpper

Fig. 8.149 [V3]—posterior trunk. nerve Mandibular Lateral A. view.

B. Anterior view. Anteromedial C. view.

fissureChorda to nerveAIncisive alveolar nerve nerveAuriculotemporal nerveMental tympani Petrotympanic nerveLingual mylohyoidInferior nerveNerve

tympaniInferior alveolar pterygoidmuscleLingulaLingual (branch mylohyoidGreater muscleSubmandibular nerveMental Medial constrictor muscleGenioglossus [V3] nerveInferior ligamentSuperior nerve muscleLingual nerveSphenomandibular horns of of raphe (cut )Buccal nerve muscleGeniohyoid hyoid ganglionNerve trunk)BCFacial nerveIncisive tendonPterygomandibular [V]Mandibular nerveSphenomandibular to nerve boneHyoglossus nerveTemporalis alveolar ligamentChorda anterior [VII]Trigeminal nerve

Fig. petrosal and lesser nerves. 8.150 Chorda tympani A. skull. Course emerging the after from B. fibers. of Course parasympathetic

ganglionPreganglionic fibers glandSubmandibular nerveTop nerve petrosal parasympathetic fibers ganglionPreganglionic glossopharyngeal glandAuriculotemporal glandMylohyoidSubmandibular [VII]Postganglionic nerveOtic [VII]Lesser from nerve submandibular from nerve (medial to nerve APetrotympanic [V3])TongueLingual fibers [IX]Lingual nerveSublingual ganglion facial [IX]Postganglionic of ganglionAuriculotemporal from fissureChorda fibers from from tympani nerve parasympathetic parasympathetic otic parotid parasympathetic

from parasympathetic parasympathetic nerve fissureSubmandibularganglionLingual glandsbelow fibers 2/3 nerve to petrosal ganglionPreganglionic nerveAuriculotemporal nerveOtic facial [VII]Mandibular nerveParotid parasympatheticinnervation from ganglionTympanic ganglionGreater nerve tympaniTympanic parasympathetic [V1]Trigeminal tympani all from oral the nerve plexusLesser taste nerve glossopharyngeal tongue)Sublingual glandSubmandibularglandChorda membraneChorda [IX]Facial [VII]Postganglionic nerve fibers nerveBGlossopharyngeal [V3]Maxillary the tympanicarries ganglionChorda otic Preganglionic of submandibular anterior [V2]Ophthalmic fibers glandTympanic petrosal nerve nerve [V] fibers (carries fromthe parasympathetic [IX]Postganglionic from nerveInferior

Fig. Maxillary artery. 8.151

arteryArtery nerveSuperficial head cranial masseterUpper of carotidMaxillary pterygoid alveolar of arteryAuriculotemporal to fossaLower head arteryMental Branches temporal )Buccal (cut (cut arteryDeep cavityMiddle meningeal oflateral arteryPterygopalatine temporal )Pterygoid arteryExternal lateralpterygoid middlemeningeal arteries arteryInferior in

Fig. Pterygoid veins. 8.152 of plexus

ophthalmic facial temporal veinRetromandibular veinDeep auricular alveolar jugular veins(connect cavernous with veinExternal jugular veinInferior veinFacial veinEmissary veinSuperficial veinPosterior veinInternal sinus)Inferior Maxillary vein

Fig. 8.153 Pterygopalatine fossa. A. view. Anterolateral B. view. Lateral

Fig. Sphenoid 8.154 bone. A. view. Anterior B. view. Posterosuperior

carotid nerve petrosal opening of foramen rotundumPosterior bony canal pterygoid canalPterygoid orbital incartilage processPart wingForamen VIIMaxillary filling foramen grooveBLesser lacerumGreater wingGreater of fossaPterygoid fissure nerve arterySuperior of lacerumCartilage related AForamen canalPalatovaginal of part [V2]Internal pterygoid of rotundumSurface topterygopalatine

Fig. of fossa. 8.155 the Gateways pterygopalatine

fissurefloor Sphenopalatine of canalroof cavity cavity(middle fossa)Palatovaginal oral cranial of cranial canalcranial fossa)Foramen rotundumcranial cavity(middle (palate)Pterygoid fossaPalatine fissureinfratemporal orbitPterygomaxillary cavityInferior canalnasopharynx orbital foramennasal

Fig. nerve 8.156 [V2]. Maxillary A. Terminal branches. B. relationship pterygopalatine the to ganglion. In

Fig. the canal. of Nerve pterygoid 8.157 Overview. A. B. In ganglion. pterygopalatine relationship the to

[VII]Preganglionic in nerveInternal petrosal cervical from lacerumDeep orbital branch trunkGeniculate glandParasympathetic nerveLacrimal fossaInferior petrosal ganglionGreater of T1Superior canal pterygoid nerves canalCartilage carotid of filling fissureInfra-orbital ABLacrimal nervesNerve nerves foramen arteryPterygopalatine sympathetic nervePreganglionic parasympathetic zygomaticotemporal nervesPostganglionic parasympathetic sympathetic carotid nerveInternal sympathetic pterygoid nervesPreganglionic nerveNerve of plexus[V1][V2][V3]Internal nerveFacialnerve carotid nervesPostganglionic sympathetic nerveZygomatic ganglionSympathetic

Fig. fossa. the pterygopalatine in 8.158 Maxillary artery

alveolar part of superior greater arteryMaxillary of arteryLesser fossaNasopharynxArtery artery palatine foramen arterySeptal palatine pterygoid ininfratemporal canalCartilage palatine arteryPosterior lacerum arteryAnterior filling arterySphenopalatine Pharyngeal arteryGreater arteryInfra-orbital alveolar superior

Fig. 8.159 of the fossa. Veins pterygopalatine

Fig. 8.160 Compartments neck. the of

Fig. and posterior of Anterior neck. 8.161 triangles the

Inferior mandibleAnteriortriangleSternocleidomastoid of musclePosteriortriangle muscleClavicleTrapezius border

Fig. of view. Fascia 8.162 neck, transverse

Fig. of Fascia sagittal 8.163 view. the neck,

ofpretracheal layerBuccopharyngeal sternumPretracheal space layerRetropharyngeal fascia(posterior prevertebral spaceFascial Investing layerInfrahyoid spacePrevertebral fasciaManubrium within portion layer) of musclesPretracheal

Fig. 8.164 Superficial veins of neck.

Fig. catheter central 8.165 a the Placing venous in neck. A. procedure. Clinical B. of the the the tip is Chest showing catheter that radiograph in origin right of the atrium.

Fig. triangle subdivisions the of and neck. the of 8.166 Borders anterior

triangleAnterior ofdigastric of muscle muscleMuscular musclePosterior Submandibular belly triangleSternocleidomastoid omohyoid triangleCarotid of digastric triangleStylohyoid musclePosterior triangleHyoid belly boneSuperior belly muscleTrapezius muscleSubmental

Fig. 8.167 Suprahyoid muscles. view. Lateral A. B. Inferior view.

Fig. 8.168 Infrahyoid muscles.

Fig. Origin common of carotid 8.169 arteries.

veinClavicleSuperior internal of internal common vena arteryArch arteryLeft veinRight carotid subclavian veinLeft veinRight subclavian carotid aortaLeft brachiocephalic cavaRight vein arteryRight common veinRight jugular brachiocephalic subclavian TracheaEsophagusLeft arteryLeft subclavian jugular

Fig. Carotid triangle. 8.170

carotid artery muscleInternal belly SternocleidomastoidmuscleCarotid arteryExternal arteryPosterior muscleCommon of digastric belly carotid ofomohyoid triangleSuperior carotid

Fig. 8.171 system. Carotid

Fig. the Glossopharyngeal anterior nerve 8.172 in of the neck. [IX] triangle

Fig. neck. 8.173 [X] in Vagus nerve the anterior of triangle the

Fig. the posterior of neck. the in nerve [XI] Accessory triangle 8.174

Fig. [XII]. nerve Hypoglossal 8.175 hypoglossal of A. anterior the in triangle view nerve Surgical neck. of B. Diagram.

belly jugular (cut ofdigastric arteryAB cervicalisSuperior arteryHypoglossal carotidarterySuperior digastric )Stylohyoid branchof occipital root muscleExternal of belly muscle muscleOccipital of muscleSternocleidomastoidbranch ofansa nerveSternocleidomastoid arteryPosterior veinInternal jugularveinPosterior nerveHypoglossal thyroid arteryInternal occipital Hyoglossus

Fig. cervical 8.176 triangle of the anterior neck. nerve in Transverse the

Fig. 8.177 cervicalis. Ansa

muscle(superior Hypoglossal muscleSternothyroid muscleOmohyoid belly)Sternohyoid muscle(inferior root ansa root of nerveC1C3C2Superior cervicalisOmohyoid muscleThyrohyoid ansa of belly) cervicalisInferior

Fig. triangle anterior the 8.178 gland in of Thyroid neck. A. view. Anterior Transverse B. view. the scan—compound axial C. neck. of Ultrasound view the scan—axial of neck. Ultrasound view D. E. pertechnetate thyroid Nuclear scan—normal the of medicine in uptake neck.

Fig. anterior the view. Vasculature thyroid: of 8.179

Fig. arteries and left right and thyroid thyroid recurrent nerves laryngeal and inferior and glands. Superior 8.180 and parathyroid A. Posterior view. parathyroid gland of B. lobe (anterolateral) left Surgical retracted. view thyroid of with

gland of BLeft thyroid glandParathyroid lobe

Fig. lobe to left nerve. recurrent laryngeal Surgical 8.181 association thyroid of close retracted of with view enlarged show (goiter)

recurrent glandLeft laryngeal thyroid of lobe Left nerve

Fig. 8.182 Ectopic in adenoma mediastinum. parathyroid superior photon (SPECT/CT). tomography/computed Noncontrast computed emission hybrid single tomography Transverse A. view. B. view. Sagittal Coronal view. C.

Fig. of Borders of the posterior neck. 8.183 triangle the

muscleInferior omohyoid of Sternocleidomastoid triangleHyoid muscle orsubclavian muscleTrapezius muscleOmoclavicular belly ofomohyoid bonePosteriortriangleSuperior belly triangleOccipital

Fig. neck. triangle posterior of the 8.184 the Muscles of

muscleLevator muscle muscleAcromion of muscleClavicleInferior belly scapulae ofscapulaTrapezius musclePosterior Sternocleidomastoid scalene scalene omohyoid muscleAnterior scalene muscleSplenius capitis muscleMiddle

Fig. 8.185 jugular neck. in the the External triangle posterior of vein

Fig. Arteries the triangle in the 8.186 posterior of neck.

artery3rd arterySternocleidomastoid nerveCommon of arteryThyrocervical Trapezius subclavian plexusSuprascapular muscleMiddle jugular muscle of cervical veinInternal carotid veinExternal part subclavian arteryBrachial muscleSubclavian thyroid jugular scalene scalene veinClavicle1st arteryPhrenic arteryVagus part trunkInferior nerveAnterior muscleTransverse

Fig. neck. the the posterior of cervical triangle cutaneous the and plexus in branches nerve of 8.187 Accessory

Fig. 8.188 Cervical plexus.

Fig. muscles vertebral and lateral plexus. cervical supplied Prevertebral by 8.189

Fig. 8.190 of neck. the Root

pleuraTI sternumCervical vertebraEsophagus of TracheaRib IManubrium

Fig. neck. of 8.191 the of Vasculature the root

Fig. 8.192 the in Nerves neck. the of root

Fig. system sympathetic nervous Components the the of root in the of 8.193 neck.

Fig. part trunk. sympathetic of 8.194 the Cervical

Fig. in the Thoracic duct the root neck. 8.195 of

Fig. in 8.196 root lymphatic the of the of neck. Termination trunks

Fig. Lymphatic system neck. the 8.197 in

Fig. 8.198 Pharynx.

Fig. are Neck evaluate to 8.199 (levels) clinically nodes. regions lymph that used

Fig. of the to 8.200 attachment Line of the skull. the of base pharynx

of levator on nasal of tubeChoanae attachment meatusPharyngeal boneScaphoid veli of pterygoid bone petrous pharynxRoughening plate on of of cavities)Pterygoid fossa sphenoid sphenoidPetrous of hamulusLine attachment process Cartilaginous of palatiniExternal canalMedial bone part tubercleJugular for acoustic pharyngotympanic openings attachment position (for palatini) foramenCarotid of temporal veli of part of temporal tensor (posterior

Fig. the of pharyngeal wall. Attachments 8.201 lateral

Fig. Constrictor the pharynx. of 8.202 muscles A. Lateral view. view. Posterior B.

musclePharyngeal sphincteron constrictorSuperior surface of constrictorMiddle constrictorInferior of palatopharyngeal fasciaStylohyoid process tuberclePharyngeal superior deep constrictorEsophagusPharyngeal ligamentStylopharyngeus rapheStyloid ABPosition

Fig. 8.203 pharynx. the Longitudinal of muscles Stylopharyngeus muscle. A. Medial B. view.

Fig. pharyngeal in wall. muscles Gaps between the 8.204

and (muscles,nerves, vessels)passing constrictorInferior vesselsTracheaMylohyoidBuccinator the into and laryngealnerve constrictorMiddle laryngealnerve constrictorOropharyngealtriangle:structures outof and cavityInternal fasciaStylopharyngeusSuperior vesselsEsophagusRecurrent oral Pharyngeal

Fig. 8.205 the Mucosal features of pharynx. view. A. Lateral B. view with the opened. pharyngeal wall Posterior C. Superior view.

tonsilsPalatoglossal inletEsophagusPiriform palatePalatopharyngeal tonsilChoanaeTorus tonsilPalatopharyngeal inletEsophagusTracheaValleculaLingual tubariusPharyngeal ABCFold cavityTracheaLarynxPharynxEsophagus thepharyngotympanic of isthmus)TongueNasal tonsilEpiglottisValleculaPiriform archPalatopharyngeal archPalatine tonsilValleculae fossaLingual levatorius(fold tubariusTorus arch(overliespalatopharyngeusmuscle)Laryngeal overlyingpalatopharyngealsphincterTorus opening overlyinglevator tonsilLingual arch(margin palatini)Torus levatoriusSoft oropharyngeal cavityOral fossaSalpingopharyngealfoldPharyngealrecessesNasal veli tonsilPalatine of epiglottis)Laryngeal foldPalatine (anterior tubeSalpingopharyngeal to cavityNasopharynxOropharynxLaryngopharynxOropharyngealisthmusPharyngeal tonsilPharyngeal recessPharyngeal

Fig. the pharynx. Arterial of supply 8.206

arteryThyrocervical trunkSubclavian arteryPharyngeal arteryInternal of arteryAscending branch(supplies nasopharynx)Superficial temporal carotid arteryLingual carotid roof artery arteryTonsillar branchMaxillary arteryFacial arteryExternal palatinearteryAscending thyroid branchesInferior Pharyngeal arteryCommon pharyngeal carotid

Fig. the Venous 8.207 pharynx. drainage of lymphatic and

Fig. pharynx. Innervation 8.208 of the view. A. Lateral Posterior innervation muscle. of view showing B. stylopharyngeus

laryngeal [IX]Laryngopharynx–sensory ABPharyngeal nerve(branch nervefrom superiorlaryngeal [X])Internal to nerve(branch of stylopharyngeus [IX]Pharyngealbranch of of superior [V2]Oropharynx–sensory of laryngeal [X]Superiorlaryngeal [X])Pharyngealbranch from branch of [X][IX][V2]IXMotor [V2]Nasopharynx–sensory [X]External nerveInferiorganglion laryngealnerve branch of

Fig. 8.209 Larynx. A. other Relationship cavities. to Lateral view. B.

Fig. Cricoid cartilage. 8.210 view. A. Anterolateral B. view. Posterior

cartilageTracheaCricoidcartilageLaminaArchAirwayAFacet for witharytenoid cartilageDepressionsB horn for articulation thyroid horn Facet articulation inferior articulation with witharytenoid cartilageFacet of articulation for withinferior for thyroid of cartilageRidgeFacet

Fig. cartilage. Thyroid 8.211 Anterolateral A. view. B. view. Superior

Fig. 8.212 Epiglottis. view. A. Anterolateral B. Posterior surface.

of CricoidTracheaEpiglottic of surface tubercleThyro-epiglottic laminaAnterior epiglottisPosterior epiglottisAB thyroid ligamentRight surface

Fig. cartilages. 8.213 Arytenoid

processArticular vestibular surfaceMuscular for attachment of processArytenoidcartilageDepression cartilageAnterolateral surfaceRidge of cricoid)Vocal ligamentBase musclesDepression (concave forcorniculate with facet surface vocalis attachment for articulation surfaceMedial for – on ApexPosterior anterolateral

Fig. cuneiform 8.214 cartilages. and Corniculate

Fig. Extrinsic the of larynx. ligaments 8.215

of laryngeal internal superior branch ligamentMedian ligamentHyo-epiglottic ligamentsAperture cartilage arteryThyrohyoid for thyrohyoid ligamentHyoid membraneCricotracheal associated and nerve Lateral boneTriticeal thyrohyoid

Fig. 8.216 Cricothyroid ligament.

Fig. Quadrangular membrane. 8.217

Fig. 8.218 Fibro-elastic membrane the view). (superior larynx of

ligamentQuadrangular process cartilageVocal arytenoidCorniculate process of arytenoidVocal ligament membraneConus elasticusMuscular of EpiglottisVestibular

Fig. 8.219 joints. of Movements the cricothyroid

Fig. joints. Movements crico-arytenoid the of 8.220

Fig. Laryngeal cavity. 8.221 Posterolateral view. A. Posterior B. (cut away). view inlet. through view C. Superior the laryngeal superior D. view. the photograph Labeled larynx, of

recessTongueAnteriorPosterior vestibular ligament)Vocal tubercleCuneiform tubercleCorniculate spaceInterarytenoid vestibuliRima (closed)Piriform vocal of ABCDLaryngopharynx fold archMiddle edge vocal between notchCorniculate vocal sacculeVestibuleVestibuleCut thyroid cord)TracheaCricoid cords)Interarytenoid glottidisRima cavityLaryngeal (mucosa tubercleCuneiform inletLaryngeal foldCorniculate fold edge mucosaLaryngeal tubercleCuneiform tubercleLaryngeal cord)Vocal inletVestibular part foldVocal glottidis (true fold ligament)Vestibular fold fold(mucosa (opening EpiglottisEpiglottisEpiglottisAry-epiglottic foldAry-epiglottic ventricleInfraglottic vocal tubercleVestibular of sacculeRima overlying foldCut (false of laminaLaryngeal right foldAry-epiglottic overlying

Fig. Cricothyroid 8.222 muscle.

Fig. vocalis Crico-arytenoid, oblique and and 8.223 arytenoid, transverse muscles.

Fig. muscle. Thyro-arytenoid 8.224

Superior ofoblique muscleSacculeThyro-arytenoid thyroid muscleThyro-epiglotticpart thyro-arytenoid muscle part notchAry-epiglottic arytenoid of

Fig. 8.225 function. Laryngeal A. Quiet respiration. B. Forced inspiration. Phonation. C. Effort closure. D. Swallowing. E.

vestibule inspirationPhonationEffort folds open• Vocal Rima closureSwallowingVocal foldsclosedVestibular glottidis and open• and foldVocal is them• rima glottidis Quiet adducted closedABCDE foldVestibularfolds wide folds foldLaryngeal folds open• abducted swingsdown as inletLaryngealinlet and respirationForced folds Vocal Vestibule Vestibule arytenoidsEpiglottis• Vocal adducted• to air closedAry-epiglottic vestibular narrowedEpiglottis between stridulating forced and

Fig. larynx, the supply left 8.226 view. Arterial lateral of

Fig. the Venous anterior view. drainage larynx, of 8.227

veinThyroid cricothyroid subclavian veinInferior veinRight veinHyoid of thyroid laryngeal ligamentInferior veinSuperior Superior glandManubrium jugular internal veinMiddle bone thyroid membraneMedian veinThyrohyoid sternumRight thyroid laryngeal

Fig. of Innervation 8.228 larynx. the

nerveSuperior nerveCricothyroid trunkEsophagusManubriumRight nerveInternal recurrent subclavian arteryRight Inferior vagal arteriosumPulmonary nerve vagus subclavian vocal laryngeal nerveThyrohyoid laryngeal ligamentLeft foldsMedian arteryLigamentum vagus membranePosition archLeft laryngeal laryngeal pulmonary nerveTracheaLeft laryngeal recurrent nerveExternal arteryAortic muscleRight of pulmonary ganglionLeft arteryRight cricothyroid

Fig. (anterolateral Nasal view). cavities 8.229 to cavities. other Relationship

Fig. 8.230 cavities. Nasal A. walls. roof, Floor, lateral and on walls. B. lateral Conchae C. Coronal section. Air cavity. D. channels right in nasal

Fig. sinuses Paranasal 8.231 duct. nasolacrimal and

Fig. of the cavities. Regions 8.232 nasal

Fig. 8.233 bone. Ethmoid A. Overall shape. Coronal section skull. through B.

conchaEthmoidal cellsSuperior of conchaPerpendicular sinusRight processInferior processInfundibulumCranial galliLeft ethmoidal ABAnteriorPosteriorCrista offrontal ethmoidal cavityCribriform plate conchaEthmoidal concha ductopening bullaMiddle conchaUncinate ofethmoidal frontonasal for plateSuperior labyrinthCribriform plateChannel processMiddle bullaMiddle cavitiesOrbitOrbitMiddle boneMaxillarysinusMaxillarysinusOrbital into process labyrinthOrbital plateNasal labyrinthOrbital boneCrista conchaUncinate frontal cavityPalatine plateUncinate galli ethmoidal maxillary plate boneVomerOral platePerpendicular

Fig. nose. 8.234 External

cartilage ofseptal cartilageLateral cartilageNarisMajor boneFrontal margin Nasal process process of ofseptal boneNasolacrimal cartilagesSeptal grooveMinor maxillaLacrimal alar alarcartilageSuperior

Fig. Paranasal sinuses. 8.235 Anterior A. view. Posteroanterior B. skull radiograph.

Paramedian of cavity. nasal right view C. D. radiograph. Lateral skull

boneNasal process cellsMaxillarysinusesMaxillary septumForamen frontal of of posteriorupper ABEthmoidalcellsFrontal ofethmoid plate boneSuperior orbital sinusRoots molarsOrbital fissureFrontalsinusesEthmoidal sinusesZygomatic rotundum

Fig. of nasal septum. the Medial nasal cavity—the wall 8.236

plate frontal bonePituitary crestSeptalcartilageNasal ethmoid crest ofmaxillary of bone fossaSphenoidal of Nasal sinusVomerNasal spine andpalatine bonesIncisor bonePerpendicular

Fig. Floor of (superior 8.237 view). nasal cavity the

canalPalatine palatineSoft process maxillaHorizontal cartilageNarisAnterior nasal palateNasal sinus crestsMaxillary spineIncisive of of Septal plate

Fig. cavity. 8.238 nasal of Roof the

vomer)Nasal themidline of frontal sphenoidal with rostrum(articulates sinusAla of bonesNasal in Cribriform plateOpening spine bone vomerVomerSphenoidal the of

Fig. the wall cavity. of nasal 8.239 Lateral A. Bones.

B. Covered mucosa. with Conchae attachment away wall. broken at to C. lateral

maxillaSuperior cartilageLacrimal process of AFrontal cartilageMajor palatine process plateof cartilageLateral conchaMedial ofseptal boneInferior alar boneUncinate of conchaMinor ofsphenoid process plate alar boneNasal pterygoid bone ethmoidPerpendicular conchaMiddle

ethmoidalcells of tubeNasopharynxSoft semilunar that conchaOpening palateInferior of bullaSemilunar infloor conchaMiddle sinusand nasolacrimal hiatusOpening lateral ofpharyngotympanic the of onto frontonasalduct of hiatus posterior opening recessOpening meatusOpening of sphenoidal ethmoidal ductInfundibulum sinusinto frontal cells into of superior sinus of drains middle ethmoidal wall conchaSuperior of anterior spheno-ethmoidal maxillary Opening ethmoidalcells BCOpening

Fig. 8.240 Nares. A. view. Inferior B. muscles. Associated

cartilagesInferior frontalprocess alar cartilageBOrbitAttachment cartilageMinor maxillaNasalis nasi alaeque NaresAMajor septi to labii alar maxillaDepressor tissueSeptal nasiNarisLevator spine of muscleAttachment of maxillaConnective superioris to nasal

Fig. (posterior 8.241 Choanae view). A. Overview. B. view. Magnified

Ala rostrumSphenoidal of boneOral plate boneMaxillaPalatovaginal vomerSphenoidal of palatine bonePyramidal pterygoidplate palatine bonePalatine of cavityChoanaeChoanaeVaginal canalVomerBAVomerSphenoid process of of process boneMedial palatine sphenoidHorizontal plate medial process pterygoid of

Fig. cavities. nasal Gateways to 8.242 the

Fig. of cavities. Arterial nasal the 8.243 supply of the nasal Lateral cavity. wall right A. B. of right (medial Septum cavity). nasal wall

lateral of branch branch arteryPosterior arterySeptal (proneto ethmoidal superior ofposterior branch nasalartery nasal ethmoidal significantanastomoses ethmoidal ABAnterior arteryAlar labial conchaMiddle arterySeptal arteryArea palatine conchaGreater nasalartery ofanterior arteryTerminal anteriorethmoidal part “nosebleeds”)Posterior from of sphenopalatine branch arteryExternal palatine from nasalbranches septal branch ofgreater conchaInferior arterySeptal arterySphenopalatine arterySuperior from arteryPosterior oflateral ofsphenopalatine artery ethmoidal

Fig. Venous 8.244 cavities. the drainage of nasal

cavityDrainage to foramen fossaDrainage infratemporal vein cecumDrainage to vein cranial to Nasal plexusin pterygoid facial in in cavernoussinus

Fig. the cavities. nasal Innervation 8.245 of A. cavity. nasal of right Lateral wall wall B. Medial nasal cavity. right of

inferiorlateral superiorlateral nerve branches)Olfactory nerve ABPosterior bulbAnterior [I]Sphenopalatine nervesNasal nerveNasopalatine [I](septal nervesInternal nerveExternal nasalbranch ethmoidal branch of anteriorethmoidal of nerveSeptal branch nerveOlfactory nerve alveolar nasal branchesof ethmoidal nerveOlfactory infra-orbital anteriorsuperior foramenPosterior ofanterior nasal nasal

Fig. of the drainage cavities. nasal 8.246 Lymphatic

Fig. 8.247 Oral cavity. A. cavities. other to Relationship B. oral vestibule cavity Oral and proper.

Fig. lateral 8.248 and aspects skull. of the Base A. in oral with to skull the base the of related cavity. structures Features associated the

process the temporal bone. of Styloid B.

plate lacerum canalStyloid cartilage)Cartilaginous part maxillaAlveolar bony for pharyngotympanic processMedial plate fossaPalatine ofcartilaginous of foramenLateral of boneScaphoid pterygoid boneGreater foramenLesser to of of of part spinosumCarotid tubeAIncisive foramenJugular palatine of lamina processStylomastoid process palatiniForamen tubeForamen bonePterygoid maxillaHorizontal (closed palatine palatine nasal temporal palatine of of attachment suturePosterior pterygoid of boneMastoid ovaleSpine by process of wing temporal sphenoidOpening spinePyramidal levator Petrous hamulus of foramenRoughening part pharyngotympanic process fossaForamen processIntermaxillary process veli of of tubeGreater sphenoidMembranous plate partof pharyngotympanic

Fig. Mandible. 8.249 A. Superior view. view. B. Lateral C. view. Medial

Fig. Hyoid bone. 8.250 view. Anterior A. Lateral B. view.

Fig. 8.251 Buccinator muscle.

constrictorPterygomandibular mandibleBuccinatorOrbicularis Attachment maxillaSuperior rapheAttachment orisModiolus to to

Fig. muscles. 8.252 Mylohyoid A. Geniohyoid muscles. B. view. C. Lateral

of marginSubmandibular spinesMylohyoid spinesRapheGreater fossa mental lineInferior hyoidFree spinesGeniohyoidGeniohyoidMylohyoidMylohyoidSuperior hornBody mental Superior ABC posterior mental fossaSublingual

Fig. cavity. floor 8.253 into oral the of Gateway the

pharynxMiddleconstrictorof pharynxMylohyoidTriangular mylohyoid,superior triangle) (oropharyngeal and Superiorconstrictorof aperture between middle constrictor constrictor,

Fig. Tongue. 8.254 A. sagittal section. Paramedian B. Superior view.

(anterior tongueVallate of sulcusForamen muscleGeniohyoid one-third)Hyoid terminal lipOral papillaeTerminal vestibuleFiliform papillaeFungiform papillae (posterior boneRoot cecumand tongueMylohyoid AOral of part part surfaceLower sulcusPharyngeal papillaeFoliate part two-thirds)Foramen cecumBOropharynxPharyngeal muscleMandibleInferior

Fig. 8.255 tongue. the of Muscles

Fig. muscles. Genioglossus 8.256 A. view. Posterior (left) B. Lateral view.

Fig. muscles. 8.257 Hyoglossus Posterior A. view. view. Lateral (left) B.

Fig. Styloglossus 8.258 muscles.

Fig. 8.259 Palatoglossus muscles.

palatoglossusarch of Hard muscle palatePalatoglossus soft (underliesthe palatePalatine mucosa)Uvula aponeurosisof

Fig. 8.260 Arteries, and of nerves the tongue. veins,

veinDorsal Lingual (from lingual jugular [IX] arteryInternal lingual of nerve(from occipital [V3])Chorda tympani arteryLingual veinHyoglossusGlossopharyngealnerve branch carotid arteryCommon [XII]OccipitalarterySternocleidomastoid [VII])Hypoglossalnerve veinDeep

Fig. tongue. Innervation 8.261 the of

Fig. in cavity oral nerve (medial Lingual of the view). the 8.262 floor

Fig. fibers. C1 and nerve Hypoglossal 8.263

fibersC3C2ThyrohyoidSuperior to thyrohyoid(C1)GeniohyoidNerve geniohyoid Hypoglossal (C1) nerveC1C1 ofansa to root cervicalisNerve

Fig. gland. 8.264 Parotid

tooth)SternocleidomastoidParotid meatus 2nd glandExternal acoustic MasseterBuccinatorParotid upper of buccinator molar oppositecrown duct(penetrates

Fig. sublingual Submandibular 8.265 glands. and Medial A. view. view. Posterior B. view. C. Anterior D. view. Anterosuperior

glandSublingual Superior muscleSuperficialDeepSuperficialDeepSubmandibularglandLingual ductSublingual ductOpening overlyingsublingual ducts rapheSmall ductSublingual ductSublingual of ofsubmandibular of ductGenioglossus sublingual veinFimbriated lingual musclePterygomandibular foldFrenulum sublingual caruncleOpening glandSubmandibular ducts of glandSublingual veinFrenulum glandSubmandibular from nerveABSubmandibular carunclesLingual fold constrictor of tongueOpening tongue muscleHyoglossus leftsubmandibular glandCDDeep of

Fig. in the Summary innervation parasympathetic head. (secretomotor) of of 8.266 glands

of [IX]Chorda from below fissureinnervated petrosal [VII] nerve greater of fibers glandsSublingual oral [IX]Greater [V3])Parotid nerveLabial glands by petrosal tympani parasympathetic of glandsLingual bychorda oral glands nerveAll ganglionOtic of tympani[V][VII][IX]Preganglionic level onpalatePterygopalatine innervated fissureinnervated [VII]All glandSubmandibular gland glandSubmandibular (from ganglionAuriculotemporal glandGlands by abovelevel ganglionPalatine Lacrimal

Fig. nerve. in fibers the Course 8.267 chorda of parasympathetic carried tympani

Fig. of in sympathetic 8.268 Summary of head. innervation glands the

Fig. 8.269 Palate.

Fig. palatini the and aponeurosis. Tensor A. 8.270 veli muscles palatine Levator veli muscles. B. palatini muscles. Palatopharyngeus C.

pterygoid of musclePterygopalatine plateNasal palatiniPalatopharyngeus pharyngotympanic rapheBuccinator pharynxPterygomandibular hamulusPosition tensor Muscular cavityMedial plateLateral of fossaABCNasal tubeFibrous part part rapheSuperior of veli palatiniCartilaginous ofpharyngotympanic of veli pterygoid tubePalatine palatopharyngealsphincterPharyngeal septumLevator part aponeurosisPterygoid constrictor

Fig. Open 8.271 soft with mouth palate. opened. isthmus Oropharyngeal A. Oropharyngeal closed. B. isthmus

Medial soft and arches• movement palatoglossal Medial of downward oropharynxSoft forward downward and tongue• isthmus(palatoglossal movement Upward archPalatopharyngeal of isthmus• palateTongueUvulaPalatine oropharyngeal palate palateSoft of of archPosterior and arch)Closure wall arches• Downward of of palatopharyngeal movement ABPalatoglossal tonsilAnterior oforopharyngeal movement margin

Fig. 8.272 uvulae. and Palatoglossus muscles musculus

aponeurosisPalatine of Musculus uvulaePalatoglossusfrom tonsil underside

Fig. Arteries the palate. 8.273 of

Fig. 8.274 arteries. and nerves Palatine

foramenLesser of palatine facial foramenLesser palatine nerveGreater from palatine ascending arteryGreater palatine palatine ascending artery of nerveGreater fossaNasopalatine palatine palatine arteryLesser artery Incisive pharyngeal artery branch palatine and nerveUvulaBranches

Fig. 8.275 of and lymphatic Venous the palate. drainage

Fig. of palate. 8.276 Innervation the

foramenGreater petrosal pterygoid parasympatheticand special [taste])[VII]Deep arteryNerve trunkPreganglionicsympathetic nerve palatine petrosal T1UvulaInternal carotid ganglionSympathetic (preganglionic sympathetic of canalLesser palatine foramenPalatine ganglionNasopalatine nerve from Greater palatine palatine nerveGreater nerveNasopalatine (postganglionic nerveMaxillary nerve[V] cervical canalPterygopalatine sympathetic)Superior sensory nerveLesser

Fig. Oral lips. and 8.277 fissure Anterior view. A. Sagittal section. B.

and of muscleBuccinator salivary border PhiltrumVestibuleOrbicularis lipFacial oris inferior and glandsArtery arteriesABLabial bordersOrbicularis fissureVermilion muscleOral oris arterySuperior labial veinVermilion muscle

Fig. Teeth. 8.278 A. Adult and lower upper permanent teeth. (“baby”) teeth. Deciduous B.

sinusRoots maxillary sinusPremolars3212132121Roots to tomandibular AIncisorsCaninesPremolarsMolarsMolarsPremolarsCaninesIncisorsMaxillary related related canalMolarsCanineIncisorsUpperLowerMolarsIncisorsCaninesBUpperLower

Fig. teeth. Arteries the and veins 8.279 of

cavityEmissary veinExternal veinMaxillary mandibular alveolarartery veinsRetromandibular canalFacial sinusin veinMaxillary arteryPterygoid cranial jugular andvein in and artery carotid alveolar veinInferior and Cavernous alveolarartery veinAnterior superior superior veinInternal veinExternal veinPosterior and of veinsInfra-orbitalartery artery jugular plexus

Fig. Lymphatic gums. drainage 8.280 the and of teeth

Fig. 8.281 of Innervation teeth. the

Fig. and the 8.282 of teeth gums. Innervation

(from [V3])Mental nerve nerve (from (from of (from (from nerve [V2])Posterior nerve [V2])GingivaeAnterior alveolar nerve superior from (from TeethAnterior superior alveolar [V3])Incisive nerve superior (from [V3])Buccal nerve [V2])Middle nerve superioralveolar (from alveolar [V2])UpperLowerMain [V3])Nasopalatine (from nerve alveolar nerve inferior [V2])Posterior trunk [V2])Middle inferioralveolar nerve superior (from (from [V2])Greater [V2]) inferioralveolar of palatine [V3]) nerve nerve (from superior (from branch nerve alveolar Lingual alveolar

Fig. of landmarks. the position 8.283 head Anatomical major and man. a head of Lateral and neck

External of orbitPosition of occipitalprotuberanceCervical arch[V1][V2][V3] zygomatic boneFrankfort acoustic of lineInferior mandiblePosition of meatusSternocleidomastoid of margin processVertexZygomatic spinal muscleAngle head nervesExternal mandibleMastoid

Fig. structures the 8.284 at levels. vertebral CIII/IV Visualizing CVI and a and Lateral man. head neck of

cartilage• CIII/IV• common cricoidPharynx of Superior arteryBifurcation level Upper common Superior carotidFrankfort of Arch end Bifurcation carotid lineEsophagusArch of of level cricoid Vertebral tracheaVertebral esophagus• of CVI• thyroid of of cartilage• margin end

Fig. outline and the 8.285 neck. of anterior to How posterior the triangles A. a view. In woman, anterolateral left indicated. anterior triangle The is B. In anterior a triangle. the posterior of man, view

margin of trianglesStructures upper betweenhead ABMidline neckAnterior the triangleAnterior with thorax anterior ofsternocleidomastoidAnterior coursing are margin and coursing of triangleInferior posterior associatedwith oftrapeziusClaviclePosterior areassociated margin triangles and limb mandibleStructures betweenthorax/neck ofsternocleidomastoidPosterior the margin

Fig. How to locate 8.286 ligament. median cricothyroid the A. of man, lateral neck. head In a view and B. In neck. view and a head of lateral woman, C. man, elevated. chin a neck anterior In the with with woman, neck anterior chin a D. elevated. the In

notchLaryngeal ABThyroid prominencePosition of cricoid mediancricothyroid cartilage ligamentArch of

of cricothyroid Thyroid ligamentArch thyroid glandCD of of prominencePosition notchLaryngeal median cricoidcartilageIsthmus

Fig. to gland. find thyroid 8.287 the How A. neck. of In a woman, view anterior B. man, In anterior of neck. a view

Position of of line of glandRight thyroid prominenceMedian notchLaryngeal cartilageHyoid glandAB thyroid glandIsthmus cricoidLeft of thyroid boneThyroid on cricothyroidligamentArch oblique of thyroid lobe lobe

Fig. position Estimating middle artery. of the the meningeal 8.288 head Lateral man. and of neck a

margin margin acoustic orbitSuperior orbit earExternal External lineInferior of of meatusPterionFrankfort

Fig. the features 8.289 face. Major of of Anterior neck and a head woman.

testingsensory fissureNostril[V1][V2][V3]Region oculi fortesting orisPhiltrumOrbicularis [V3]Orbicularis for fissureOral testing of Region for [V1]Palpebral [V2]Region

Fig. lacrimal and Eye apparatus. 8.290 A. woman. Face a of the are apparatus Lacrimal of flow and indicated. tears B. Left structures. eye and surrounding down eye lower lacrimal and the C. structures papilla eyelid with and Left surrounding reveal lacrimal pulled to punctum.

tearsNasolacrimal commissureLateral commissureLacrimal papillaLacrimal fissureLacrimal foldLacrimal canaliculusLacrimal ALacrimal ductInferior eyelidLower glandFlow of punctumBC eyelidLacrimal sacUpper caruncleIrisMedial lakeScleraPupilPalpebral

Fig. External 8.291 ear. right the of ear a Lateral woman. view of

Fig. neck. take head pulses Where 8.292 in and to arterial the

Fig. scan an CT fracture. demonstrating Coronal orbital 8.293 blowout

eFig. (axial scan demonstrating stone view) duct. a dilated 8.294 in parotid a Ultrasound

eFig. showing macroadenoma. Coronal MRI 8.295 pituitary

of foramina skull the Table 8.1 External

8.2 Internal foramina Table of skull the

venous Dural Table 8.3 sinuses

nerve functional Table 8.4 Cranial components

or functional smell, visceral taste. describing used when afferent sensory, components: special terminology Other *Special (SVA): somatic Special hearing, balance. (SSA): vision, afferent

motor. branchial **Special visceral efferent (SVE) or

8.4 Cranial (see abbreviations) nerves 8.5 Table for Table

Table ganglia the of 8.6 head Parasympathetic

the of Table 8.7 Muscles face

Extrinsic (extra-ocular) 8.8 muscles Table

the Table eye Intrinsic 8.9 of muscles

8.10 Table ear of the middle Muscles

mastication Muscles of Table 8.11

infrahyoid Table and 8.12 of triangle muscles) (suprahyoid neck Anterior

8.13 Branches carotid of external artery the Table

Table of regional the approach the 8.14 of anterior neck—a Subdivisions triangle

indicate with the triangle parentheses the involvement 8.15 associated possible of neck; Table Muscles posterior

Table muscles Prevertebral vertebral 8.16 lateral and

the Constrictor muscles 8.17 Table of pharynx

muscles the of Longitudinal Table 8.18 pharynx

8.19 the of larynx Intrinsic muscles Table

the the in of Table Muscles oral 8.20 cavity floor

tongue Muscles Table of 8.21 the

Table of soft Muscles 8.22 palate the

clinic In the

with (synostosis) sutures. cranial can the or be of ossified babies Some born one more fusion of and because can are growth shape result irregular the head pattern an of direction in altered. This skull caused by the In a cases syndrome. may genetic it majority unknown, and of minority a cases in of the cause be is

the clinic In

of imaging head the Medical

standard Until of the plain imaging method the radiography. recently, head was the position). standard anatomical The axial—head taken (anteroposterior Towne’s three and in posteroanterior view view, are radiographs lateral projections—the view, in the [AP] of foramina to obtained and the the at the views are skull base Additional assess bones. facial the in used are trauma, but of such cases radiographs skull Currently, use is declining. easily are detected fractures Skull relatively (Fig. 8.29). treatment potential The upon assessed and patient underlying neurological or is neurological the complications. is based

the neuroradiological cerebral of of development “workhorse” examination. become Since has CT tomography (CT), computed the easily and be and the for used is detected. can brain and quickly because head coverings is examined ideally easily It injury its blood algorithm be altering data demonstrated. of the set can By the also bones the mathematical

contrast, to the aneurysm intravenous intracerebral before of angiography With an endovascular treatment. and size position can be used demonstrate the CT

is Magnetic other in techniques imaging by (MRI) imaging contrast for its resonance resolution. ability unsurpassed column easily can fluid coverings, examined. cerebrospinal (CSF), vertebral and quickly be its and The and brain suppression imaging to Newer permit lesions. sequences periventricular define CSF

the of is Willis), of completeness some determining necessary extremely angiography which conditions. in vasculature has Magnetic useful (circle been resonance in intracranial surgical the

tool carotid in stenosis. of powerful the also assessment MRI is a

is plaque. which studies, from embolization experiencing out surgeon a Doppler detect It intracranial patient whether a to carry carotid possible is a enable cerebral now to

and staging masses Extracranial extremely ultrasound important carotid in assessing is the bifurcation and tumor in (Fig. neck 8.30).

is useful an Ultrasound have the in through children they acoustic window fontanelles. because

the In clinic

vault skull the of Fractures

The remarkably vault most our because strong protects it is the skull brain. structure organ, a vital critical is the vault fracture. prevent The of and skull its biomechanics importance shape of clinical complications. and to an standpoint the potential force skull fractures alert clinicians and nature injury From of a little is consequence a The tibia). itself of say, the fracture usually (unlike, of fracture and the treat brain rather to focusing of the the injury minimize extent on complications, potential fracture. than importance to need Of skull key primary secondary is skull depressed and that fractures fractures. compound fractures, Skull significance fractures, include pterion particular have

a depressed bony fracture normal fragment convexity. skull skull is below the depressed In a formation. secondary hematoma with venous damage This arterial may and to lead also result of primary injury can brain this fracture. type from A

the the skin, together enter. to of compound fracture with an allow fracture of bone may which there In a is a infection a breach antibiotics. with lacerations can usually Typically these treated be with and are scalp associated fractures

Important meningitis, include fractures be which of complications compound fatal. may

the type sinuses. involves fracture more subtle A across compound of fractures and be first should but intracranial an infections morbidity secondary patients considered appreciated not on are of in trauma. be may These develop cause important who to inspection, potential

pterion point of the the lateral important skull. is The an on aspect clinical pterion together. the sphenoid, parietal, frontal, of the wing and bones come temporal the greater At deep is to structure meningeal middle the Importantly, this artery. produce injury serious be extradural this skull is the to because damage An which fatal. of may hematoma, vessel to this can point a significant extremely

In clinic the

of overproduction an reabsorption cerebral CSF. obstruction an of or is the system, a CSF, failure to dilation is ventricular due Hydrocephalus of a flow either of of the which CSF, to

choroid brain. is within by fourth lateral, the of the the ventricles Cerebrospinal and third, fluid plexus secreted third through from lateral produced the is (the of ventricle. interventricular the As Monro) it to ventricles foramina it the foramina passes enter into the of through Luschka). ventricle From the it it foramina the foramen and (aqueduct midline cerebral ventricle, subarachnoid from passes space Magendie here the the passes of and foramina fourth via two third or Sylvius) (foramen lateral the aqueduct into of

the and CSF the the envelops the The venous walls through in passes dural sinuses. absorbed superiorly, around of inferiorly, granulations is brain spinal cord arachnoid the per produced liter of is adults day. almost In CSF a half

an arachnoid of absorption the In commonest granulations. the of normal CSF interruption through hydrocephalus adults cause the is hemorrhage, brain, when CSF occurs subarachnoid normal the space enters after interferes blood the with This passes and subarachnoid absorption. over it hydrocephalus relieve to severe through prevent into system brain pressure. necessary place small be the the a catheter the ventricular may to To

where of obstructs aqueduct. tumor), aqueduct the the include the a hydrocephalus midbrain of (e.g., of variety a Sylvius congenital obstruction causes and mass tumors of Other choroid Rare causes plexus tumors secrete CSF. that include

in its stages. is children, hydrocephalus always dramatic In later dimensions enlarges. result and hydrocephalus ventricle, the brain the the of and a size increases as The skull the head sutures the fused, are expands. not Because to enlargement a Cranial delivery may and be make utero delivery then has section. impossible, vaginal caesarean by in

to in a CT site of the determine Both radiologist enable most cause obstruction. and cases the obstruction the of MRI and hydrocephalus enlargement causes between a ventricular due other cerebral distinction be that due (e.g., atrophy). made of to must to and variety A

In the clinic

space may spinal after occur brain, the of subarachnoid the in from CSF and around meningeal any and membranes. procedure cord, Leakage and CSF These procedures lumbar epidural surgery, injection, include aspiration. spine

the “cerebrospinal CSF and reason. through mater leak” out syndrome, apparent for In no space of dura leaks fluid subarachnoid the consequences in this clinical mouth. metallic taste include and the a of nausea, The dizziness, fatigue, include nerve weakness and also Other effects vision. double facial

clinic the In

combination rare and a mater infection a pia is of leptomeninges the leptomeninges (the are mater). arachnoid of the Meningitis the some the cribriform direct route, meninges occurs through the it cases be though or cavities Infection plate from by bone. the the a via typically spread trauma) in nasal ethmoid of blood-borne may (e.g., in

meninges bacterial virulent Certain the of so of with types coma the that cerebral are to into and sepsis overwhelming inflammation irritation can inflammation die. and pass cause patient rapidly a

is Meningitis treatable with usually antibiotics.

Certain a effects; example, meningitis. other feature produce types produce of hemorrhage subcutaneous of bacteria meningitis for is meningococcal (ecchymoses) that

history at meningitis first. of is nonspecific typical The nausea. mild fever, may have and The drowsiness, patient headache, may (light and ensue. progresses, the photophobia ecchymosis infection intolerance) As hospital and discomfort admission causes raising warranted. sign) pain (Kernig’s is an Straight emergency marked leg neck and

intravenous of management. antibiotics treatment very-high-dose consists supportive and Immediate

the In clinic

the vault. of a which importance, it arises particularly the from arises structure cranial is anatomical utmost tumor when Determination of the within lesion of origin consequences may patient. site location and the Misinterpretation for of devastating the a its have of

extra-axial assessing brain). intra-axial brain, When or important the it the is to is define the (outside any in lesion whether it brain) (within

of acoustic meninges) tumors the include and meningiomas neuromas. Typical (tumors extra-axial and the falx Meningiomas cerebri, with middle including fossa. anterior cranial the at free regions tentorium the from margin typically meninges, the and preferred the the of cerebelli, arise sites edge around of typically cerebellopontine around at the angle. [VIII] neuromas are and in and vestibulocochlear Acoustic nerve the

secondary. or lesions are primary either Intra-axial type tumor commonest metastatic the deposits. By brain are the which far most cases in secondary are lesions,

breast can other Metastatic though rise found typically lung either to cerebral lesions with tumor malignancies carcinoma in metastases. carcinoma, or give patients are many

Primary extremely from tumors lesions a prognosis. aggressive with to are brain poor and rare benign lesions range include tumors different and tumors. arise cell choroid These from oligodendrocytomas, the gliomas, lines and plexus to the in followed at middle incidence few a a later in Primary is may of though life peak brain early small occur peak age. by there first age, years any tumors

the clinic In

neurological 24 hours. interruption brainstem function than blood lasting the defined resulting cerebrovascular in or stroke, as more is to or flow the A of (CVA), brain accident impaired known ischemic a impairment is or resolving attack mini-stroke. within transient (TIA) as hours Neurological 24 broadly their are strokes or Based etiology, either on hemorrhagic. ischemic as classified caused embolic strokes further those or divided phenomena. Ischemic into are thrombotic by The atherosclerotic emboli into block intracranial the that far and of is arteries in plaques originate caused migrate smaller commonest carotid often and by vessels. by type stroke is the that from latter are Hemorrhagic by strokes vessels. caused blood rupture of

are for those risk diabetes, smoking. and disease, hypertension, as stroke of factors cardiovascular such The and of additional disorders, as patients underlying cocaine) use contraceptives, In illicit substance (such younger causes. oral abuse clotting are

signs symptoms perfusion. depend stroke distribution of The of on and impaired the a brain presentations deficits, of a Common decreased include level visual and dysarthria, loss, hemiparesis or consciousness. hemisensory rapid-onset field ataxia,

a Stroke emergency. is neurological It important to as so be diagnosis administered. treatment that early possible urgent establish life-saving therefore is as can the potentially and (blood-thinning) Potent administered to of outcome cerebral of symptoms. improved restore flow onset within can blood patient thrombolytic and 3 patient’s the hours if drugs 4.5

and (CT). with stroke brain imaging neurological tomography history patients undergo urgent Following clinical suspected examination, should all taking computed initial with contraindicated such hemorrhagic an for alternative and diagnosis therapy malignancy. is as thrombolytic which exclude is to to This identify strokes show the relatively perfusion. density area to corresponds region brain imaging early CT darker appear ischemic of of abnormal can stroke, or In normal low may that a normal and its (Fig. swelling, to sulcal the also affected edema subsequent Due pattern loses brain brain 8.40A). carried CT thrombolysis is 24-hour performed, scan a If complications hemorrhage. is follow-up such as out to for intracranial evaluate routinely

biochemical identify causes disorders. hematological Additional or workup stroke clotting such underlying tests of diagnostic to includes as and hypoglycemia blood mimic screen A identify substance be useful to toxicology which intoxication, stroke. may can

for is on to also which be useful scan. has neurological imaging extent be to tissue strokes brain, of can a CT soft magnetic evaluated on the identifying CT. may (MRI) that too resonance small MRI better compared of full injury resolution subsequent The detect scans that by sequences. images, of as complicated produced series also using are algorithms known create MRI a to and anatomical be sequences can brain. the properties different obtained assess physiological of Various is (Fig. A sequence whether sensitive will fluid acute as a on bright to that a (T2 appear or weighted) chronic, stroke, region 8.40B). a further stroke (Fig. are acute, as (DWI) imaging obtained, identify To whether diffusion-weighted is sequences known and 8.40C) the coefficient (Fig. apparent diffusion (ADC) map. 8.40D) water molecules of These the brain. in evaluate the diffusion the the the which known stroke. ADC on abnormality as bright and is appears map, diffusion, with is of compatible If DWI restricted on acute this region an dark sequence after to insult. changes a persist can initial week the These for up

of any atherosclerotic for and treatable stenosis. vertebral to carotid and also arteries performed is Imaging assess the changes with done MRI. frequently, or be ultrasound, can less CT, This

is multidisciplinary. stroke a Management of the Supportive a stabilize priority. patient treatment to is therapists, in physiotherapists roles language therapists, rehabilitation. Stroke key occupational and specialists, have speech patient and factors use risk of the stroke. cardiovascular secondary drugs antiplatelet aspirin important Long-term in as disease prevention of such are of modification and

the In clinic

surgical Endarterectomy to a from atheromatous plaque remove procedure arteries. is

plaques macrophages Atheromatous vessels debris. subendothelial in consist lipid-laden layer of and cholesterol and the of occur plaque calcifies. The tissue developing accumulates and eventually fibrous connective to bifurcations, vessel distal may embolize blood limiting commonly flow, and occurs organs. around Plaque

endarterectomy, the During and removed plaque reopened. is vessel material of hole vessel. patch of the in and sewn enabling preventing over many the vessel, improved instances the the is In flow narrowing a from suturing

clinic In the

(of arterial vessels arise Willis). aneurysms and around circle in cerebral the the Cerebral from and end anterior artery, the artery, of basilar artery the the in typically posterior communicating artery, They (Fig. branches the communicating cerebral the distal the around occur middle of inferior artery. posterior the 8.41), cerebellar and

have risk significant rupture. As aneurysms they the enlarge, a of wrong. have is there patients anything Typically no that idea “thunderclap” headache produces vomiting. As that a and aneurysm neck sudden-onset may complains stiffness of ruptures, the the patient induce a established. where death reach ensues, the In many number diagnosis patients patients of hospital, but is the scan and blood this within bleed. subarachnoid may space, demonstrates be CT with intracerebral the an An initial associated Further determine to aneurysm. usually the radiologist which includes site, origin management cerebral the angiography, the of and enables size,

complex the undergo of ligate aneurysm. surgery neck to patients the Usually the superseded of some specific aneurysms radiological sites. in intervention management has More recently the femoral involves catheter cannulation circulation thence and aorta of circulation. a cerebral long artery, the into through into placement of the This treatment the carotid and microcoils tip is The is the packed of fine the and placed with within (Fig. catheter aneurysm seals rupture. the 8.42), which

In clinic the

and and scalp significance the Summary clinical of relationships of (Fig. meninges 8.47).

clinic the In

a death. Head and of is trauma is common significant and injury cause a morbidity it injuries; other the but in may always should patients injuries. with suspected isolation, patient in occur multiple Head has often injury be Among the 50% from die trauma, head with multiple injury. patients

processes take initial the the head time At two place. injury of

brain. shearing First the from involve deceleration injury axonal damage, results the primary which brain may forces within the and primary cellular These generally repairable. injuries not are and primary and white penetrating include hemorrhage may Further directly destroy which matter. brain injuries, intracerebral gray injuries

initial sequelae secondary of the trauma. injuries are The and veins, arteries of fracture vault, intracerebral scalp the infection. laceration, disruption They include edema, and cranial intracerebral of improve rapid treatment prognosis. be will effective treated these and early, and In diagnosed if cases and significantly can patient’s the recovery most

the In clinic

hemorrhage Types intracranial of

after of include bleeding to secondary a pressure), infarction. hemorrhage many aneurysm rupture, hematoma causes (intracerebral brain high and primary cerebral blood The hypertension

hemorrhage extradural An (Fig. the damage is and middle from branches in arterial meningeal of by which of pterion. the occurs tearing results caused of the the artery, region typically 8.48) periosteal and slowly dura Blood pressure calvaria the the between under layer collects the of and expands. arterial

the of is minor produces (often blow head typical that loss during sporting a history a consciousness. activity) The to a of for consciousness patient a and the Following usually interval a injury regains of period the hours. lucid has this, drowsiness lead which unconsciousness to death. ensue, and After may rapid

subdural (Fig. hematoma A from 8.49) venous they superior where veins enter torn usually cerebral sinus. results from sagittal bleeding, the The the separates rest thin the hematoma of border blood tear cells the of seepage resulting the dural develops. dura layer and of as from

risk elderly. a at and developing hematoma are young of most the Patients subdural in sinus. CSF increased the entering results atrophy space greater with normal sagittal The cerebral patients the veins in on stress than cerebral a clinical an by alteration usually personality. history trivial of insidious a consciousness loss The of followed or includes injury

hemorrhage (Fig. Subarachnoid undergone from have results and aneurysm circle arterial from vessels patients may cerebral who arising around trauma, it the the typically supplying occur intracerebral significant a ruptured in 8.50) but (of Willis).

clinic the In

central system Tuberculosis nervous the of

the brain, the and Tuberculosis central meninges may nervous including cord, invade (Fig. spinal system, (TB) 8.51). include of stiffness, fever. brain headache, Symptoms and neck TB loss, weight and TB cord weakness spinal fecal incontinence. urinary and leg include of Symptoms Meningitis altered and fever, status, mental seizures. cause can drugs years. treatment TB for year, a of Treatment requires require 2 usually but can for brain 1 cocktail

clinic In the

conduit veins extracranial important cranial they intracranial through can are clinically a connect be because enter which can with infections Emissary veins and cavity. veins the the lack and as Emissary valves, head of veins neck. the majority do veins in

In clinic the

brain is common injury. injury traumatic of (mild most type the brain traumatic Concussion [MTBI]) a rotation head cranial brain within or the cavity. rapid the a from of The injury by the of deceleration typically results amnesia, motor headache, dizziness, and posttraumatic coordination, symptoms consciousness, include sensitivity. can General loss confusion, vomiting, of MTBI of of lack light is The current of concussion, event, diagnosis status, the consciousness the patient. the of based neurological the of and on MTBI, state

the In clinic

patients injury Clinical of with head assessment

head injury Clinical of appears relatively straightforward. with assessment always patients it from In reality is far usually straightforward.

from wide complex trauma. multiple simple a to have may of of a spectrum fall Patients modes injury communicate patient ability of to The factors. important are the about and the age injuries

to to law. physician required circumstances serious injury a injuries be because and give in be which evidence assault, the result the should from some may The have court a head documented may occurred of

or severity of Determining injury intoxication. be as some in because alcohol difficult of may a head the with association occur injuries result

to the return carpet and on to been has be on reviewed which staircase). correct circumstances a when made after will injury the the patient diagnosis in the (e.g., Even tripping environment instigated, the and an occurred prevent loose the injuries management person elderly to need further treatment been has which

but A the peripheral thorough examination systems, on with focus all systems. nervous includes special and central clinical a allows any Scale, be that can of value clinicians measured improvement to Coma a quantified. The which be documented the numerical or must assessed deterioration level using so the consciousness and and level upon accurately place also Glasgow consciousness of

Coma The widely world. Glasgow 1974 accepted throughout now proposed is and the was in Scale 15 coma. score severe whereas total such indicates that 3/15 patient of fully a is that deep indicates a and alert points, There oriented, 15/15 the is and response best (total eye motor response comprises points), 5 of verbal movement best best of a points points), 4 response of (total score and (total 6 points). The

clinic In the

head Treatment of injury

brain primary limited. extremely of Treatment is injury cellular death generally irrecoverable. and Axonal disruption are swells. like tissues, it is most the injured, brain Whenever cerebral a fixed is and Because skull), function space important effects. other within encased brain swelling the has two (the impairs

skull, supply blood the physiologically compresses increase in swelling pressure. resulting the dramatic blood First, the in into a

(coning). magnum brain the and the diffuse, swelling through be squeezing Second, foramen brainstem may the cerebral eventually the ensue. compression This lead of function, brainstem and and loss of to death a disruption may will basic cardiorespiratory edema the herniation). of cause one cerebri herniate brain the to beneath Focal (falcine may falx side cerebral

include is acid–base action swelling) Simple delayed). balance measures and their corticosteroids intravenous to the often alters (which hyperventilation decreases swelling intracerebral prevent (though the and

removed hematoma be surgically. may Extracerebral

how The of on patients outcome head injury managed. the secondary with is injury depends normal life. a to Even severe injury, with patients primary may a recover lead

the clinic In

are brain physiologically cerebrospinal closed a The skull the narrow within and a fluid is intracranial pressure range. bony and compartment, maintained compress new swelling, and or that an space-occupying can brain increase a a as intracranial such injury leads lesion, tumor, to brain. Any the brain pressure hematoma, may giving cone compress “coning.” the into squeezed spinal shape, and fatal. in cerebral cases, herniation, foramen brainstem turn severe the In may can a which be be cervical termed it or This magnum, upper down the brain cord,

foramen Chiari too or cerebellar occur herniation is coning of as through if I condition small, malformation the (Fig. posterior the Congenital known tonsils can also the magnum fossa a 8.52). causing only in in and adulthood. often no may symptoms childhood This problems causes start

clinic In the

In clinic the

of Overview nerves cranial

nerve (CN Afferent—Trigeminal V)

(CN VII) Efferent—Facial nerve

(CN nerve Afferent—Glossopharyngeal IX)

(CN X) nerve Efferent—Vagus

(CN Afferent—optic II) nerve

III) nerve Efferent—oculomotor (CN

Fig. nerves. of Overview cranial 8.55

pterygoid, (parasympathetic) – sensory acoustic – part nerve except of expression, trapeziusVagus tonsil, of nerve)Special ear, tongue)Somatic abdominal (superior larynx, tongue, ofauricle, secretomotor parotid orbital 2/3 tongue, some to sphincter muscles from – middle of motor pharynx (superior and acoustic external motor body tensor and thetongue mylohyoid, facial sensory to acoustic motor except (lateral [V] allsalivary part nasal sensory all and anterior [XII]Somatic and – and taste – ciliary of (anterior meatus medial motor of – [IV]Somatic andstapedius, motor eyes, external one motor muscles 1/3 tympani,and lacrimal [VII] of of midgut, sensory of pharyngotympanic [IX]Special from [VI]Somatic for intrinsic 1/3 motor rectus)Hypoglossal musclesTrochlear muscles [XI]Branchial of [V] nerve nerve digastric, superioris)Visceral all contents, soft end to part – secretomotor 2/3 air – with cases extra-ocularmuscle tongue)Somatic visionTrigeminal sensory – external muscles of for nerve motor sensory thoracic parts – nerve motor sensory – motor Branchial anterior four dura, stylohyoid, muscles external motor in – of rootSomatic – nerve sensory carotid body) nerve theparotid belly of veli veli fibersFacial midgutVisceral sensory all muscles motor sternocleidomastoidand of fibersV3V3V2V1Afferent extra-ocularmuscle teeth, epiglottis nerve nerve glandVisceral pterygoid, – – viscera levator sinusFacial – deeper posterior for oral except end belly – rectus, (parasympathetic) sensory extra-ocular and mastication(medial – viscera five – – – muscles anddeeper of carotid the meatusSpecial all nerve one gland; (posterior [X]Somatic tensor motor of (parasympathetic) tensor stylopharyngeus; inferior Glossopharyngeal of nasal except – palpebrae sensory all oblique)Abducent [I]Special balanceOlfactory larynxVisceral cavity, palate [III]Somatic cellsBranchial pharynxBranchial digastricEfferent thoracic [VII] meatusTrigeminal [VIII]Special and palatiniOculomotor of andmastoid of oropharynx,palatine – rectus,inferior the lateral pupillae (motor) glandVestibulocochlear anterior ear,and all oblique, part rectus, [II]Special temporalis)and taste auricleVisceral the of tube, masseter, palatoglossusAccessory sensory chemoand oral – – (intermediate palatini, and sinuses, rootBranchial (sensory) sensory cavities; nerve laryngopharynx, posterior andabdominal smellOptic glands hearing muscles nerve baroreceptors(and face, – and motor viscera nerve nasopharynx, glandsassociated parts stylopharyngeusVisceral cavities, nerve – viscerato mucous taste

In clinic the

lift half (rhytidectomy) face and to up of in the surgery and make aims lower more the the face skin taught. Facelift the back to pull neck incisions hair to or there placement is distortion important facial no ensure loss. avoid and to Careful of the is skin are incisions ears, extending side, of around the the to The on behind placed each in then the commonest occiput. the to tragus, earlobes, the helices and tracking region the temporal then

bacterium in produced by neuromuscular which muscle the toxin from the botulinum, relaxation. blocks Botox is derived junctions resulting Clostridium extra-ocular (crossed it used muscles. into strabismus in It including many eyes) where is therapies injected is cosmetic muscles of and wrinkles blinking to bladder and disorders, with patients well appearances muscle improve and (hyperhidrosis). to as uncontrolled also treat used to overactive treat facial is relax lines sweating to injection spastic Its conditions, (blepharospasm), excessive as the

the In clinic

largest fascia. the gland is glands paired cervical within salivary deep parotid of split of is the layer and investing the enclosed The

into oral produces amylase, the The the passage necessary digestion, salivary of gland gastrointestinal tract. for food saliva and smooth parotid bolus which watery bolus a and are upper formation,

of Tumors parotid gland the

of gland the commonest The (Fig. parotid tumors are benign and of typically gland. more superficial part involve the the 8.63) pleomorphic and adenolymphoma. These adenoma include in position. importance is their Their relation to anatomical nerve the resection tumor to facial damage because any The of nerve. tumor be may the [VII] relationship branches of defined must of the the

to parotid It stones not gland. develop for within is uncommon the typically within the the the of They occur main ducts main parotid duct. within confluence and usually and when foods pain intense symptom. to The produce of avoid this tends that complains salivating patient in juice easily clinic mouth. squirting can pain be patient’s lemon the by the into The reproduced

is. where the upon Surgery depends stone a duct, a mucosa is simple the anterior incision in the allow with of may buccal within sphincterotomy If it the removal. aspect necessary. excision be back If the gland stone duct, farther within is the may main complete

clinic In the

processes at the and complexity nerve occur. The facial is sites [VII] of by these pathological processes the which different demonstrated

from of is emerging junction the The the facial medulla. [VII] at the nerve the nuclei the within and brainstem formed pons to to skull emerges stylomastoid course branches), the acoustic (which internal meatus, a bone, further from after base It and geniculate complex the enters temporal the gives the foramen. leaving through the passes ganglion within rise enters of muscles. more face that five branches to the gland posterior that of a the branches and muscles parotid gives in number groups additional and terminal deeper or rise It supply supply the of to and the lesions of course good of determine to course, possible, nerve. along in may site series lesion nerve with expertise, A it is affect clinical its the the the exact relation

would motor side) [VII] (same brainstem weakness affecting A of nucleus face. to of the the primary lead the whole ipsilateral lesion nerve facial nucleus left leads the because hemispheres the occurring to a lesion input right motor from of the cerebral part receives and However, nucleus lower upper facial weakness. above the contralateral is motor from part In example, both face spared hemispheres. upper the because innervation input upper the to of this nucleus the receives are functions loss of and the the extent by Preservation special lesion. determined the of

at Lesions and the around ganglion geniculate

and the the Typically motor the of face. ipsilateral whole by function on lesions of are of ganglion accompanied side geniculate the at around (same) loss some the is chorda petrosal of anterior tympani to salivation Taste likely be to the because are of nerve. to affected tongue, the and the and lesion proximal greater branches also lacrimation, two-thirds the

Lesions stylomastoid foramen the and at around

[VII] facial before the canal usually the foramen. nerve of and from through abnormality viral around a and stylomastoid the nerve within inflammation the are foramen Lesions stylomastoid bony at result the the of commonest exiting Typically ipsilateral patient of an the whole motor of the the face. loss function side has of Not chewing complicates this produce food. it does only also unusual an but of appearance, lesion the if may bone. and the in that temporal and Lacrimation greater branches petrosal originate the to not deep chorda remains distal affected tympani be taste

the In clinic

root is of complex of trigeminal sensory the douloureux) (tic sensory the Trigeminal a disorder nerve. neuralgia is skin. pain by and triggered and maxillary of is is of region sensitive [V3] of be nerves, onset, the mandibular in Typically excruciating usually the touching and nature, may the in sudden region [V2] a

[V2] nerves maxillary neuralgia anomalous the blood trigeminal to adjacent [V3] although sensory the The of involved. mandibular is route vessels etiology and be of lying may unknown,

any and unresponsive may medical of not vessels. surgical aberrant risk) persist without to remove the necessary If to are (which care, nerve trigeminal is be symptoms exploration

clinic In the

the has lacerations scalp blood from tend extremely carotid profusely. the to supply so an external The of arteries, rich scalp bleed of because is reasons. predominantly Importantly, two scalp bleeding arterial, position low. erect extremely is the the pressure in First, venous open. which not lacerated retract found the and tissue vessels when holds the Second, do because connective they are them in close

the clinic In

bones. and involve not may Fractures orbit uncommon and the frontal, with zygomatic maxilla, extension into of margins are the orbital the fractures. fractures facial often of These are complex part wall; frequently medial and and occur the the occur. fractures the lateral within superior Fractures also wall within however, floor orbit commonest types floor fractures one of orbital injuries. are of Inferior the into fractures fracture muscle the drag line. oblique may tissues inferior associated These the and affected in gaze eye. these upward failure In patients the gaze have (upward may diplopia) instances, fractures within the orbit Medial in air wall radiographs. show characteristically ethmoidal continuity to is the orbit the between fracture This due paranasal sinuses. labyrinth, permitting the and of direct ethmoidal nose. within Occasionally, sensation orbit full the a feel when patients blowing the

the In clinic

any lesion to that loss caused sympathetic head. function in of the syndrome is leads a by Horner’s It sweat the of and on to the face pupillae superior constriction ptosis the of of glands. sweating the ipsilateral of due to the (drooping partial typical muscle, due by characterized neck is innervation absence of to the the tarsal upper paralysis three eyelid) of paralysis of side and muscle, due absence dilator pupillary features:

vasodilation due feature of although paralysis Secondary ipsilateral loss the to blood of also this (sinking orbitalis changes include: the of syndrome. muscle, eye)—believed vessels, the of to uncommon Horner’s of the may an and is from normal control result sympathetic subcutaneous enophthalmos

muscle forward maintain orbital position and spans of fissure orbitalis the contents. inferior The the helps orbital

ganglion, cause eroding is tumor. apical syndrome lung commonest for The Horner’s the a tumor an which is cervicothoracic typically

patients who Horner’s (sweating). induced necessary for syndrome suffer A be severe hyperhidrosis surgically may their so that debilitating are to be of often embarrassment. This condition home severe confined for may fear patients straightforward. Treatment is relatively tube and is anesthetized endotracheal main The the placed patient into and bronchi. is left right a bifurcate appropriate the is small surgically a induced pneumothorax incision the made intercostal is side, created. in on A and space through lung. patient is The the contralateral ventilated

readily cervicothoracic apex from an the of can cavity and ganglion thoracic the Using identified. endoscope inside the viewed be include techniques excision. surgical thermocoagulation and Obliterative removed, After the has is the hole reinflated, the is lung destroyed, and small ganglion been sutured. is endoscope the

In the clinic

of eye the Examination

the the process. extrinsic disease of eye isolation part systemic function, of processes in affect that capabilities, Examination visual eye as the assessment of and its includes may musculature or and the the

visual color color fields, circumstances. Examination the acuity, variety for eye of (to of blindness) a interpretation astigmatism, tests and in visual includes exclude lens, the the the its and assesses also The and nerve optic coverings, retina, physician cornea. the

[VI], abducent nerve are muscles the extrinsic the nerve [IV], supplied the trochlear [III]. by The and nerve oculomotor

oblique—trochlear [III]. appropriate eye synergistically provide lateral [IV], to remainder—oculomotor The extrinsic superior [VI], nerve work movement: muscles nerve nerve and conjugate and rectus—abducent

in systemic diseases. may eye be affected The and may and retinal cataracts, hemorrhage, all affects disease, typically mellitus cause Diabetes vision. macular impairing eye the

or the paralysis injury direct Occasionally occurs with trauma. compression muscles be injury, which and or is unilateral brainstem due associated nerve tumor of may to extra-ocular of muscle. easily move of that is muscle a The to paralysis normal eye in patient demonstrated when direction the action associated the the attempts with vision (diplopia). double the of patient Typically complains

the Loss of eye around innervation muscles of the

of tightly, droop [VII] of the to away by of to tears. eyelids lower spillage causes the nerve innervation causing oculi an Loss inability allowing close the orbicularis facial eyelid the of This allowing the infection. which of may tears allows so ulcerate, loss secondary drying conjunctiva,

an the ptosis. innervation a damage producing superioris Loss oculomotor causes of inability eyelid superior of the complete levator by nerve [III] of elevate, to palpebrae severe is [III] Usually, caused injury. oculomotor head by damage nerve

muscle Loss ptosis. constant partial superior causes innervation sympathetic by tarsal of the fibers of a along Any sympathetic can lesion induce the trunk this. 920). (see p. syndrome the part the apical because malignancy of be should suspected “In Horner’s always ptosis An be pulmonary may on clinic”

In clinic the

“H-test” The

“LR6SO4 that the remembering simple nerves superior palpebrae rectus all are rest the (lateral [IV], is oblique 3” innervate muscles extraocular rest and A for “formula” including the [VI], are the levator superioris [III]). all

her a tip VI] IV, eyeball having “H” as two orbits nerves patient in the the The such midline function eyes can time in muscles from all the between or an pen the moving finger moved by of head, that and a pattern—starting be of track, an at object (Fig. without the the both their move same easily [III, all or extrinsic tested his 8.98).

In the clinic

amount the Intraocular and increases. fluid of aqueous absorption fluid pressure disturbed will of rise normal humor the cycle that is production so if This problems visual compression glaucoma and to of lead and supply. its from blindness, blood condition results the which is of can including variety a retina

In the clinic

increasing of the age With in states opaque. disease the lens becomes certain and eye in results opacity Increasing increasing visual impairment. cloudy common with new a replacement lens A lens. excision of is operation man-made and the

clinic In the

the in eye settings. chamber is clinical (vitreous) of of the possible postremal visualization Direct most through light posterior the allows pupil a is the tiny which ophthalmoscope, visualization It a eye and wall of postremal lens. lens battery-operated an of achieved and chamber with direct the is using the the small (vitreous) that better to is for onto the eye necessary visualization. drug to the sometimes It a directly pupil dilate place

optic is observed as easily The optic nerve, disc, the seen. central also the retinal artery are fovea the and The seen. typical of branches four

optic of ophthalmoscopy the nerve, and look within abnormalities, diseases the Using changes vascular can retina for the physician (Fig. 8.109).

the clinic In

optical coherence High-definition (HD-OCT) (Fig. tomography opaque images materials. procedure translucent to subsurface or of used a obtain is 8.111) is light produce It except to cross-sectional images. uses it to instead high-resolution similar of sound that ultrasound, optic management is especially useful nerve and of and retinal the in diseases. It diagnosis

(Fig. membrane epiretinal An problems. is develops can cause of the that fibrous 8.112) tissue macula a of the on surface retina visual the sheet the area and in of thin the problems be removal significant, the surgical are membrane necessary. may of If visual

clinic the In

the balances links The pharynx outer the eustachian between middle the tube middle ear and pressure ear. and and Colds fluid the tube, then impair ear. of drainage particularly middle the from can of and of the lining eustachian in in swelling which result children, can allergies, normal cause membrane, for behind bacteria The and an attractive tympanic otitis grow the viruses then to media. providing up and builds fluid environment membrane, untreated, and brain the lead abscess. perforation otitis of media can tympanic Left meningitis, hearing to loss,

In the clinic

ear Examination of the

ear internal and The components—the comprises ear. external, three middle,

is Clinical carried assess out balance. to examination and hearing examination use otoscope Further an other or imaging involves techniques. of

external easily ear The examined. is and acoustic (Fig. the The examination require membrane tympanic otoscopic meatus external 8.118B). the An be and external and light otoscope can the membrane. a which inspect to the through magnified image shone acoustic tympanic meatus device is

the the by aspect examination the ear retracting begins it and external to gently of straighten grasping The posterosuperior auditory meatus. and tinge. gray–reddish tympanic membrane relatively a has translucent is The normal the of is membrane. malleus the handle The the visible center of near always light of position 5 is o’clock cone a the demonstrated. In

ear the middle visualize and and investigated malleus, is MRI incus, CT to The by stapes. determined of to any ear these bones middle is cavity and the identified. relationship masses The

assessed ear is CT by The MRI. inner and also

the clinic In

the ear, acoustic painful Swimmer’s in meatus. from external is resulting often externa, infection a otitis an called condition frequently It swimmers. occurs in

the clinic In

lump” development ear, in cold is water, in which prevalent a the surf or of external Surfer’s swim who “bony individuals the acoustic results among meatus. from ear. the the hearing and meatus constricts reduces in lump affected eventually Growth of the

clinic In the

many has Although the are (eardrum) tympanic common. the trauma most and of causes, perforation infection membrane

the tympanic membrane is to heal of large. be rupture the Ruptures spontaneously, if necessary may but surgical intervention tend

the may to ear tympanic middle enter through the Occasionally, necessary membrane. be it membrane, tympanic are always below of tympani incisions Because chorda upper runs the the level. the in this one-third posteroinferior the The blood in supply the tympanic richer surgical membrane to determines aspect. standard posterior of approach the the aspect

of to can media common is perforation middle membrane. of tympanic the ear) the and (infection Otitis lead with be treated antibiotics. usually infection The can change If deafness. chain may ossicular ear the the infection inflammatory the persists, chronic and structures to produce other the within damage middle

In clinic the

usually mastoid in is middle within cells and infection secondary mastoid ear. Infection antrum the to the infection. culture cells for an excellent mastoid The medium provide of spreading may the middle (osteomyelitis) fossa. bone also the Infection cranial develop, into

air numerous this. is are and approaches for the the mastoid there pus doing of cells Drainage within necessary of extremely is the When that type important injury nerve the wall prevent this taken it facial to of to not undertaking [VII]. is damage to ear surgery, mastoid care middle the to meningitis allow table vault cranial of Any and breach the the of inner may ensue. enter will cavity cranial the bacteria

the In clinic

to produce of the anterior sensation lingual mucosa, of lip, in chin. tongue, lower fossa injury the the and it the A tympani infratemporal two-thirds the chorda where proximal oral will loss from general the nerve gingivae, joins

If also the chorda will glands site lost. the lesion it oral below lingual by salivary the anterior taste where is tympani, and to secretion distal from be fissure of the joined the is from a nerve the tongue two-thirds

In clinic the

alveolar dentists. the Anesthesia of practiced nerve by widely most is inferior information sensory branches one of largest mandible. inferior is the and the mandible, alveolar receives The teeth most skin [V3], from the sensory and the the branches over nerve of of carries from nerve mandibular the

the courses into passes the canal, through of nerve the mental eventually chin. into the inferior through alveolar emerges mandibular foramen and the The body mandible,

inferior anesthetic. alveolar nerve the by local of is arch) anesthetize the the inferior fauces along deposited ramus so can the be around placed cavity in region. this nerve oral the of To the of the in third border is of needle this (palatoglossal arch and mandible medial the anesthetic advanced to that the anterior lateral

to needed. anesthesia buccal on infra-orbital nerves, is and the anesthetize depending the is possible where also It

clinic In the

access peripheral however, veins, most catheters will obtaining the tendency in for certain or analysis; it drugs nutrition, a circumstances phlebitis. drugs place dialysis, for central of fluids administration blood to arm intravenous have necessary for in the to for and is leg the and to that example, the veins for parenteral larger-bore administering instances, of and suffice In produce

jugular veins practice. venous obtain and access used be central the standard “Blind to to subclavian of puncture” vein complications. without puncture not subclavian However, is the the over inferiorly, subclavian clavicle, apex posterior passes the passes vein it lung. the to As of structure the producing a needle Any puncture or pleura, may of a this apical into through misplacement pneumothorax. laceration vein produce and also may a puncture arterial Inadvertent hemopneumothorax.

the vein of A puncture jugular internal (Fig. to fewer damage complications. carries the artery and important are risks, hematoma carotid again but local 8.165)

to ultrasound under vision access to direct significant any using practice Current venous central identify major complication. is obtain and avoid vessels to

In clinic the

is the of and venous enables waveform the sign venous side pulse functioning clinical right important an assess the to The is physician pressure heart. reflection jugular of of a the that and the

the clinic In

develops small tissue thyroid from gland base a the of The tongue. region of near the cecum from foramen hyoid middle posterior tongue This the the the as bone. descends of duct to of aspect the in the of anterior thyroglossal tissue the the adjacent pass aspect to tissue the to of neck. anterior and the continues aspect eventually in trachea migrate the to rest comes The inferiorly root at the of thyroid

Consequently, embryological the arrested of descent of thyroid gland. migration be the may tissue along anywhere the rare. is thyroid tissue relatively Ectopic the seen the cystic arises is change that More frequently from duct. thyroglossal a The mass. cyst a symptom duct is midline thyroglossal of usual Ultrasound position, treatment and is by easily demonstrates nature and excision. its surgical the of must The excised recurrence. the bone part whole duct a aspect as well the hyoid of as of to small prevent anterior be

clinic In the

common is thyroidectomy A a surgical procedure. of or most involves In of the gland. it part most thyroid cases excision multinodular thyroid procedure carried and as diseases, cancer. goiter is surgical usually such out benign This for

other there the glands carrying of the location and thyroidectomy, gland, structures a nerve damaging namely is a out thyroid Given laryngeal parathyroid the when the (Fig. recurrent possibility of 8.181). the folds surgery before that is and recurrent the laryngeal and nerves to vocal during the be of related gland because closely larynx to Assessment are the necessary easily can bind surgical procedures. traumatized ligaments thyroid after

the In clinic

complex. is gland extremely Thyroid pathology gland assessed from points should thyroid two of view. pathology In essence, be enlarged, gland numerous which focally First, the diffusely are thyroid causes. be for there or may Second, the hormone may thyroid thyroxine. oversecrete gland undersecrete the or

a gland is diffuse the thyroid with colloid is hypertrophy gland disorders areas of cyst commonest which and irregular formation. enlargement of the One thyroid a of the multinodular thyroid goiter, of are levels). serum (i.e., thyroxine normal euthyroid have patients Most or the is managed a is medically may which life the diffuse respiratory problems. patient’s affect The mass neck, be large need mass enough or surgical typical in cause excision if may symptom the to

nodules dominant nodule thyroid tumor possibly in in of multinodular a an gland. the gland Isolated gland or isolated may thyroid a the be secrete not Isolated their may or depending morphology. thyroxine on cellular tumors may usually excision. Treatment by is

overstimulate to produce gland and thyroid it the excessive thyroxine. affect may may diseases Immunological be which exophthalmos, diseases associated may manifestations, include myxedema, other and nail pretibial with These extrathyroid changes. of thyroid causes diffuse thyroiditis. Other viral stimulation include to gland, of of diseases undersecretion (myxedema). thyroxine cause the Some leading may thyroid atrophy

clinic the In

adult locations their The to and during more glands develop development. and the third pouches pharyngeal translocate parathyroid from fourth highly position sometimes the variable, of in thorax. neck high The can the glands or be the situated in being locations these in Tumors (Fig. any of develop 8.182).

the clinic In

to and or right left to speak. Damage a recurrent an finally to may hoarse inability initially nerve either voice the to laryngeal lead nerve laryngeal Recurrent from the course. of disruption nerves along occur anywhere can their palsy the vocal division interruption can laryngeal of vagus nerves of symptoms. nerves before also recurrent Furthermore, the the produce

the whereas as that left artery area can right recurrent apex cancer “aortopulmonary nerve, the infiltrate nerve. the the affect laryngeal into an recurrent window,” area Lung laryngeal affect pulmonary the cancers of lung aorta, and between the known can right clinically in the nerves. Thyroid can the recurrent laryngeal traumatize surgery also

the clinic In

the Clinical lymphatic of drainage and neck head

processes that of manifestation nodes (cervical and neck. the Enlargement common is neck in lymph a lymphadenopathy) the head occur disease of the of a diffuse and certain of infection. human of also diseases glandular body, and immunodeficiency as types viral manifestation virus is common lymphoma, such infection (HIV) fever include sarcoidosis, It which

primary nodes the process important etiology produced of cervical that of disease and lymph the nature enlargement. determining in nodal is extremely Evaluation has

and from to neck. particularly evaluation relating the Clinical health includes symptoms head a general assessment, often clinician themselves the the nodes gives Examination nature of clue process. the a the of to as pathological

is to lymph acute nodes be an Soft, most which inflamed tender, process, inflammatory suggest and infective. likely

rubbery nodes lymphoma. often Firm suggest multinodular of diagnosis large-volume a

nodal retroperitoneum, axillae, regions, Examination the careful should the also other supraclavicular include fossae, the of inguinal assessment including the and regions.

include body CT Further scanning. examination endoscopy, tract radiography, may and chest digestive

to Most lymph suitable palpable nodes easily cervical and establish diagnosis. biopsy tissue a for are obtained. be samples Biopsy good of ultrasound performed and lymph using for nodes be guidance can may

complex, somewhat lymphatic of is the drainage neck The clinically. evaluating enlargement has relatively been in primary nodal head and extremely designed system is “level” of node A of neck simple spread helpful that lymph tumors. nodes, be size of mode levels can the number best nodes of lymph the treatment are instituted. determined, of the and of Once the surgery, and radiotherapy, chemotherapy. This include may The node a be lymph prognosis made. to enables level also levels (Fig. as The follows are 8.199):

gland. midline the the Level the up of submandibular I—from level to the submental triangle of

bone the muscle. base hyoid anteriorly of border the to level sternocleidomastoid II—from skull from the Level the of the posterior

midline. inferior bone to the of anterior to the border cricoid arch sternocleidomastoid III—the posterior aspect to of and the Level bottom the the up hyoid

sternum top border and the of sternocleidomastoid of anterior the IV—from the the inferior of Level manubrium muscle. the the cricoid the to of aspect to posterior

of the level the to sternocleidomastoid V—posterior the muscle above the to anterior Level clavicle. trapezius muscle and

Level notch the midline. the (sternal) the VI—below above jugular in and hyoid bone

level VII—below jugular of the notch. (sternal) Level the

the In clinic

an the In vocal and to through when folds, above the blocked ligament median the airway. tube level can emergency be of is cricothyroid small airway the perforated establish the incision inserted situations, a presence and structures the there the ligament median few occasional skin. and lobe for of a of the the gland, thyroid pyramidal are between Except normally cricothyroid vessels small

the clinic In

in and made a is a is ventilation. procedure surgical enable hole the a which tube inserted is to trachea in tracheostomy A

of typically when there is foreign severe larynx body, and to performed inhalation of trauma. severe A head is tracheostomy edema or neck reaction, as secondary anaphylactic to a the obstruction a result

which atmosphere is typical performed operating in in the tracheostomy calm a situation an is of theater. The the A transverse placed anteriorly. incision neck third the is small of lower in deviated muscles are easily the strap visualized. The laterally and can be trachea the of Occasionally divide the is it to necessary isthmus thyroid gland. and the is small made a tube An second inserted. in tracheal rings incision tracheostomy third and

time, is it After required situ tracheostomy been length removed. of the the in simply for has without almost The hole was inserted through it inevitably closes any which intervention.

long-term to is are Patients vocal unable with tracheostomies the no air through because cords. passing vocalize

In the clinic

the to that inspect Laryngoscopy is used a procedure larynx. medical is The of tumors, and the swallowing, voice. assessment the include difficulty evaluation assessment weak larynx laryngoscopy cords, of patients and vocal functions the masses, for of of with

is The visualized larynx using methods. two typically dental involves to small indirect visualization passage a of a oropharynx into mirror) larynx. permitting of (not laryngoscopy Indirect dissimilar rod-mounted the mirror the the direct allowing the and Direct curved using a epiglottis that laryngoscopy of performed can with tongue inspection larynx. metal a forward, device tip be holds in patient whom reflex a intact. This only the in gag performed or be the is patient in not unconscious procedure can fiberoptic oral cavity. through of nasal of either inspection passage Other methods the cavity the include endoscopes or

In the clinic

other in trauma. nasal uncommon, is one cases midline; many not to to side septum typically is or and secondary deviation situated in however, the The is direct septal the can deviation Extreme septal nasal occlusion. produce can be deviation corrected The surgically.

In the clinic

the oral sinuses, Most the from larynx, squamous them, epithelial arise cells of that salivary glands cavity, carcinoma. cancers and oropharynx, nasopharynx, cell resulting line in to The related cell damage by alcohol are these smoking of use. and majority caused neck, are human in papillomavirus and also (EBV). Epstein-Barr virus cancers viruses head the Certain to and related including (HPV)

and 50-year-old hoarseness overweight noisy doctor A came voice of breathing. of the to woman complaining was at size also She concerned her increase of neck. in the On slow beats examination rate she per pulse a had minute). (45 the lower right. the in irregular aspect knobby neck, mass deviated the had an trachea also which the She anterior of to

A clinical diagnosis goiter of hypothyroidism made. multinodular was and a

thyroid-stimulating secretion output thyroid which is usually Enlargement of gland hormone, increased is to of hormones. diminished secondary of to thyroid the due periods (colloid formation activity are The which thyroid undergoes to cysts). partially of of cystic and lead regression, some the and are can which nodules, of which solid some of formation gland. fibrosis the nodule areas within compounded by is This of multinodular certain and interfere causes deficiency production drugs circumstances, and metabolism of thyroxine. with that goiter in the of include iodine Other of thyroid the painless gland. is goiter a swelling a of typical The symptom occasionally into and mediastinum goiter. superior as It retrosternal or smooth the it nodular, extend a may be may

The deviated. trachea was

multinodular goiter due gland be to the thyroid symmetrical. not enlargement The a of may lobe right. trachea this to the case the there In of the was asymmetrical of the left deviating significant enlargement thyroid

noisy had voice a hoarse The breathing. and patient

an such narrowing “crowing the compress that thyroid to it If during inspiration sound” is can it extent trachea, gland a heard is significant (stridor). enlargement the

cord of recurrent from include Other paralysis the goiter. due nerve for of hoarseness the left compression possible laryngeal to the vocal causes concern change recurrent invading of goiter the nerve. is laryngeal malignant possibility within Of directly the the rare the Fortunately, gland. thyroid within change malignant is

that infections. have reduced rate throat production basal When of they including tract become respiratory the such infection, more relatively susceptible is thyroxine upper metabolic and to a low patients

during On thyroid swallowing. moved examination gland the

mass is arising neck the evident one of an trachea. on or enlarged Characteristically, a both thyroid as gland sides swallowing on it thyroid to the the enlarged by because attached The pretracheal is moves larynx gland fascia.

hypothyroid. patient was The

thyroid is underactive biochemical thyroid the an (hyperthyroidism gland state and Hypothyroidism refers in clinical to which the refers overactive to gland). Some and clinical no thyroid are euthyroid. biochemical have patients or patients masses abnormalities—these

weight resting may some produce other the the levels in cases gain, pulse and including depression. thyroxine The changes, hormone and of affect therefore, rate; low rate basal controls thyroxine metabolic

upon insistent surgery. was patient The

performed. and the a risks subtotal discussion complications, about thyroidectomy After was and around procedure in carpopedal feet complained mouth, tingling her and patient the of spasm. hands and the her After serum are calcium and symptoms tetany by of are These low typical caused levels.

and level four was of the in low situ the of etiology serum the The bruising operation. trauma after glands left calcium parathyroid a the appropriately. large within such Undoubtedly to removal failed parathyroid function the a gland, produced change thyroid which trauma of gland of carpopedal resulting decreased over 24 secretion peripheral increased the and hours, rapidly manifest in hormone nerves, parathyroid orofacial of The of tingling. by next excitability spasm elicited (Chvostek’s sign). gland be produce twitching Muscle emerges nerve can the to tapping of spasms also parotid from by muscles [VII] facial the facial as it the

the low due these patient a over symptoms recovered next level to hours. from 24 The calcium

which removal to placed gland. necessary clinic the thyroxine, oral At of thyroid patient is on her the supplementary the after was return

complained a The of also patient voice. hoarse

laryngeal to the hoarse nerve. of recurrent damage etiology was The voice her

nerve thyroid The close the recurrent to gland. laryngeal lies a and of produce spasm procedures, vocal damaged cord this difficult produce It unilateral the hoarse be may may voice. ipsilateral surgical in to

the has institution Since no and lost of complaints. treatment, thyroidectomy thyroxine has and patient weight the further

team. 33-year-old his A Sunday was for playing local man cricket short, of his pitched he As the bowler side the bounced him on anticipated it than new head. and higher ball hit the to he feet felt the He about ground was and unconscious, well. immediately after but 30 helped otherwise his fell seconds to It was had around he some temple. noted his bruising He playing watch side. went continue decided the to the not match and from to he hour became eventually Over unrousable. extremely the next was sleepy and He hospital. to rushed was

was to was the When and breathing necessary admitted it and was hospital, to him. patient’s irregular intubate shallow he a demonstrated pterion. the radiograph fracture A in region skull of the bruising other minor than other over demonstrated temporal No tissue fossa. left the soft abnormality was

was A performed. scan CT

of CT high density lentiform demonstrated the cranial scan within left area The fossa. a

was of A diagnosis extradural made. hemorrhage

Fractures the dangerous. pterion are region the in extremely of skull with middle conjunction division disruption, subject deep artery a this injury in this of and meningeal region. the to laceration A in passes is to structure and especially bleed, a the clot. meningeal large and producing artery In case extradural was to this started torn middle

to began pressure blood increase. patient’s The

a out goes what must come clearly fixed volume blood, fluid). the cerebrospinal Within (e.g., is and skull in there such it can hematoma, there is an If is no a as space-occupying lesion, into decompress. there which space extradural intracranial expands, becomes and the the lesion As brain the pressure compressed increases. compresses vessels, perfusion lowering pressure This the so pressure. cerebral the the blood mechanisms in homeostatic body the combat increase pressure of this intracerebral the overcome to increase To pressure. at and intracranial the pressure is the Unfortunately, that occurs the initial compounded edema increase insult. in by after cerebral

performed. procedure was surgical An urgent

it the was Burr of were holes placed evacuated. and hematoma around region the intensive the the small was artery care a The branch meningeal of patient days in middle the few and spent ligated unit. uneventful patient Fortunately an made the recovery.

punch involved sustained fight man right in and a the to orbit. was a A 35-year-old double came vision. with to emergency He department the

double The only plane. was in vision one

adducted. look of right to that to move when asked patient revealed was the Examination unable orbits upward the when was eye the superiorly There general limitation was movement. in eye some of muscle and (abducent eye [VI]), (trochlear rectus [IV]), (oculomotor [III]) otherwise the lateral superior muscle the was unremarkable. of nerve the Assessment nerve muscles nerve oblique rest

CT The patient underwent a scan.

(Fig. the of floor the the orbit scan of through CT a bones demonstrated facial A fracture 8.293).

in the of A oblique pulled fragment inferior had muscle the bone review fracture. careful been scan the that inferiorly of with this demonstrated CT so was a tethering the eye direction, of the patient upward produced eye unable This do left effect, the to was the oblique tethered gaze the to so inferior was able asked right in to because when muscle. but

position. surgical fragment inferior The exploration oblique appropriate its underwent patient the elevate the small bony to to return and complications. On patient had no the follow-up

before swelling A in complained of ear around front mealtimes. right his and significant man 25-year-old of This considerable provoked associated by lemon pain, with the ingestion was swelling sweets. of was which upper in right a On hard he the examination around right was teeth. the parotid adjacent the demonstrated nodule tenderness and mucosa buccal region molar had to

made. diagnosis A was parotid of duct calculus

in is gland a long mouth. in than the not is glands the floor the the the upward likely duct of but saliva submandibular of the course gland has from the more formation stones The parotid salivary more and in it mucinous because uncommon, is stones and in gland Nevertheless, ducts. the form parotid parotid the do occur with and calculi dental most mouths hygiene duct parotid excellent calculi duct in mucosa. Notably, and submandibular

ultrasound performed. was scan An

stone (eFig. parotid An of evidence a ductal scan demonstrated distal duct initial with end ultrasound in dilation right of the the 8.294). demonstrated and evidence the the gland Assessment lymphadenopathy. intraparotid within dilated ducts of of gland also

treated patient was with The antibiotics.

was bacteria A produced of the inflammation. course that given antibiotics the remove to had and infection. size some return On days to normal the gland doctor was or in was inflammation the of evidence there later no

operation was An necessary.

duct permitting the stone, stone to straightforward and make seem gland The buccal the incision and in it drain and thus sphincter small parotid the end was at logical of distal the the the at to deliver normally. mucosa a would this in gland bacterial the Unfortunately, significantly destroyed was patient’s the and obstruction by infection. chronic case the demonstrated in gland smaller calculi at Furthermore, ultrasound. were also previous it was that it had had that removed patient over the decided and On the should appeared attacks years direct surgically. parotid 4–5 the numerous questioning be gland

time. patient at gland this removal had the was facial discussion the of consented for parotid and paralysis for a of of loss with possibility and The the function facial patient

nerve Within terminal five the the its facial gland branches. parotid into divides [VII] is from to operation gland dissection and facial careful of nerve is away gland [VII]. the At extremely the peel branches parotid the displayed the necessary by inflammatory the procedure within difficult chronic This was made change the more gland. recovery, of the mild the though paralysis some patient whole of the procedure was side a face. right there the the good made of After to tongue anterior was the preserved. two-thirds taste of the Importantly, taste of the of tympani the a [VII]. the to chorda which two-thirds The nerve anterior travel the is nerve, facial in fibers branch tongue sensation to not within nerve (taste). facial facial to nerve does the nerve parotid leaves to nerve special the any This parotid [VII] gland; affect [VII] the gland the join lingual therefore, damage proximal the

the to during and was nerve Over due bruising following improved week procedure. the likely paralysis the The asymptomatic. remained patient

limb, 24 A the for in lasted weakness, woman emergency predominantly was right-sided with which department upper to acute hours. brought the 60-year-old went doctor. local her of uneventful about and She her extremely recovery, was the made nature concerned but an illness to see

A attack of (TIA) ischemic a transient was made. diagnosis

neurological a hours. TIA within resolving deficit A is 24 It type of stroke. is a

permanent transient. Neurological may deficits or be transient within is resolution beyond stroke. events any resolve Most established failure days 21 of days; an 21

investigation of TIA cause the into undertaken. the was An

infarction, are strokes percent result Eighty-five due of to embolization. most all which from of cerebral

the was Doppler vessels scan performed. of A carotid duplex

of plaques from that bifurcation. around The majority at develop carotid originate and the emboli consist atheromatous and Emboli debris. platelet aggregates, cholesterol, of the also arise from may Emboli secondary tumors or myocardial infarction. to heart cardiac

side. the on brain left The lesion in was the

body the gyrus. whole motor on side in represented the right motor the the sits brain, cortex strip left The of of for precentral the of which the is

of left the of duplex abnormal carotid scan ultrasound The demonstrated and (stenosis) Doppler narrowing flow internal evidence formation region. plaque with significant artery a this in approximately The 90%. narrowing was

Treatment an operation. required

and was of carotid atheromatous the A plaque) endarterectomy the (removal stenosis planned. in an ulcerating the procedure indicated of stenosis. This plaque is presence with incision carried procedure curvilinear the neck. side the left placed out The general was anesthetic of was and in under a The carotid carotid, common external and carotid, were internal arteries displayed. shunt All placed vessels flow cerebral and internal procedure. was during the carotid were common from blood clamped a to carotid maintain the into artery the artery excised. the artery The carotid opened internal was plaque and

the did patient events. procedure no extremely After and well further cerebral suffered the medical and student a patient day a interesting the the examined number However, new demonstrated following findings. of the included side on left mandible, tongue vocal to altered paralyzed to left skin of palate, the a soft deviated that inferior the and altered sensation inability to left cord, a These shoulder, the left. sensation shrug the left

was localized trauma. due etiology of injuries to nerve these The

This to bifurcation. close to be for that by of trauma neurological the are constellation carotid can accounted deficits nerves the changes be for cervical in nerves. due neurapraxia to to a The skin accounted damage can by sensation nerve to [IX]. in The palate of in due alteration neurapraxia soft the is glossopharyngeal the sensation neurapraxia while the to accessory results left of from shrug shoulder neurapraxia the nerve, The of [XI]. paralyzed recurrent due nerve cord the is inability the to laryngeal nerve of the hypoglossal Deviation be the tongue [XII]. for to by damage can accounted

injuries transient to due the these usually during surgical are procedure. Most of changes traction are and

pain her to 33-year-old and right woman the eye. came department of complaining double and vision fit well A emergency behind symptoms. other had She no examination dilated. eye right the pupil was of On the was There ptosis. a mild eye reflex down out eye and the turned that was movement present. revealed Testing of not and the pupillary

findings (palsy of the revealed nerve ipsilateral palsy nerve These an oculomotor the had that [III]). third patient

main nerve the is nerve and [III] ocular the The muscles. to oculomotor motor extra-ocular run It the arises sinus. the in the to mater the cavernous midbrain lateral and pierces dura wall of from and [III] orbit oculomotor enters cavity cranial fissure. nerve The the through the leaves orbital superior the divisions. superior inferior it into divides and its Within this fissure

lesion of nerve The site the be to assessed. needs

of nerve the pupil palsy spares painless. oculomotor nerve the Third which may and the [III], is nucleus involve typically pupillary The the through are nucleus, the supplied autonomic Edinger–Westphal ganglion. which the pass ciliary of from reflexes fibers

primary oculomotor a cannot be lesion [III] nerve nuclear The injury.

likely nerve course As is along the and the the to are both the be pupillary [III]. lesion vision affected, oculomotor reflexes of nerve may isolated associated diabetes injury, Medical oculomotor and pain. conditions but [III] not mellitus vascular disease such are with as produce an they

an lesion was caused aneurysm. by The

artery pressure aneurysm, the the communicating One on anterior of a nerve parallel the nerve of is third a the which on from the to palsy aspect brainstem. causes commonest of posterior lies nerve pupillary [III], the the loss abuts of the lead a fibers, As which the function. function over the outside nerve general to of predominance oculomotor it of parasympathetic aneurysm involves

an with imaged The angiogram. was aneurysm

The CT initially and scanning. patient underwent MRI and the for definitive test is its angiogram. assessment Willis subtraction Currently, a aneurysms the branches of arising circle of digital from artery communicating demonstrated aneurysm. angiogram the The posterior recovery. The patient surgery an excellent and made underwent

to an brought throat and 10-year-old A with nose, ENT bleeding). (nose epistaxis surgeon boy surgeon) was (ear, nose habit. was his The bleeding associated picking with the profuse and hospital on bleeding required packing. was two However, nasal and occasions admission

noted. was an indurated On inspection area

septum in an The inferior aspect area). the anterior are of typical the nasal area indurated (Kiesselbach’s findings which very often has of number traumatized a area picking. This considerable that vascular during are a veins, is nose

patient treatment. The underwent

Typical cauterization a local simple prominent usually of is treatment analgesia and which by these silver of nitrate. the Kiesselbach’s performed area, is veins application in

control. fight to which again the Unfortunately, a epistaxis, and the next day developed was involved difficult was severe in boy again

a posterior artery. palatine and of and Not also around provided is anterior only the branches which septal plexus significant arteries ethmoidal but greater branches rich from venous a the Kiesselbach’s there nasal the supply, arterial is is there the area, of These the of superior are the septal labial from supplemented branches artery.

In most is treatment conservative. cases

abnormality. Conservative usually has bleeding correcting involves the any treatment packing cavity and bleeding stopped nasal until ligating bleeding by anterior medial and medical incision ethmoidal in of maneuvers with treatment orbit, been In series through including employed, arteries cavity. supplying to arteries the patients or ligating a major a the refractory canthus other nasal have posterior the Unfortunately, the procedures of the these diverse to origin blood because nasal of cavity. of and supply fail many rich

achieved of be specific the can Determination of bleeding site radiologically.

femoral can external carotid the through By of the circulation from placing easily sphenopalatine the artery. the from cannulated and maxillary carotid catheter be the artery branch artery aorta the a into particles. can vessel demonstrated can the using be be usually small and Bleeding embolized

bleeding asymptomatic. case, this Fortunately he remained young after and stopped management further medical boy’s in

(absence 30-year-old milk). of production came menses) to and (the a A amenorrhea breast galactorrhea her doctor history of with woman of She pregnant not appeared fit and otherwise well. and was

Serum prolactin measured. was

the is gland hormone postpartum. by of pituitary breast a milk the for necessary production produced and Prolactin markedly elevated. was This hormone

Further clinical field tests defects. visual demonstrated

patient in field who performed optometrist a see visual normal aspects demonstrated the of to and visual reduction a assessment fields. lateral an The went the and bilateral was temporal symmetrical—a hemianopia. bilateral This

now pathways of the The have lesion. visual the determined site

onto the from fields aspect medial retina bilaterally. temporal is projected information the Visual of the the through the fibers side. chiasm The in midline of retina optic cross visual aspects from information that opposite is the to the medial carried the

the The is lesion the in of chiasm. optic area

of defect Any the the field optic produces chiasm bitemporal of disruption hemianopia. occur. Tumors the gliomas though do optic chiasm unusual, of are chiasm More bitemporal for cause of the optic in compression the frequently, is hemianopia. vicinity the tumors usual by

was tumor pituitary A diagnosed.

pituitary to The the extremely close and chiasm optic is anterior gland. of is loss of likely most patient of pituitary optic function and tumor) the chiasm, (a pituitary an is is explanation that the Given chiasm. tumor exophytic producing the excessive the prolactin compressing the clinical there amounts

pituitary large a of and tumor demonstrated performed MRI (macroadenoma) was scan the An gland.

shrank Drug treatment commenced the was and (eFig. tumor 8.295). stopped. endocrinological also The prolactin secretion effects of the

Follow-up scans performed. were

ensuing the tumor Over the shrank. few years to patient secrete and prolactin the Unfortunately, surgery was again performed. began

transsphenoidal approach A was undertaken.

of a fine With the cavity accuracy into instruments passed bone. very series sphenoid was nasal meticulous the through removed. pituitary approach was gland this the drilled was via bone and The

pituitary which through internal [IV], trigeminal and carotid pass. gland trochlear because nerve nerve of nerve the the both [V], sinus be [VI] [III], on must abducent artery, the oculomotor is cavernous taken Extreme sides care nerve

1121.e2 1121.e1

Fig. cont’d 8.7, Skull.

Conceptual Other Regions to Relationship • Overview

Fig. 8.16, cont’d

In the clinic—cont’d

In clinic—cont’d the

the clinic—cont’d In

the In clinic—cont’d

the In clinic—cont’d

8.5 8.4 (see for Cranial nerves Table abbreviations)—cont’d Table

the clinic—cont’d In

Muscles the of Table face—cont’d 8.7

In clinic—cont’d the

the clinic—cont’d In

Fig. cont’d 8.149,

the In clinic—cont’d

Fig. cont’d 8.235,

Fig. 8.239, cont’d

Vertebral CIII/CIV at CVI Anatomy Structures the • and Surface Levels Visualizing

Ligament Cricothyroid to Anatomy • How Surface the Locate

the • of Surface Face Major Features Anatomy

to and development, embryonic organization, science physiological of function fields Neuroanatomy of and explain structural that system. are neuroscience the seek nervous complex higher human Both to motor, fields to functions. identify simple work behavioral, the the cognitive together most questions help of and sensory, The structures basic this of of is functions human and the the of systemic components chapter nervous the and individual to introduce focus system.

system I: Nervous Part

nervous the nervous system of human Organization (CNS) is system (eFig. into central (PNS) divided system and structurally nervous peripheral the 9.1). which cord, brain vertebral Components enclosed of are of cavity are column within axial the the the and CNS and skeleton. the cranial spinal Peripheral nerves, nervous system enteric nerves, include structures nervous autonomic the spinal cranial nerves, and system.

layer week ectoderm—thickens plate a of to form the of the the embryo—the (eFig. neural outermost development third During 9.2A). longitudinally groove, neural running which This folds (eFig. plate so it a side neural deepens is by on that flanked develops either 9.2B). tubelike neurulation neural develop the neural lumen canal called form and with folds a further These to structure process the called during fuse called a eventually an tube inner long (eFig. 9.3). caudally the tube the that the so midpoint cranially by of week. starts the formed and Fusion tube fully and extends fourth at is (eFig. end form neural tube to brain proliferation the cells primary and the dilate at vesicles three the Continued cephalic cause the of later structures rise and the which give to the 9.4): mesencephalon brain. (hindbrain), the (forebrain), (midbrain), of rhombencephalon prosencephalon narrows cord. form the neural spinal Caudally, the lengthens and to tube and of of canal brain the (eTable neural forms cord canal in the the 9.1). The central spinal ventricular the system cavities nerves, cranial enteric autonomic and The consists spinal ganglia. ganglia, nervous system, the peripheral system spinal of nerves, is system neurons formed extend the peripheral develop fibers and (eFig. nerve cells by their of nervous that from migratory nervous out neural fibers that system central by crest The and 9.4A). neural originate the surface neural initially ectoderm tube, of from developing cells crest the side on each Like CNS. lie and

to used and location neural the orientation identify structures. of terms Several are nomenclature linear organisms is simple fish quite have The nervous in orientation and a system. as which reptiles, such “tail) snout, rostral For toward dorsal is ventral “belly”) for for “beak”) and the (Latin (Latin for the sky, toward the “back”) caudal toward toward these (eFig. (Latin oriented tail (Latin animals, the for ground, 9.5). Because the to are makes of midbrain–diencephalic an degrees 80 humans maintain 90 obligatory bend junction. erect bipedal posture, and an the nervous system at along dorsal, Because this, the have and (eFig. locations different such as of different caudal rostral, of directional CNS references meanings ventral, structures 9.6A). orientation terms set inferior. are to posterior, additional of and remain their superior, An system anterior, that structures of in nervous reference constant

and system When the referred plane nervous axial a the left to nervous a studied into and anterior nervous parts; coronal through inferior the one planes: system sections plane, at parts; and is which plane, angle (eFig. divides (also which right the sagittal system of right divides or three observed cut superior different horizontal plane, which posterior histopathology, oriented as coronal the parts transverse) divides in the or into to is into nervous system in and from a imaging and 9.6). to midline passing midline the as sagittal whereas plane section. a the Note be midsagittal also referred a parasagittal a referred a section lateral just section, that is to may as through taken to

(neurons) cells the cells system. components glial primary are the of Nerve and nervous cellular a connections adjoining physiological carried Neurochemical is out through between complex series signaling of predominantly neurons. a proper vital are function. that in functions cells of constellation for brain Glial participate historically and to Their the role to function regulating of include the recognition extracellular in of of appreciated has contribution regulation neurotransmitters content space expanded at their synaptic the junction. neuronal

consist soma), body of axons, 9.2). long which the which input nucleus, signals called contains short for a other cell and dendrites from neurons, from the cell (or Neurons away body receiving conduct processes processes called (eTable cell be location, variable. their quite morphology neuronal can on Depending majority end branches that are dendrites indicating multipolar, axon neurons extensively terminus (eFig. are of at mammalian a and from The that one its single there several 9.7). pseudounipolar unipolar, (eFig. neuronal bipolar, and types Some additional are 9.8).

the To cells of phospholipid-based the glial prevent propagation, form axon the of called sheath layer (eFig. insulation along linear signal a length the myelin loss of 9.7). the the and formed in sheath myelin oligodendrocytes PNS. CNS cells is by in The Schwann of segments which ion axon of Ranvier, channels. of the Interspersed myelin called are have nodes a of voltage-gated large between segments the population exposed in of node transient change potential the conduction axonal conduction in the a the called membrane) to (a node channels facilitates process ion of saltatory Presence action from voltage rapid (eFig. 9.7).

system the into somatic visceral system nervous and nervous organized nervous Functionally, system. a is system muscles. back the to carry that innervate exit The somatic nerves CNS CNS nerves of conscious regions to voluntary that sensation nervous and (skeletal) consists from the peripheral nerves sensory contrast, to motor homeostatic information and carry regulate that innervation visceral functions. the (autonomic) In consists system out the nervous CNS of into of the “Spinal discussion systems Further section. subsequent the the Cord” context somatic nervous will within of presented of visceral be and

Part II: Brain

as brain, cell bodies of outer the is layers of gray Externally, matter. or to referred surface cortex, cerebral six the of composed the axonal myelinated into Internally, hemispheres. processes cells extend these the of cerebral of of they as whitish appearance of large the Because white axons, to these bundles referred myelinated matter. are the runs is cerebral brain, is predominantly where inside cord, superficial the for the matter the located on and matter. deep the the to surface true matter In white spinal white gray hemispheres; matter the opposite is gray the cortical called both of area series infoldings cerebral the and increase hemispheres surface Topographically, of the the to elevations which has the of a sulci, of surface as significantly referred gyri brain.

occipital, parietal, four anatomical divided temporal major each lobes: hemisphere into (eFig. cerebral Structurally, and is frontal, 9.9A). frontal are The the Rolando) and located of separated parietal sulcus the lobe lobes more (eFig. from (sulcus by are central anteriorly posterior 9.9A). lobe by (fissure sulcus temporal Sylvius). the frontal the is from the of separated lobe lateral Laterally, (eFig. there aspect by between lobe the the occipital are hemispheres no is parieto-occipital parietal separated and medial along sulcus two Although specific lobes demarcation of laterally, the the the 9.9B). sagittal fissure one the midline, hemispheres are longitudinal another fissure, the Along the cerebral separated by from (interhemispheric fissure). called Concealing the lobes the for insula portions (Latin cortex referred frontal, and temporal of laterally are “lid”) to collectively parietal, (eFig. of small as operculum the area a 9.10). the diencephalon the represents by lateral The insula be fusion open sulcus. and gently prying can seen of and telencephalon

brainstem, is through and cortex achieved coursing spinal various the through white cerebral hemispheres. path pathways cerebral the matter to cord, and The from of the of referred matter is the white the surface to gray expansion an Beneath radiata. cortical corona matter as V-shaped when the deep to in nuclear sections capsule, various This structure to from condenses (eFig. a viewed pathway horizontal matter and internal axons and that white contains traversing structures form cortical 9.11). three underlying capsule connections the divided different The parts is and of internal parts into structures. on based to cortex anterior pathway and white the anterior limb, is the medially by and The laterally by globus most pallidus is which bounded caudate putamen. matter portion this of head the of the the lateral interventricular and level anterior situated the thalamus its and course limb, foramen (of “knee”) the the medial putamen. completes pallidus as Monro) and to (Latin to at limb globus genu of posterior the the into The for transitions running this callosum. stream of the corpus axonal connections is vertical In more to horizontally addition The callosum (eFig. corpus cerebral formed genu, linking divided it 9.12) horizontally two to splenium (eFig. is body, another, into rostrum, and and is a myelinated by one hemispheres axons the 9.12).

lumen from the derived developing the ventricular tube. inner is system The neural of grow, the caverns to brain of the surrounding ventricular the the to system shape pons, and form hemispheres, medulla, (eFig. cerebellum, continues the which canals As walls adapt and cerebral the of diencephalon, 9.13). and beginning the large, represent ventricular are cavities lateral Inferior fluid-filled corpus to system. callosum the two the of that two the These cerebral are lateral within (eFig. ventricles, hemispheres rostral located most C-shaped cavities the 9.14). divided all through five the lateral extend of the into are ventricles they the parts. named As of lobes cerebral hemispheres, lobes frontal the In transitions (eFig. into anterior parietal horn, (frontal) which the body and lobe the frontal within is the 9.15). horn the lobe is Projecting posterior the into occipital (occipital) (eFig. 9.15). horn the the temporal horn as (temporal) anteriorly A inferior inferiorly lobe final in (eFig. extends and 9.15). Near of the of the ventricles the come together the atrium/trigone corpus the horns at posterior, inferior body, splenium callosum, (eFig. lateral and 9.15). (eFig. the plexus Lining most of ventricles the choroid is 0.5 of cerebrospinal 9.16), for series fluid cells a responsible adults. ependymal day of modified producing L (CSF) a in

surrounded foramen the ventricles, hypothalamus CSF through (eFig. Monro) (of flows ventricle, the lateral thalamus the by which third and to interventricular is slitlike From the 9.15). midbrain ventricle through with the the communicates Sylvius), fourth via (aqueduct of aqueduct cerebral the The which courses (eFig. ventricle third 9.15). ventricular the space subarachnoid the (eFig. and lateral via anteriorly of Magendie midline posteriorly, of the and of CSF Luschka foramina by medulla into and system and cerebellum pons sends the out ventricle the the Surrounded foramen fourth 9.15).

Within bony meninx to the concentric, called brain column, skull support by for three stabilize the cord. coverings tissue Greek connective and meninges “membrane”), is and spinal CNS and word the encasement (from which of surrounded vertebral act the be section this meninges. of will focus on cranial The the different a slightly have will configuration, section. discussed meninges, Cord” “Spinal spinal in The be the which

fibrous is “hard”) two mater for dura a outermost (Latin layers. sheet for covering tough, composed the The of (Latin “mother”), the outer skull, is (eFig. and to underlying lies layer inner the periosteal The mater layer meningeal arachnoid against the adherent 9.17). they one dural to layers adherent closely sinuses, these do receive separate two (eFig. Although another, cerebral in regions form to venous venous some are drainage which 9.18). of in anatomy be discussed venous the will The sinuses section. Vasculature” “Cerebral the space, dural layer, spaces as deep space, to the and subdural to meningeal potential exist the layer. periosteal superficial epidural the Two (extradural) (eTable with 9.3). trauma during filled blood vascular can These spaces become layer reflections, areas in folds itself form mater dural cranial of cavity, meningeal septa. in the dura the or Within on to several the cerebelli falx cerebri hemispheres, the known “sickle”) the as falx the the cerebral are cerebelli for cerebellar between as and (eFig. between These hemispheres (Latin cerebellum, and the between as hemispheres reflections cerebral tentorium 9.17). the fossa pituitary pituitary A sellae, underlying covers the and gland. reflection, diaphragm smaller

Deep dura arachne is to arachnoid web”) “spider’s mater mater. the Greek the word the (from meaning the cells that mater of of layer several lie the mater adjacent of flattened layers meningeal (eFig. is dura to outer arachnoid the composed of The layer 9.19). this layer internally tissue which connect arachnoid connective to from of Strands pia extend trabeculae, form mater outer the (eFig. to 9.19). thin, and sulci follows that on the a veil-like gyri forms layer The the pia of surface the closely brain. mater the matter subarachnoid and arachnoid the are pia supplying space that major a vessels separated The brain. and CSF by blood contains

and the the arising divided vertebral supply the brain to from carotid circulation is the circulation anterior (eFig. from Vascular arteries internal posterior into arteries 9.20). carotid the internal vertebra. arteries the The level common of the arise from carotid fourth at of arteries branching the cervical cranial middle arteries canal. through carotid the the course the neck fossa the through enter to Bilaterally The temporal cavernous bone to series before turns entering then lateral the of subarachnoid portion sinus the the space make a just optic the of chiasm. pass to through and arteries petrous the artery ophthalmic to before exiting the Upon internal middle terminating choroidal rise give artery arteries gives (eFig. off cavernous continues and carotid cerebral and arteries anterior communicating and posterior as the to the artery then superiorly anterior sinus, the 9.21).

anterior to anastomose cerebral (eFig. The via chiasm communicating proximally the anterior optic the arteries anterior two artery, 9.22). corpus the the anterior lobe. this the parietal hemisphere the (ACA) to within the anterior to longitudinal the fissure medial of courses cerebral superior the border Distal of portion aspect and callosum cerebral of follows along connection, the artery course adjacent pericallosal its which immediately callosum two which follows sulcus, is corpus artery, and the (eFig. cingulate the the arise: large callosomarginal Along the to artery, branches 9.23). the the frontal its and the ACA of course portion most branches, the the perfuses aspect of brain anterior from of lobe medial the parietal to Given lobe.

arteries and middle the carotid from artery, lenticulostriate gives artery cerebral (eFig. fissure (MCA) the the penetrates lateral laterally off striate internal the Branching of bifurcating before cerebrum. superior inferior along before the into on operculum emerging divisions, the which frontal insula 9.24) the loop and convexity lateral extensively and anterior portion cortex division lobe frontal the the lateral parietal including above and lobe the fissure, a of The (eFig. the lateral superior perfuses small 9.21). lateral the including and perfuses the the anterolateral the division The inferior lobe. of cortex portion fissure, parietal lobe temporal the below

arteries. cerebral receives cortex posterior of the system supply vascular vertebral-basilar The from vertebral subclavian of begins which the from foramen with arteries through arise neck. This and vertebrae in ascend system the cervical bilaterally, transversarium the the the arteries junction, brainstem ventral at arteries to join midline courses level the entering of artery, along the pontomedullary the of basilar the which the After the form the (eFig. foramen magnum 9.20). rise (PCA), branches rise of level and gives medial and the occipital turns the temporal artery the which artery gives the to posterior inferior basilar cerebral to midbrain, At lobes. the and perfuse posteriorly that artery, artery (eFig. PCA, Also and branches connecting at artery, communicating the the a to the connects internal carotid posterior off 9.22).

veins, sinuses venous a hemispheres reaching veins, superficial system of before dural deep vein. of drainage the and the jugular follows Venous internal cerebral located veins the and meningeal reaching layers connect the between of and deep the to Before superficial periosteal jugular sinuses the internal dura. dural the veins, vessels valves this None present in network have of the in their lumen.

superior superior is cerebri along Running falx sinus. the sagittal the of the edge The to drain bilaterally (eFig. the posteriorly sinus continues superior sinuses transverse into sagittal 9.25A). the jugular sinus, sinus the sigmoid turns form Each the vein. inferiorly which to jugular transverse become foramen exits internal to margin (eFig. sinus falx is sagittal the cerebri the the inferior of inferior Along 9.25B). vein Galen the great Posteriorly, sinus. the of joins sagittal inferior sinus straight to form the the occipital as known The the sinus, the confluence of (eFig. join sinuses sinus, sinus point sagittal where and straight superior is 9.25B). sinuses. The the of transverse drained confluence sinuses is by a referred cavernous either plexus the Located fossa veins the on sinus as hypophysial of to of side is (eFig. 9.26). also sinus drainage In receives the receiving other cavernous the sinuses, the addition veins. ophthalmic from to The the and superior cavernous the jugular internal petrosal by sinus inferior vein. sinus sinuses transverse the petrosal into into sinus drained is

and the sinus. sagittal cavernous received is by veins the superior superficial primarily Venous sinus drainage from of the quite the cerebral is veins to from pattern through be variable, superficial space three constant. cortex subarachnoid appear coursing veins fairly Although the middle which parallel temporal (eFig. the to into superficial in from Positioned fissure lobe drains the the sinus the is cerebral lateral vein, cavernous 9.25A). the anastomotic cerebral is Trolard) the (eFig. vein Connecting perpendicularly to superior (of middle vein superficial 9.25A). the vein lobe the parietal superior drain courses This to across sagittal into superiorly sinus. vein Labbé) Also the vein perpendicularly is superficial connecting (of to the (eFig. inferior anastomotic cerebral middle 9.25A). anastomotic sinus. to The temporal inferiorly inferior passes transverse into vein along the lobe drain the

constant in superficial the are veins, to veins organization. their In contrast more deep deep (of great before of into eventually (eFig. Galen) veins venous cerebral the drain dural the entering vein sinuses Most the 9.27). Traveling middle to MCA vein the and cerebral and are adjacent cerebral deep anterior vein. the ACA continues the of deep basal aspect veins lateral vein Rosenthal), which These the join form midbrain. the (of to around cerebral of veins the joining the the and veins (eFig. by foramen interventricular the bilaterally internal are thalamostriate at septal Formed 9.27). vein veins cerebral great form to to cerebral the (of join the veins Galen) internal midbrain, and the basal Posterior (eFig. 9.27). straight inferior the the vein sagittal sinus. sinus From great to joins here the cerebral form

III: Part Thalamus

large, of 9.1). mass diencephalon eTable The derived the of is from a gray “inner chamber”) matter (Greek egg-shaped (see brain the for thalamus developing of significant thalamus role cerebral the synaptic for pathways most relay cortex. is a to projecting The the as the enhance thalamus information to prevent However, gatekeeper the state. as on transfer, or behavioral depending acts a also have Sensory, modulatory relays all thalamic signals circuits and arousal and behavioral synaptic nuclei. the limbic, within from motor,

of its is neighbored the and also system. the of within Because portions the by deep ventricular brain, location thalamus structures several interventricular to the contact (eFig. connects ventricles and lateral third forward extends foramen, the the which thalamus Anteriorly, 9.28). the Together, ventricle. masses comprise ventrally thalamic of located third nuclear lateral the hypothalamus and the the walls of internal limb to the posterior the is (eFig. Immediately thalamus lateral capsule the 9.29). midbrain (eFig. is and the the the thalamus is to body brainstem ventricle, of Related aspect the the dorsal caudally of extending of portion the lateral 9.28). third thalamic the midline the Across two of interthalamic interconnected are the ventricle, adhesion. the by masses

(3) of their the medullary coursing are lamina, axons Based and relationship nuclei myelinated medial, anterior, (1) (4) lateral, thalamic (eFig. through on classified rostrocaudally (2) four internal to the intralaminar groups: Y-shaped a band into thalamus, the 9.30). categorization, to this divided classes: are and three (1) (2) intralaminar, nuclei structural functional the reticular. In (3) major addition into relay, have mentioned of most of cortex. thalamus is with earlier, As the which reciprocal composed excitatory nuclei, relay the connections sensory based into subdivided nonspecific specific areas Relay to and cortical diffuse are projections. and primary on further of more motor nuclei the specific their projections or cortex fact, olfaction, majority the sensory have the of The the thalamus modalities, specific reaching before of in exception relays primary nuclei lateral all in thalamus—in lateral with cortical their target. relay reside their nuclei specific eTable reviewed cortical and can connections 9.4. nonspecific and of be Details in

the with formation internal have reciprocal ganglia medullary projections, Intralaminar and nuclei basal reside and numerous within reticular primarily (eFig. lamina the major and two rostral of functional the intralaminar 9.30).There are regions nuclei: caudal. intralaminar also with the basal system. ascending input connections nuclei activating have reciprocal reticular relay ganglia from The the rostral and large in basal the nucleus, circuitry. include involved Caudal which predominantly nuclei, centromedian ganglia intralaminar are

The reticular just nucleus limb sheet-like along the (eFig. of capsule aspect the is of thin, thalamus of internal the a to medial lateral thalamus the posterior structure the 9.30). which the and not of to thalamic input to nuclei the thalamus. the cortex, thalamic from does Unlike projections the rest but send rather other cortex, reticular cerebral nuclei, the back receives nucleus the project of organization this of it and effectively. reticular Functionally, to with GABAergic the inputs regulate along neurons outputs, allows activity nucleus, the thalamic quite

cerebral choroidal from the lenticulostriate carotid, the from from supply cerebral and the arises anterior of branches arteries the arteries. the penetrating from artery ACA, to middle posterior internal Vascular thalamus branching thalamoperforator arteries artery

IV: Part Brainstem

within cord skull forebrain structure connecting fossa of a cranial and is brainstem spinal the the posterior The stalklike (eFig. the 9.31). consists pons, caudal, of midbrain, brainstem the From the to rostral oblongata. and medulla to it CNS; it and and is three reflex houses cord); III (3) Broadly main XII for that for ascending (2) cranial regulation brainstem the the (1) cardiovascular centers the related respiration, descending the cervical in location to has is speaking, nuclei conduit and a function, consciousness. is spinal functions: it tracts (note nerve through CNXI of the and Externally, features each many of appearance distinct the has portion that a functional define its brainstem structural roles.

the the length, posteriorly (eFig. Approximately connects in and cerebellum forebrain to midbrain caudally the the pons cm 2 9.32A). the through there fossa, deep fossa. Along which on the perforate several the of where its the of surface is anterior the perforations has interpeduncular midline floor surface small depression, vessels a On fossa crus cerebri are either of the (eFig. side the interpeduncular 9.32B). (eFig. nerve cranial medially the crus Projecting oculomotor is nerve the from III, 9.33A). posterior are surface features the (eFig. colliculi the inferior and most The prominent on superior 9.32A). of inferior nerve Between cranial wraps (eFig. IV, lateral crosses emerges, the trochlear nerve, the the the around colliculi, aspect and midbrain the midline, 9.32A). and inferior the seen brachium brachium superior and from colliculi. as in direction anterolateral inferior they Laterally, can superior an project the be

approximately medulla is the (eFig. midbrain, cm the and length in to to connects Caudal 2.5 midbrain the pons the 9.32B). course has anterior the midline artery groove, shallow a the basilar of along (eFig. The the surface basilar resides its where groove, 9.32B). the to either result the through a the number cerebellum of convex vast the pons of peduncle. fibers as middle bridging On the side through basilar prominent groove, shape a cerebellar has the pons of trigeminal Along the and of pons, anterolateral surface the V, sensory nerve, emerges root (eFig. of the cranial nerve the motor 9.33B). VI and (abducent), medulla, the medial from nerves At of the (vestibulocochlear) VIII emerge VII (facial), junction pons cranial (eFig. and lateral, to 9.33C). fourth faces floor forms the (eFig. surface ventricle and pons cerebellum the The of posterior the the of 9.32A). is (eFig. facial colliculus, between posterior nucleus the relationship abducent around the the the the surface nerve prominent they Along a as bump, nerve of midline wind represents fibers which the facial of the 9.33C).

medulla the brainstem, the length is 3 approximately (eFig. portion of measuring cm The longest in 9.32A). rostral of foramen connecting it to a spinal shape At level the tapers conical magnum. medulla connection caudally the pons, the the that at with has cord the the before broad of the anterior cord of the median which fissure, to continues the anterior midline the anterior surface Along (eFig. of on surface spinal is the 9.33B). the cortex (eFig. descending Lateral the are pyramids composed cerebral the fissure from motor fibers to of medullary 9.33B). fibers give the the decussation opposing the eventually of where decussate pyramids Continuing to side. way majority to the motor pyramids the of caudally, are the represent which the the underlying Lateral olives, to inferior pyramids nuclei. olivary nerve, is of the and at that nerve the hypoglossal the emerge the the It of junction cranial (eFig. pyramid XII, olive rootlets 9.33D). (eFig. inferior form Oriented a peduncles, and the between connection posterior olives cerebellum cerebellar to the medulla the which are 9.33D). rootlets XI IX and (spinal junction peduncles (vagus), X and (glossopharyngeal), rostral accessory) of cranial from the inferior cerebellar At emerge. of the to olive caudal, nerves surface medulla pons, of the posterior of ventricle floor the Like the the (eFig. the forms fourth 9.32A). the into cord. midline posterior of sulcus, the is spinal down the median Coursing posterior medulla which the continues (eFig. the of cuneate either On nucleus side by tubercles, gracile are nuclei sulcus underlying formed and and the cuneate gracile the 9.32A).

the or tectum general (Latin of structures be by (Latin “covering”), for can in brainstem tegmentum their (eFig. for identified Internal “roof”), basis the location 9.34). present each identify it to is the brainstem, in structures To best the serial sections for stained of level myelin. view another. more distinguished myelinated one from way, easily This can groups nuclear and be axons

inferior consists is of obvious landmark colliculi, the The underlying and colliculi, midbrain, cerebral the of prominent tectum as aqueduct. the superior it most typically of colliculi, which which the superior midbrain, inferior short include rostrally, caudal. the the are the stained sections Given colliculi, either located or length are serial can (eFig. mesencephalic superior of nuclei as seen and nuclei, nuclei, to section within nuclei nigra V, rostral of the such a Edinger–Westphal nerve midbrain cranial the the In addition prominent red oculomotor nuclei, be substantia colliculi, 9.35). colliculus, midbrain trochlear sections cranial caudal V, inferior nucleus, (eFig. are present mesencephalic nuclei substantia In the of of nigra the nerve and 9.36).

fibers pons from are contralateral route the rostral for transversely en multiple oriented the nuclei pontine pontocerebellar Sections cerebellum. to significant and these (eFig. running Interspersed horizontally longitudinally fibers among running axon corticospinal are 9.37). and the of the is forming lemniscus (eFig. the bundles, this fiber pons collection basal to between borderlike medial structure Dorsal of tegmental oriented a horizontally, portion 9.37). cerebellar superior seen, of neighbors the the peduncle be tract it the At because lemniscus, lateral can (eFig. medial the spinothalamic edge 9.37). matter. medial the gray the fasciculus the Near ventral to periaqueductal midline, just longitudinal resides

(eFig. the of peduncles form mid-pontine At expanding the walls lateral superior ventricle fourth cerbellar the levels 9.38). Also prominent can the level, motor middle be of nerve. also nucleus at seen, this the nucleus principal sensory with peduncles along trigeminal V, nerve cranial the cerebellar and

the fasciculus aspect lateral appreciated can the nucleus longitudinal to medial pons, the In (eFig. abducent be just caudal the of 9.39). the Also vestibular level this to cochlear present nucleus anterior at addition medial nuclei. posterior is and in the

the be pyramids. from rostral arcuate of will inferior of medulla the decussation briefly nucleus, of fibers, three the (3) internal internal From caudal (1) the and olivary levels: to decussation level of structures described the (2) section at nerves a (hypoglossal) XI include level (vagus), associated cranial transverse Nuclei the (spinal and accessory), (vestibulocochlear), of the (glossopharyngeal), VIII visible X in with inferior (eFig. nucleus IX those olivary XII 9.40). maintains level, position the At this a to midline. vertical lemniscus the medial immediately adjacent and Dorsal fasciculus medial to nucleus. longitudinal are medial the lemniscus hypoglossal the large cerebellum inferior peduncle, rostral is posteriorly. distinguishing A cerebellar the level connects structure this which oriented the to at laterally

by gracile of populated the fibers, is the of dorsal the internal nucleus at trigeminal the nucleus caudally and the medulla Continuing by the medially, laterally. cuneate level followed arcuate aspect spinal cuneate midline nuclei, the the and medulla. near medial form internal gracile can seen their of the axons be neuronal to decussating fibers arcuate to Ventral the lemniscus as the internal to anterolateral tract, be and along medulla can Lateral arcuate seen of (eFig. perimeter ventral the the to spinal trigeminal spinocerebellar the tracts and the fibers 9.41).

the caudal spinal medulla into Before cord, can transitioning pyramidal observed decussation midline (eFig. along the the of be the 9.36). continue cuneate their nuclei to fasciculi to rostrally. these the and decussating begin emerge gracile fibers, Dorsal as (CN the that accessory Note the located cord XI) in and spinal is medulla. not nucleus spinal the cervical

in brainstem, system vertebrobasilar the cranial the structures Vascular and of branches is by the posterior to other supply provided off of arteries. fossa, which arteries C2 subclavian ascend neck. the in bilaterally, transversaria vertebrobasilar begins C6 the and with the the of the cervical in mentioned “Cerebral foramen Vasculature” As the through system arise vertebrae vertebral section, to arteries from form the vertebral basilar arteries artery. pontomedullary At the fuse single the to junction, rostrally paired The terminates cerebral at the pontomesencephalic junction. basilar posterior continues as artery the arteries and

to posterior rise and and forming artery (PICA) to artery the Before basilar formation each the artery merging the a artery, of contributes artery posterior cerebellar spinal and gives inferior vertebral (eFig. spinal anterior 9.42). medulla perfuses The aspect and portion the lateral the of the inferior the PICA cerebellum. of medial The anterior the spinal medulla the portions the of from vertebral branches arteries. paramedian and and supply off anterior vascular receive of

basilar level of the caudal of (AICA) pons, At pons the inferior caudal artery off perfuses the anterior the artery and lateral portion the of (eFig. cerebellar branches the 9.43A). perfused lateral basilar levels the of by pons circumferential the artery branches are Rostral (eFig. of and B). 9.43A it Medial the branches by are basilar as perfused of off rostrally the midbrain. paramedian toward pons continues artery the of portions

and of superior and cerebellar the midbrain reaching aspect the artery the of peduncles the caudal off Just of the arteries the the cerebellar before branch dorsal basilar midbrain, superior before superior supply hemispheres. portion cerebellar the supply midbrain aspect medial from Paramedian the branches of (eFig. the basilar artery 9.43C). of before the the medial reaching The occipital, the of (eFig. emerging final lobes and the the from artery are top midbrain lateral which the inferior PCAs, thalamus, aspect temporal perfuse branches basilar and D). 9.43C

cord V: Spinal Part

cord foramen is the spinal the oblongata the magnum of with The skull. medulla the at base continuous near of the the column vertebral canal LI it the vertebral and shape, Cylindrical in occupies an in (eFig. LII vertebral to adult level 9.44). movement, sensory information (afferent) for and brain facilitation spinal mechanisms. (efferent) of convey motor through feedback course the tracts reflexes, input, the sensory to and with cord connect axonal Numerous descending and ascending and

mater, arachnoid pia spinal dura the cord meninges: mater. and the brain, is concentric Like surrounded the by mater, three mater The meningeal extends to and cranial is dura the posterior surface continuous with inferiorly the of the S2 body vertebral spinal dura inner (eFig. of the layer of mater 9.45). It bony from separated (eFig. epidural/extradural the by vertebral is canal the space 9.45). is and or theoretical instead the potential underlying adherent the arachnoid mater, not space. dura a has subdural called plane tightly the In in space unlike addition, mater the cranial cavity, to

structure cavity, arachnoid (eFig. with the the less cranial same adherent than of the of dura mater mater overall the in cord the spinal mater is the arachnoid the has a Although relationship 9.46A). (eFig. mater the of level the relationship loose created and underlying to space The by inferiorly SII subarachnoid extends pia arachnoid the vertebra the of 9.45). lower safe cord near accessing the enlarged in a space the that the spinal Given LI–LII setting creates of terminates subarachnoid point CSF vertebrae, termination (eFig. this the space and clinical for 9.45).

highly to layer vascular mater surface a pia is innermost the spinal that the The of cord. adherent is and a the Midway posterior the between roots mater pia ligament denticulate flat forms anterior the continuous (eFig. sheet, 9.46B). attach projections sleevelike the rootlets, dura mater. anterior through the the extend At mater ligament the arachnoid and denticulate onto to from out posterior position space. anchor the subarachnoid the cord delicate spinal of These central the area and attachments within

the and cord posterior and The of have sulci. longitudinally fissures several spinal surfaces anterior running surface the is the Along deep cord midline the on a separation, fissure anterior of median (eFig. the anterior spinal 9.47). a flanked either which Posteriorly is sulcus, shallower (eFig. the has separation, by posterior the side sulcus cord a spinal median posterolateral on 9.47). (eFig. are roots coalesce segment series posterior the anterior from Emerging form the at of rootlets, spinal to and which cord cord corresponding a 9.48). the pairs extend 31 posterior converge (eFig. These nerves, cord to anterior which and the spinal of form length of roots spinal 9.44). the length innervating two the accommodate to extremities. and enlarged Along of the neurons numerous the are cord regions lower upper spinal to lower extremities whereas L2 innervates S3 from (eFig. enlargement innervates upper the the to C5 T1 the The extends extends and cervical and lumbar enlargement extremities, from 9.44).

of the cord axons. of an composed A cross-section gray neuronal cell myelinated matter H-shaped neuronal outer spinal and reveals consisting white an bodies inner matter of receiving sensory ventral information or motor bodies gray dorsal cell matter of horns anterior (eFig. the bodies whereas of The or cell contain neurons, posterior contain horns 9.47). cell gray the spinal of of the the portion region L2 (eFig. be cord matter, column, to of the can intermediolateral in enlargement An lateral the T1 termed seen 9.49). the nervous enlarges to system. bodies This region of the cell sympathetic accommodate preganglionic 10 zones the Rexed’s into To cytoarchitecture further define divided is matter, as it gray the (eFig. known of laminae diverse 9.50). within to will discussions referred the as the to of relate they tracts cord. These descending be ascending spinal later and

consists whereas information axons, the funiculus the of motor sensory of axons conveying white (eFig. matter consists posterior The funiculus anterior of 9.47). lateral sensory axons has funiculus mixture information. motor The conveying both a of and

spinal through targets a that the entering the structures. cerebral other sensory CNS in with Sensory cord, series receptors information and from cortex, conducted brain is peripheral synapse of neurons sensory and temperature, modalities input. in carried these include The pain, tactile, proprioceptive pathways pathways, cerebral input region cortex. reach sensory the through somatosensory neuronal is of of Conscious the perception transmitted which primary to sensory such transmitted is In conscious there structures input, subconscious to input, cerebellum. other addition is sensory which the as sensory that pathways review conveying section discuss in perception cerebellum. the input subconscious will we simplicity, this on section pathways the and reach sensory the conscious in For

of sensations cord somatosensory cortex: pathway, fine posterior and the pathways, and ascend temperature, (1) which vibration, touch, to Two spinal lemniscal pain, (eFig. or reach the pathways the convey conscious conveys anterolateral the sensations touch; (2) within discriminative and crude proprioception of which column–medial 9.51). series pathways of transmit through these a neurons. Both of information three review We first. the will anterolateral pathway

spinothalamic, the spinoreticular, anterolateral three The and spinomesencephalic are of pathways tract. composed tracts: of course will Separate those conveyed follow tract, are of so pain aspects the through spinothalamic we neurons first. the axons spinal is located neuronal spinothalamic forming cell a ganglion of tract The in the first-order body (eFig. 9.52). posterior spinal the posterior the root to Axons enter through reach horn. then cord the axonal (eFig. and two the synapse horn the some I here, in posterior to one courses: on matter V), gray others before posterolateral descend neurons or collaterals of synapsing that Lissauer have neurons segments cord two matter in From have gray axons in second-order the with spinal the immediately and second-order tract (lamina ascend 9.51). obliquely the the commissure Axons cord contralateral on over anterolateral segments (eFig. the of tract cross spinal join side spinal the then cord second-order of two anterior within the to three to neurons 9.52). of bodies reach nucleus third-order second-order through axons ventral posterior These ascend CNS in the cell lateral to (eFig. the neuronal the thalamus the 9.52). the somatosensory the the Axons through reach from primary the then project neurons cortex (eFig. of limb capsule posterior to internal third-order 9.52).

spinomesencephalic beginning spinoreticular and a spinothalamic the similar tract. have as tracts The difference of second-order the the target structure principal axons. The is aspects does, the emotional formation arousal and as convey spinoreticular the the projects in brainstem project than tract to the pain of to the to tract thalamus spinothalamic the (eFig. reticular Rather in pain 9.52), the spinomesencephalic for colliculi and midbrain superior tract the periaqueductal of the projects and gray to (eFig. central the modulation matter 9.52).

cells ganglion column–medial of in spinal bodies posterior the neuronal a are First-order (eFig. pathway located lemniscal 9.53). carries limb lower and the reach the trunk, the Axons which information or and the from carries enter then “thin”), root fasciculus the limb cuneate the neck. spinal (gracile cord means either information to from “wedge-shaped”), which means fasciculus posterior through gracile (cuneate upper and bodies neuronal caudal the ascend nucleus within (eFig. the then gracilis cuneatus medulla These second-order the with ipsilaterally nucleus synapse to first-order cell and axons 9.53). fibers then (eFig. arcuate to these the Axons lemniscus medulla the of as second-order in contralateral the cross medial internal over neurons form 9.53). through bodies ventral brainstem These third-order posterior of reach thalamus axons lateral in the to neuronal second-order the the cell ascend nucleus (eFig. the 9.53). the Axons posterior primary third-order through neurons of limb project the then somatosensory cortex the from the reach capsule (eFig. to internal 9.53).

movements. the head, voluntary cord tracts in Descending movements; through involved coordination spinal eye and of and neck, movements; are postural basal the cerebral These and influenced originate sensory cerebellum are from cortex input pathways feedback by and brainstem circuitry and the and ganglia. from sections. will subsequent regulation control Structures be planning in influence of discussed motor and voluntary that of medial lateral motor this section In the tracts we will and review the systems. the systems in the lower an motor upper The bodies neuron with spinal a and cerebral of in with bodies tracts these neuron or cord motor each brainstem gray in cortex located composed of cell located are cell matter. We will of system first. lateral by exploring motor begin the tracts the

rubrospinal motor the lateral corticospinal Tracts tract. tract and of the lateral system include white anterior neuronal cord the located Both motor in bodies lateral horn of the the in spinal synapse on the and cell are matter matter. of column gray aspect lower lateral

the the important Clinically, and movement is of corticospinal lateral controlling tract upper responsible because tract, lower it for is most the extremities. located motor cortex bodies are this upper tract primary neurons forming in Cell motor (eFig. the of 9.54). internal these cerebri the corona the of radiata posterior upper Axons converge crus neurons reach capsule the of of through descend midbrain. to motor limb and the in the fibers, accommodate pontocerebellar aspect the These axons through the transverse in also pons location. of this present which small anterior as are bundles to continue the grouped together pyramid again fibers large and form known the the they (eFig. the medulla, reach a Once swelling are as 9.54). to form corticospinal of (eFig. spinal axons before the lateral side At to tract contralateral medulla, caudal transitioning the over cord, most decussate into the the the 9.54). motor tract will stay in axons tract, medial form and systems. ipsilateral The remaining included the the anterior a corticospinal

After neurons synapse and the of axons motor bodies the cord in portion forming decussating lateral lateral to the through corticospinal the the tract, of gray anterior cell lower matter. on spinal descend horn the lower Axons spinal cord then root the (eFig. neurons motor these anterior through the of exit 9.54).

pathway tract motor lateral the system The (eFig. rubrospinal other is 9.55). of nucleus red the this in upper of pathway the in neurons midbrain. bodies Cell motor begin the descend the and as lateral spinal ventral tegmental After decussation leaving the as column the white brainstem midline cross axons cord matter (eFig. red of through nucleus, the tract the and the rubrospinal 9.55). synapse the flexor gray and activity only activity inhibit to facilitate limb. axons regions spinal of cervical the These cord, in interneurons extensor descend of matter muscle with and horn the anterior muscle upper to axons

system and movements, of Tracts neck. motor maintaining truncal head of orientating in the gait-related involved or movements posture, and muscles automatic axial regulate medial balance, the the on system spinal system, interneurons primarily Unlike this tracts bilaterally lateral cord. in the the project within motor difficult it makes This in each system. to clinical the individually tract test the medial the We the with briefly tract. corticospinal system beginning of tracts motor anterior will four review

remaining form is tract in corticospinal that descending the by upper the to formed lateral neurons The decussate tract. did anterior the motor medulla corticospinal caudal not cord form corticospinal the to spinal tract, which descend upper anterior motor region of ipsilateral These medial neurons, the the to upper anterior remain thoracic aspect of the the level (eFig. through 9.54). to portion lower of on motor the bodies anterior axons synapse cell neurons matter. project These medial gray horn in bilaterally the of lower the neurons then spinal the through root. anterior exit Axons these motor of cord

the the bodies tract midbrain superior from dorsal axons in Tectospinal (eFig. colliculus located cell arise of 9.56). brainstem. These decussate of the axons tegmental to the after the midline form leaving tract decussation nucleus the dorsal shortly along the tectospinal in cervical medial longitudinal spinal continues near median regions near fissure. the into brainstem The the of cord the tectospinal the through tract and anterior fasciculus spinal anterior synapse Within project bilaterally cord, cell of the gray matter. interneurons to on cervical the horn in axons bodies stimuli. to response postural superior colliculus reflex receives visual is the tectospinal modulates tract movements in it visual As input, the believed that

tract in pons the from Vestibulospinal nuclei vestibular axons and located medulla. arise matter synapse horn rise cord entire vestibulospinal vestibulospinal ipsilaterally rise medial nucleus of vestibular descends spinal thoracic cord, to the the projects through (eFig. tract, bilaterally regions interneurons of the which in which the to tract, gray the to gives lateral to nucleus and vestibular spinal the lateral on the anterior length gives medial The 9.57). flexor inhibits cerebellum, upright vestibular and extensor/antigravity that this ear sensory to balance facilitates the activity and maintain inner activity an input and of receive of muscles posture. from nuclei the Given muscles tract oneself limb example, the change extension head during falling As to prevent of induced from position in tripping initiates forward. an and/or the lower limb upper

from pons tract and the arise medulla. Reticulospinal the in formation reticular axons of interneurons the the the matter. descend and synapse gray medullary anterior in cord pontine with tracts and in the axons spinal reticulospinal The ipsilaterally the white horn matter through anterior of length 9.6). in 9.5 are and reflex voluntary believed activity movements regulating to and They function in (eTables outflow autonomic

are segmental branches. supplied Vascular several cord three running and by the to vessels longitudinally spinal perfusions and spinal running spinal vessels two are The longitudinally artery anterior arteries. posterior the spinal the vertebral either The PICA. in of or cranial cavity posterior the arteries artery as originate branches posterolateral of sulcus. spinal the on descend These along length posterior arteries the the cord two cavity from contributing from originates union anterior within the the spinal the branches vertebral cranial arteries. single artery The of anterior anterior of the length cord spinal the along spinal fissure. on The the artery descends anterior median

vascular longitudinally arteries. vessels to running these eight to ten Reinforcing segmental provided supply by is medullary upper segmental thoracic lumbar in medullary The of is Adamkiewicz largest or artery the lower the region. artery the portion to on This the of lower and significantly cord. the left is spinal vessel contributes side typically perfusion of

occurs spinal anterior that series running connect posterior drainage on and cord. the a through of spinal cord the the longitudinally Venous the with of veins channels surface of

nuclei Basal VI: Part

their basal the nuclei collection location within forebrain. for the a of base gray-matter structures The deep of named are and nuclei basal a basal through movement have significant role structures. in thalamus, and nuclei voluntary neighboring connections controlling to cortex, the the posture Functionally, basal expression nuclei role of their connections various limbic to the to states. in govern and motivational pathways, behaviors In and posture the system which addition movement, have posture For involved movement. controlling focus on and reviewing voluntary this we nuclei basal the pathways section, of in structures the of purposes will the and

nuclei individually of basal variety collective the the A to terminology based morphology. on structures and to is their of refer used is coronal sections To of the to to view surrounding best of taken nuclei their basal appreciate shape levels and three-dimensional the relationship structures, it at horizontal brain brain. and in them the different

body”) striatum nucleus and caudate The includes lentiform corpus “striped the for nucleus. (Latin the putamen the anterior the their striated of name of and the structures limb bands nucleus appearance because capsule received (eFig. internal lentiform of of through This caudate of collection interconnect nucleus that the 9.58).

and viewed appear for (Latin when the includes laterally. pallidus lens-shaped which globus nucleus “lens-shaped”) putamen, lentiform The thalamus and the structures lateral the to of medially from Both these them internal are (eFig. caudate which capsule, separates nucleus 9.58). layer of adjacent the thin to capsule, putamen called the gray-matter external the claustrum. by bordered Laterally, white a matter a thin is layer is (eFig. external white claustrum the the Beyond the insula borders matter the capsule, of which 9.58).

the internal Medial nucleus. the capsule to caudate is divided the lateral nucleus of and a The which structure is large ventricle closely the into C-shaped shape head, tail, (eFig. follows caudate body, a 9.58). lateral large a horn has caudate to Rostrally, of the (eFig. lateral of ventricle contributes the the the rounded head the anterior of shape that wall 9.58). the is the of at the level, putamen continuous head this Also (eFig. caudate with 9.59). relationship collectively close and this caudate to as the of are the Because referred putamen striatum. foramen, At the body. the interventricular the of transitions caudate head to level the of the the head (eFig. is long from it of caudate as and tail to narrows body the the transitions The substantially 9.59). the ventricle. the of to body floor lateral the course Along contributes its transitions caudate thalamus border tail. Near of the the body of the the the into posterior to ventricle the of in the terminate continues anteriorly the The nucleus (eFig. roof within lateral amygdaloid horn the tail of inferior 9.59).

basal from pallidus. putamen), output to the primarily by predominantly is and nuclei (caudate striatum Input and globus received leaves nucleus the the input the nigra. all of the areas substantia cerebral nuclei, to striatum, subthalamic nucleus, thalamic Many including send brainstem, and cortex, structures nuclei and influence to incoming loops the this two understand To described: activity, indirect direct pathway. the all of integrates how simplified basal pathway the neuronal motor are information

in in of increase The overall a basal activity. an motor series has which nuclei, direct pathway through connections the result (eFig. pallidus connections which the globus with axonal begins This to sends the pathway to striatum, input 9.60A). with has output connections circuit the the then to back completes the The axonal globus to thalamus, connections pallidus which cortex. activity similar a to nucleus, motor connections of output decrease subthalamic the (eFig. addition an has in which the with results overall pathway course, The in indirect 9.60B).

Part Cerebellum VII:

largest cerebellum the The is hindbrain. the of structure within which two the of the large hemispheres, (eFig. composed resides the cranial It midline in vermis is by fossa connected are and posterior 9.61). plays role in by synchronizing cerebellum posture a and maintaining of voluntary muscles. relaxation Functionally, contraction for the influencing responsible is movements balance and and coordinating contribute how the structures examine circuitry the cerebellum the review We then structural of of the and these cerebellum. first organization to will

covered the cranial cerebelli fossa, dura the (eFig. cerebellum mater tentorium is the of the posterior by Within connects of and (eFig. peduncles the cerebellar via posterior brainstem superior, inferior and surface middle, the the 9.17) to 9.62). the of forms fourth Anteriorly, roof cerebellum (eFig. ventricle the the 9.14). On has the folia, several or cerebellum convoluted folds, fissures. by its surface, separated three cerebellum serve landmarks fissures lobes. as divide Two into to the these of anterior lobe the Superiorly, fissure separates posterior lobe the (eFig. the from primary 9.61). nodule each the flocculus inferiorly, structures which the vermis of includes the fissure defines and (eFig. from posterolateral Anteriorly the of flocculonodular and the hemisphere lobe, 9.63). the fissure, fissure, A the superior cerebellum and third of the (eFig. surfaces inferior horizontal borders 9.64).

core by of covered matter of white fold a the layer cortex a folia gray of or cerebellar superficially. central thin Each matter has the to branching of can to folia the referred the this sections plane, arbor median pattern be parallel In appreciated; the vitae often as (eFig. is 9.28). white matter nuclei. cerebellar the Deep of each masses within of hemisphere four are (eFig. the emboliform, to they are globose, medial lateral From dentate, and fastigial 9.65). as and to nuclei. interposed globose are the emboliform the Note collectively that referred peduncle, through complexes leaving nuclear from from of the superior Output the cerebellar before predominantly. originates cerebellum one four these movement coordinates the the body. on side output of hemisphere each general, cerebellar the from ipsilateral In

can cortex areas. Functionally, into the be divided three cerebellar axis The the body, including along pelvis vermis influences midline the the and of movements (eFig. abdomen, neck, the in trunk, 9.66). distal intermediate controls limbs. lower muscles Adjacent to the and the upper the of zone vermis, in motor to participates of zone planning the lateral coordinate The sequential body. movements entire cerebral cord, to predominantly by middle these cortex, Input and from of through the peduncles. inferior spinal cerebellar passing and areas the cortex brainstem come cerebellar functional (from olivary mossy climbing various or fibers Fibers entering nucleus). the as fibers (from regions) cerebellum proceed the granule form the fibers synapses of granule layer cell in (eFig. cells, dendrites Mossy excitatory with 9.67). axons the where to folia. here, in they bifurcate send the molecular From parallel cells into layer, the that run granule longitudinally fibers cell in then outermost Purkinje cells synapse on the layer (eFig. The parallel Purkinje fibers 9.67). to powerful project the Purkinje and cells. Climbing layer fibers cell form connections excitatory Purkinje with the then project cells The the Purkinje nuclei deep (eFig. to cerebellar 9.67).

receives input brainstem, the earlier, cortex, cord. mentioned As from and cerebellum spinal cerebral the involved the from cerebellum to cerebral movement. and control in is voluntary Input cortex muscle of primarily the coordination and nuclei for through descend Axonal (eFig. terminate projections on pontine the capsule cerebellum cortex the internal from cerebral the destined 9.68). nuclei from fibers the cerebellar the cross enter as over cerebellum to pontine then The transverse the middle axons peduncle. through contralateral

and the from the cerebellum joints from muscles spinal tone information conveys and Input influence to posture. to cord muscle the ventral or the include primary anterior and with spinal dorsal tracts. pathways The the or spinocerebellar connections cerebellum to spinocerebellar posterior cord joint inferior peduncle tracts ipsilateral mechanoreceptors through the the originate from cutaneous spinal (eFig. and ascend and enter to cord cerebellum the These cerebellar primarily through 9.69).

arises cerebellar vestibular A final brainstem. input the reticular formation of source from in nuclei and the primarily in of balance. connections reflexive maintenance involved are The ipsilateral cerebellar peduncle. nuclei send the projections axonal to These cerebellum the inferior through

cerebellum from nuclei. one of Output cerebellar the four the from deep originates the largest cerebellum dentate the nucleus. fibers from The collection originates of leaving in peduncle. this project thalamus Axons to nucleus nuclear the cerebellar contralateral the superior from decussating complex after of ventral the the to motor the thalamic nuclei here, From of cortex axons project (eFig. 9.70). pathway and posture This influences movement.

with another addition target. The synaptic axons nuclei, from as interposed nuclei, or and of the a have dentate, the course emboliform globose similar the but synapse contralateral the the peduncle and interposed nucleus on of nucleus in superior the to the from Axons thalamus decussate the in cerebellar the ventral contralateral midbrain red nuclei (eFig. 9.70). Axons the nucleus inferior the olivary nucleus to leaving the red descend medulla. in and from axonal interposed the monitoring function motor upper nuclei projections The the of activity lower correcting and in extremities.

fastigial and the tectum. the nucleus contralateral from thalamus, formation, vestibular to Axons the nuclei, reticular of contralateral project nucleus ventral reach vestibular the to and vestibular Vestibular contralateral to uncinate pass axons ipsilateral fasciculus through nucleus (eFig. inferior peduncle the reach the nucleus cerebellar 9.70). the through are going to cerebellar peduncle heading inferior axons Also the formation. reticular nucleus axons in of and contralateral contralateral thalamus. the synapse with Ascending the peduncles that superior cerebellar the will are ventral tectum

the cerebellum system arteries (eFig. The of vertebrobasilar is perfused by 9.42). contributes to artery PICA Before artery, artery the the and the and to each spinal formation a vertebral forming spinal basilar artery gives of posterior and rise (eFig. merging anterior 9.71). The the PICA inferior of portion perfuses the cerebellum. lateral anterior the basilar (eFig. portion middle the and the inferior caudal the as artery of the and off of AICA as pons, and branches peduncles cerebellar perfuses cerebellum, well the level At the 9.71). and the artery branch the the off the basilar superior hemispheres (eFig. of of cerebellar midbrain, cerebellar Just superior portion peduncles before cerebellar the and superior supply arteries 9.71).

Part System Visual VIII:

cortex, visual eyeball the system and association complex the cortices. special and is that in The brainstem, primary a has begins connections thalamus, visual sensory to neuronal system objects. these of in higher addition relationships mediating and visual between visual functions, such determining to In perception, also as objects spatial structural are connections involved features the In the primary visual from the cortex. explore visual pathway will geniculate retina section primary this to we or

the too. eye perception, of retinal the structures Although of the perception is important of eyeball beginning anterior the role the an in layer considered play often visual visual light, is and visual the through The layer first anteriormost enters cornea the stimulus, the which is eye structure the (eFig. 9.72). chamber the This central eye. anterior a controls and the how much that overlies the layer aperture humor is light of aqueous transparent the into admitted small pupil, portion is the body, of portion from the through eye After (eFig. which ciliary pupil the anterior with separates the lens, through along light refracted the posterior passing the 9.72). the a contracts in referred shape parasympathetically ciliary process as the the the biconvex that borders and to accommodation. lens ligaments structure a rounds The of attached to relaxes is controlled lens, suspensory clear as muscle

of the posterior After is passes layers the lens, the (eFig. projected light and the onto chamber of vitreous humor retina the through 9.73). of is layers connections. with several layer neural composed retina of a cells synaptic and non-neural The in reflected reduce sclera the of eye, layer the amount surface light the of the lining choroid (eFig. To inner the (eFig. layer retina, of the 9.72), refract the (non-neural) epithelium along absorb and light some pigment of stimulus with the 9.73). into light transduce a phototransduction. Interdigitating cells, called the epithelial electrical photoreceptors in process the an stimulus the signal between pigment formed retina lateral vertical and both on dimensions the in Images (eFig. are inverted 9.74). visual Because and four having the is field as of defined left/right quadrants: upper/lower. this,

are light color visual in and very which responsible cones, and rods, lit high vision are essential for Photoreceptors and for which include dimly conditions, sensitive acuity. vision to and in distributed by retina. rods the rods are twentyfold both cones of Although are periphery the concentrated across and the cones outnumber retina, Cones are the (eFig. present and near only the at photoreceptors fovea predominate macula the 9.72). acuity. eye The primary visual fovea axis and represents of the of visual the the location is maximal the both inner have their Despite differences, segment, a rods an functional synaptic outer cones an light-sensing segment, and terminal. and in neurons terminals synaptic first-order the cells, These contact visual pathway the (eFig. bipolar 9.73). the in visual with neurons then cells, second-order the ganglion pathway. synapse Bipolar cells in cell Two present are the retina types other and amacrine cells. horizontal bipolar cells. the transversely oriented interneurons moderate level of and ganglion These excitation

blind thus the coalesce the cells spot the ganglion optic is disc, and a Axons visual from in at absent field. creates of which photoreceptors sheath disc invested they provided As form acquire the by optic leave are (eFig. myelin cranial nerve, oligodendrocytes, optic by they a the meninges and the 9.72). the embryonic define derived of nerve development, morphological component CNS. features during optic These the a as stalk, nerves optic the the infundibular to converge Anterior the chiasm. optic at and (eFig. from the into nasal decussate retina chiasm, the the of tract optic portion axons enter Within contralateral the 9.75). enter stay from temporal the of ipsilateral to the Conversely, the ipsilateral tract retina (eFig. optic axons portion 9.75).

the optic enter to the geniculate of (eFig. nucleus course the thalamus midbrain around posteriorly, the Continuing lateral tracts 9.75). pretectal mediate At and reflex. level, area portion this the the pupillary of a travel to from tract superior fibers the small light to the colliculus optic the form the primary optic in continue cortex lateral lobe occipital leaving geniculate radiations, nucleus on Axons the which to (eFig. the visual 9.76). terminate the portion visual cortex cortex, on terminate whereas fibers in optic the of the half upper lower the (eFig. half the traveling lower the Fibers radiations of of the portion on primary upper in 9.76). A be throughout pathway review visual is full visual of field in the eFig. how can the represented reviewed 9.77.

and vertical formed mentioned both images dimensions. retina are As on lateral inverted previously, in the the at optic hemiretina the In chiasm. nasal addition, fibers of from portion the the decussate half relating of primary radiations, only and to visual receive contralateral visual the the information field. the of tracts, optic cortex Because optic this, thalamus, visual the the of in field location field deficits. with represented pathway lesions Knowledge throughout visual patients how essential for the is visual is of identifying major are deficits primary chiasm, of tract, visual cortex) the of lesions their associated in optic optic field Examples visual (optic five visual the eFig. and represented pathway structures nerve, optic in radiations, 9.78.

Auditory Part and IX:

to sensory from vestibulocochlear brainstem. nerve, and the of VIII, organs of information pontomedullary inner junction the the nerve conveys the the vestibular auditory Cranial ear Although sensory brainstem nerve these common are modalities central each to bundle, by has sensory the functions pathways. conveyed a these different of we central the pathways. then this vestibular section and In the pathways auditory will review first

acoustic are by ear toward directed to membrane auditory the the canal the Sound (eFig. pinna ear meatus the stimulus, tympanic and outer the through waves, external of the 9.79). waves, tympanic to incoming induced transmitted stapes) the the the middle the of is incus, of three membrane, and by sound bones (malleus, ear. Vibration ossicle of pressure fluid-filled sound waves they so be oval to the at can window waves amplify converted cochlea. the bones These the loud are stapes of high-decibel muscles. from tympani reduced by To the damage stapedius movements and or malleus and sounds, prevent tensor

signal an In converted of electrical organ are into waves cochlea, at Corti. sound the the membrane organ basilar Corti with rests is The endolymph (eFig. which in filled upon the of the media, scala 9.80). separates the filled are the addition scala vestibular cochlea and scala helicotrema the which membrane (eFig. to are perilymph into with and the scala the contributing the continuous tympani, the to media one with at with of formation vestibuli membrane, basilar In another 9.80).

through the membrane, displace hair move cells deflection organ the perilymph the basilar waves the causes of As in the Corti they of which (eFig. sound 9.81A). which spiral with in sensory the bodies ganglion the receptors cochlea neurons, of modiolus have located These within sensory cell synapse (eFig. 9.80). base form leaving the the modiolus Axons the the of nerve cochlear near cochlea. passes internal subarachnoid then cerebellopontine angle. and enter the to nerve through acoustic the at pontomedullary cochlear The the meatus space junction

terminate cochlea from brainstem the dorsal on first-order the and cochlear ipsilaterally entering nuclei. ventral The axons the second-order have From targets. synaptic here, axons several pathway nucleus on the (eFig. ascending axons superior Second-order the auditory bilaterally olivary pons and forming project ascend to the 9.82). acuity localizing a the These projections important and auditory sound. bilateral of for are origin From continue to midbrain. terminate the as here, colliculus ascend and in lemniscus the inferior fibers the of lateral gyrus) then colliculus auditory temporal geniculate of have medial temporal leaving synaptic synaptic Axons inferior (superior relay a primary final the nucleus cortex before the thalamus (eFig. of the reaching lobe the in the the target: 9.82). cortex, Throughout are to tonotopically represented. auditory membrane this stimuli from the primary the basilar auditory pathway, somatotopic This on the map is analogous discussed pathways. in the section systems somatosensory to previously

auditory descending a pathway, of input In receives the the the from form nucleus cortex (eFig. olivary primary superior to ascending feedback addition auditory as 9.82). harmfully to inhibitory The the cells olivary hair olivocochlear then of sends nucleus damage from on prevent to the has superior sounds. which Corti, fibers descending organ an loud function contraction muscles motor tympani the It sounds. and that facial loud mediate also the nerve the to olivary to reflexive superior of with tensor nucleus believed connections the response trigeminal and nuclei stapedius is of in has

The utricle organs, the vestibular transmits vestibular semicircular or afferent ducts, head include regarding movement information and which of from nerve position the sensory