ancillary additional please visit to this materials related chapter, For thePoint.

OVERVIEW I.

molecules systems. living are abundant functionally the and diverse Proteins most in every macromolecules. Virtually on of process depends this class life in the polypeptide enzymes direct hormones and proteins movement. in and metabolism regulate example, muscle whereas body, For contractile permit the in collagen bone, of concrete. crystals, for the like calcium reinforced cables acting a deposition framework protein steel the phosphate In forms bacteria whereas life, viruses. hemoglobin transport In to albumin, proteins, as and the bloodstream, molecules and fight such immunoglobulins infectious essential functions, feature common polymers the of short, linear share amino incredible of being structural proteins In all of acids. diversity an yet display the of acids. properties describes chapter amino This structures, how specific to these that them building biologic capable 2 three-dimensional making simple Chapter explores functions. unique joined of performing form have are blocks proteins

II. STRUCTURE

20 been commonly acids only are nature, different >300 constituents have in mammalian of proteins. Although as amino found described These p. standard the 411). in are the genetic material [Note: amino the acids (see amino DNA, only cell acids that are encoded by produced Nonstandard (see chemical are by acids standard amino modification amino of acids p. 45).] for bonded (R distinctive has secondary amino and a Each to chain a atom. amino (except the has a primary carbon group, proline, group group) a α group), carboxyl side which acid amino the carboxyl physiologic the amino (−NH3+) protonated and dissociated, the At is carboxylate (~7.4), group negatively is ion pH (−COO−), forming group charged (Fig. 1.1A). almost linkage (Fig. for general, not in of peptide through for proteins, are reaction and, amino except these In formation groups all carboxyl hydrogen chemical and bond are combined available 1.1B). in is acid plays Thus, protein. dictates of it side the an the role a the amino nature that chains ultimately Figures of 1.3. and an as is properties 1.2 bases) chains, amino useful the (have according such distribution even it acids and classify distribution Therefore, an shown to electrons, to they are of polar in the side uneven (have electrons) whether of nonpolar as is, their that acids or

from acidic of (continued pH chains and at their polarity side Fig. 1.2). acidic histidine [Note: the groups, and chain the to α-carboxyl 7.45), the side (7.35 At chains, of physiologic deprotonated.] free are side pH

nonpolar side acids Amino chains A. with

or or that or side acids a hydrogen of protons not ionic (see bonds has lose nonpolar chain does Each amino Fig. in participate these gain 1.2). amino be as Fig. or lipid-like, of The of chains these “oily” a side acids property hydrophobic that promotes thought can (see interactions 19). p. 2.10,

1. proteins: In polar the chains amino in the of environment), in the protein proteins to together cluster (Fig. side acids tend (a interior of Location nonpolar found in aqueous solutions the 1.4). effect, an This aqueous the hydrophobic droplets oil which in act environment. hydrophobicity of that nonpolar coalesce the the is as known much the like groups, phenomenon, R of result of protein, R up nonpolar of By the three-dimensional help the give interior these folded shape. filling protein the its groups protein, found environment, are for are membrane, environment R (see that Fig. the surface proteins of hydrophobic However, lipid outside the located nonpolar with such the a interacting the groups as on a in 1.4). on stabilizing protein p. discussed in hydrophobic importance these 19. of interactions structure The is

position nonpolar a causes sickle results replacement polar shaped, the cell valine in from anemia, sixth (see β hemoglobin red of cells 36). than disease become shaped glutamate disc that them p. of A Sickle the to of rather with the subunit blood at

2. five-membered differs form chain nitrogen Proline rigid, α-amino Proline: ring and amino from its other in acids that side (Fig. a structure 1.5).

(rather then, primary) Proline, than has a secondary group. a amino to geometry of formation frequently (see but acid.” proteins the p. of the It The 45), 16). of referred an “imino proline fibrous collagen the to α-helices in p. (see unique found it is structure as interrupts globular contributes

Amino chains B. uncharged side acids with polar

an pH, lose cysteine can net at amino charge at and acids pH chains a have (see side the physiologic alkaline of Fig. proton These although zero tyrosine 1.3). contain (Fig. formation hydroxyl tyrosine each hydrogen Serine, that a participate group polar can and threonine, bond in 1.6). hydrogen a and amide in each group, and bonds. which asparagine of can of chains carbonyl both group an also participate glutamine side The contain

1. sulfhydryl is site of cysteine bond: which of side an the component group Disulfide The contains (thiol) chain (−SH), a important enzymes. active of many disulfide a oxidized cross-link bond can a form of –SH called covalent two In groups (−S–S–). the cysteines proteins, to be are cystine. to referred Two disulfide-linked cysteines as formation.) a bond of p. discussion (See for 19 further disulfide

extracellular by Many stabilized bonds. disulfide proteins are that blood an is of for functions transporter Albumin, a as example. protein variety molecules, a a

2. as phosphate attachment group. of Side attachment for structures such a as can compounds: threonine, The site (rarely) other tyrosine hydroxyl chains serve of sites group a polar as for serine, and attachment as oligosaccharide 165). as serine threonine, (see of serve amide In as a group can addition, hydroxyl in the for chains group of glycoproteins well the asparagine, or site p. of

C. Amino with chains acids side acidic

The proton and aspartic glutamic acid amino acid are donors. acids acids containing side At the group chains of these fully pH, are amino ionized, (−COO−). negatively carboxylate a charged physiologic fully glutamate. forms aspartate called ionized and The are

side Amino D. chains acids basic with

(see chains accept acids The of basic Fig. amino the side protons 1.3). charged. ionized arginine and positively the are lysine R fully At and of pH, groups physiologic the basic at physiologic largely is amino histidine uncharged In weakly pH. and free contrast, acid ionic the R into be by group can either histidine However, when provided the charged neutral, a depending positively its incorporated or is environment protein. (protonated) on protein, p. (see of important property of functioning the 30). it This hemoglobin buffering contributes such to plays the in role as proteins histidine chain is the amino the that with side physiologic range.] can Histidine ionize pH [Note: within only acid a

acids occurring commonly symbols (Fig. amino Abbreviations for symbol and E. letter 1.7). by determined are codes the rules. The following one-letter

1.

one If its with only symbol. as used given a then letter: acid begins amino first is letter, letter that Unique V valine. For = example,

2.

these priority: acids letter of occurring commonly most begins receives with more amino acid acids one amino If than its have this symbol. common the a as letter, Most particular amino For is example, common G more glutamate, than = so glycine. glycine

3.

amino like represent. Similar the they sounding sound symbols one-letter names: acid Some would phenylalanine, example, W For = F say). Fudd or = tryptophan (“twyptophan” Elmer as

4.

initial lysine. close = For symbol is as example, letter: one-letter to Letter that K the acids, for amino assigned the possible acid, a amino the of the alphabet letter in initial as is remaining close to Asx, X is aspartic Glx, asparagine; signifying an assigned to Furthermore, acid unidentified is either glutamine; assigned or signifying acid glutamic amino assigned to or and to acid. Z is B either

Amino isomers acid F.

amino it an Because atom. is α-carbon the groups, is chemical asymmetric of attached (chiral) different an acid four to is α-carbon because its two has substituents. the exception Glycine hydrogen forms, (Fig. or exist αcarbon with in mirror and chiral Amino a L, D acids are designated images two enantiomers, isomeric which different 1.8). [Note: optically are Enantiomers active. form.] rotate isomer, If to of an either the the clockwise, causes L, polarized (+) designated plane D it or light is of amino found the acids L mammalian All in are proteins configuration. acids and However, antibiotics (see walls in D-amino are p. in 252). cell found bacterial some of interconvert Racemases [Note: amino D-and enzymatically free acids.] L-isomers the

III. ACIDIC PROPERTIES BASIC AND

weakly acids α-amino and acidic weakly basic contain groups aqueous solution groups. in Amino α-carboxyl and its an each of acids ionizable the addition, in side acidic chain. basic group contains In amino free some in combined act linkages Thus, both and acids peptide amino as acids amino buffers. can may proton and acceptors. Acids donors defined bases be as proton as described (or limited extent. a Acids to ionize as only bases) weak as aqueous pH, solution pH log 1/[H+] concentration where protons expressed or of = The ([H+]) is [H+]. –log in solution the conjugate Henderson-Hasselbalch its quantitative the is concentration relationship by described between equation. and and a of acid the of base pH (A−) weak (HA) The

A. Equation derivation

by the weak ionized the of a HA: release is a proton represented weak A−, of acid or The a base, by salt form conjugate Consider acid. acid, A−. has H+ dissociation and Ka, the the Ka, the [Note: constant HA of larger acid, the dissociated The is: By most because the stronger into definition, of the acid less the the smaller the Conversely, the has the Ka, acid.] therefore, weaker dissociated and, −1, −log in equation: sides −log of of sides both the equation pH Ka, solving equation, the pKa = the [H+] By and obtain both substituting the multiplying the and equation, Henderson-Hasselbalch [H+] taking of the logarithm we = by above for

Buffers B.

of solution change that pH an the acid addition A in base. is buffer a following or resists created be its (A−). can buffer mixing base weak A acid (HA) a by with conjugate to acid added such an buffer, converted HA as is being neutralize can A− process. in HCl to it, If a the neutralize base A− added, being can HA process. converted If likewise it, is the to a in of the within to at solution but pH a buffer when the Maximum occurs still the an ±1 of effective capacity pair conjugate is unit approximately serve a as buffering pH a pKa. pKa, pH can acid-base equal to If HA pH and of the equal, the A− amounts are pKa. equal is the 4.8. = a pH As solution (A− pKa in a shown containing COO−) 5.8, in CH3 Figure pH resists with – = (HA a with 4.8 acetate change 3.8 1.9, – COOH) acid CH3 at pH of from to acetic and maximum buffering species the form pH is – acid pKa, the COOH) At (CH3 values than predominant protonated solution. the less in

than values is base – species. (CH3 form deprotonated the pKa, the COO−) predominant the At greater pH

acid Amino titration C.

the way acid. in same as amino of can for acid acetic The analyzed an curve described titration be

1.

for example, α-carboxyl and group α-amino which an dissociation: Consider ionizable group. Carboxyl contains alanine, is R [Note: group –CH3 Its nonionizable.] both protonated are a At (acidic) low pH, groups of these (Fig. 1.10). I is to dissociate donating −COOH the the medium. the of group a solution the H+ can As pH form by raised, of release group, H+ formation results of a −COO−. carboxylate the of the in The the (see II, form structure shown is Fig. as of the which dipolar This is molecule form 1.10). form overall an for the zero. also is (from of called has form, (net) alanine, that word This it a is, “hybrid”), the of charge zwitterion German isoelectric

2.

amino rather called The of carboxyl the of K1, group Henderson-Hasselbalch acid of constant the Application dissociation is equation: an than

contains because titratable second Ka, group. molecule the a I of carboxyl used and for protonated same in group equation the alanine (see to alanine Henderson-Hasselbalch way the as II analyze of isoelectric form acetic can be dissociation The is alanine where described Fig. of acid: fully form of the is the the 1.10). rearranged logarithmic and yield: be can to This 3. its form equation to converted

group of group Amino The amino 1.10. shown alanine titratable the in group is dissociation: Figure second (−NH3+) a than is smaller a has constant, it group, –COOH this weaker much acid dissociation K2. much the Because therefore, [Note: pKa is, larger.] Its of alanine, in form deprotonated protonated group results Fig. the (see II Release H+ from form fully III of a amino the of form 1.10).

4.

The carboxyl groups Alanine Figure amino pKs: 1.10. in summarized and is from alanine dissociation H+ of sequential the of equal to that been group the the pKa numerically Each half pH one which from titratable a exactly removed at H+ is that of have group. has for The (−NH3+) most acidic group group (−COOH) pK1, pKa pKa the is pK2. next acidic for the is the most whereas [Note: whereas amino that pKa of the is ~9.] group The ~2, of the is α-amino group of acids α-carboxyl 5.

acid. of applying weak it group, Henderson-Hasselbalch to to dissociable calculate is possible each acidic a By equation titration curve: complete Alanine the titration curve the the base pH deprotonated fully form completely the alanine occurs in (III). the (I) to form change during 1.11 of that Figure produce the to shows addition protonated of Note the a. following:

The pK2. and buffer in pairs: –NH3+/–NH2 buffer pH can around as pair the region Buffer in the can –COOH/–COO− region pK1, a around serve pair the

b.

equal the II When equal of in I to solution. = exist forms is alanine pH pK: (2.3), When amounts pH and of pK1 the equal When forms in of II (9.1), are and solution. present amounts pH pK2 III equal to is

c.

exists predominantly At neutral alanine amino the ionized, and the point: as pH, dipolar groups are zero. II form the in is charge which but Isoelectric carboxyl net amino pH the an equals positive the of which is sum that the is electrically the neutral, charges is, the acid of The (pI) at which charges. in sum negative isoelectric point two group), average the that shown Figure alanine, For 9.1]/2 from such an and is and 1.11. from in α-carboxyl pI hydrogens the pK2 as α-amino acid, only [2.3 pK1 amino the (one one + 5.7) dissociable = = has of as (pI the is, pK2 between pK1 The (9.1). pI (2.3) thus, midway and at form pH of which zero) −1). of which net corresponds to charge predominates there are III pI at +1) I of amounts of the forms also and and charge (net II equal (net a the charge (with

done Separation a of by pI the pH proteins is charge at plasma the typically major proteins. of above the is on negative. Therefore, charge proteins the electrode at a positive field, their move an electric the determined In proteins by rate the net toward will negative charge. are certain mobility suggestive diseases. in the of pattern Variations

6. group at attached to negatively charged pH: group Net a and positively have pH, amino charge acids α-carbon. physiologic the (−NH3+), neutral At (−COO−) a charged both side Glutamate, potentially charged arginine, lysine their aspartate, have additional [Note: groups chains.] histidine, in and and amino either (amphoteric are that as electrolytes). to as acids a acid defined amphoteric ampholytes or as base referred act such as are Substances an can

of the equation applications Henderson-Hasselbalch D. Other

to the pH acid to its The corresponding a concentration salt calculate the used of solution changes in of can how and/or physiologic responds equation form. a Henderson-Hasselbalch be weak bicarbonate system, concentration, buffer predicts and how the the dioxide example, in [CO2] the Henderson-Hasselbalch shifts (Fig. equation carbon pH the concentration influence in bicarbonate For [HCO3−], ion 1.12A). of also useful of for calculating is basic drugs. and ionic abundance forms The the equation acidic are drugs either acids weak most (Fig. weak For or bases example, 1.12B). a form. (A−) charged (HA) Acidic anion a to H+, drugs release causing

release H+. also a bases Weak (BH+) can base drugs the and the loss produces a of However, proton usually protonated charged, (B). form basic the of uncharged is

membranes A drug if is uncharged. through it readily more passes aspirin, the cannot. acid, permeate as weak HA A− but a through can for uncharged such membranes, Thus, BH+ as the Likewise, membrane, base, permeates such morphine, uncharged weak cell B not. but for a the does through form and forms. effective at Therefore, of uncharged the determined (permeant) the form site charged the each drug absorption relative (impermeant) concentrations its of is by concentration of the permeable two the which site strength and pKa weak forms absorption of of at between pH ratio base, ionizable represented by the of the the the acid the the by The or is is determined group. by much equation for plasma pH, in a either Henderson-Hasselbalch that 7.4). side of how is separates is that stomach drug The the compartments determining blood two in (pH useful on example, 1.0–1.5) found membrane (pH differ and

IV. MAPS CONCEPT

understood. list concepts of sometimes be to Students biochemistry memorized, as a equations be body or a rather to facts than view of into turn to these inadvertently provided understanding Details of distractions. concepts enrich have concept story.” guide a student topics relationships can organized. maps an how “tell road text, the biochemical and been is Therefore, that to in series map—a illustrate to in various information how understanding show to a a be or seems provides to presented grouped chapter fit What this of a missing graphically between together with ideas created of be the A between the concept concepts. is, connections a visualizing for tool thus, map is with inclusive, beneath. arranged most top fashion, map, concepts the general the specific, less represented in general the of the more a most at Material concepts and hierarchic find to the guides The readily possess. information so ways concept student for organizing maps they information, function into integrate new knowledge ideally or the already templates as can best Concept map described below. construction is

A. boxes Concept and links

oxidative (for define example, or energy), (for concepts include as biochemical objects.” Educators concepts regularities 6-phosphate). the phosphorylation), glucose In example, example, in and “perceived processes compounds events abstractions free (for maps, the broadly the positioned at the idea central defined of with top concepts page. are prioritized These The central this boxes in then drawn (Fig. concepts are that idea follow from 1.13A). type of the relative the indicates idea. size importance of each The Lines are boxes which are show to between drawn concept related. the (that between it the on creates relationship label so as line meaning). two that defines concepts, connection statement a reads is, valid The the connection (Fig. lines direction indicate in read which be arrowheads the The with should 1.14).

B. Cross-links

contain map or maps between the (Fig. complex may the of that ideas to Unlike concept linear flow outlines, cross-links relationships represented different visualize allow parts reader charts in book in the map other chapters 1.13B) between this (Fig. or and 1.13C). can, effective clinical biochemistry, Licensure are other empowering situations in identify Cross-links require one to that and than thus, United to (USMLE) the students States concepts or topic central integration examinations of on Medical in Examination more material. be that contrast visually in cross-referencing text. relationships perceive within facts, to between learn to nonlinear Students linear

CHAPTER V. SUMMARY

group α-amino (except α-carboxyl secondary acid which for and Each has amino primary proline, a group has group). amino an a At the group negatively is (−COO−), forming α-amino carboxylate protonated group pH, dissociated, ion (−NH3+). is charged α-carboxyl the the physiologic and

attached Each side of also acid one contains the to amino chains 20 α-carbon distinctive atom. of in and or acidic R of The the (polar nonpolar, a as the (polar basis basic acid provides polar, uncharged group of this determines amino acids negative), nature an chemical the function amino for positive). protein classification serve can amino amino plus charged free in chains, buffers. All peptide acids, as acids acid a the the by (HA) equation. solution and relationship conjugate The pH and base is a Henderson-Hasselbalch of described weak of the between its (A−) quantitative concentration is pH within pKa, [HA]. [A−] pKa pH and = Buffering occurs when which ±1 at maximal unit = the of mirror (enantiomers). acid to in attached D-and images is Because and L-isomeric chemical α-carbon each acids amino of asymmetric active that exist optically is forms amino four groups, the it different glycine) (except are (chiral), amino the is proteins acids by of The found L-form in human synthesized body.

best the ONE answer. Choose

.1. amino the a acid concerning the correct? statements Which one is curve for following nonpolar of titration the regions letters D through certain A The curve designate below. on

A. acid the represents Point region amino where A is deprotonated. the

B. Point of B minimal buffering. represents a region

net on C represents is the the region amino C. where acid Point charge the zero.

acid’s group. amino D represents the carboxyl D. of the pK Point

amino lysine. E. The acid be could

acid. or is a for and Correct pK2 pK1 midway the nonpolar such isoelectric C Point = between represents pI, and point, as C. amino answer amino A. at Point is The protonated fully acid is B as addition free basic ionizable buffering, Lysine the α-carboxyl amino D. represents maximum side groups. acid, an of does region has α-amino lysine Point in ionizable and Point a a chain to and

.2. Which concerning correct?Val-Cys-Glu-Ser-Asp-Arg-Cys following of one below statements the is shown the peptide

A. peptide The asparagine. contains

B. The group. a with contains peptide chain amino secondary a side

peptide C. contains that chain can phosphorylated. The side a be

D. The peptide disulfide bond. an form cannot internal

to pH 5. (negative move The during E. electrophoresis the cathode would electrode) peptide at

can serine The group. Correct hydroxyl of C. a answer accept group = phosphate Asp aspartate. is contains group. amino Proline secondary a cysteine oxidizing form (covalent) bond. under a two residues can, The disulfide conditions, it the is would on to 5 anode. pH charge the move at net The peptide negative, and

.3. child A aspirin presents of with an acidosis after 2-year-old flavored metabolic ingesting number unknown tablets. pH At blood her was presentation, 7.0. calculate is 3, the pH acid) ionized unionized pKa Given at of (salicylic 7.0. its of ratio to that aspirin the forms

[A−]/[HA]. log 1. Correct + to answer pKa = pH 10,000 = and × + = 7 = 4. 3 × Therefore, is is ratio of 10,000 to (unionized), because The 4. of 10,000 the to log (ionized) 1 A− HA then,

this thePoint. materials chapter, visit to additional please ancillary related For

OVERVIEW I.

proteins found are acids commonly together 20 amino The by in joined peptide bonds. that a linked information with a determines shape acids contains three-dimensional unique of the linear the molecule protein to function. The sequence amino necessary generate structure (Fig. primary, levels: considering by protein in terms analyzed quaternary of organizational the complexity tertiary, molecule four best of is secondary, The and 2.1). wide of functional examination hierarchies their revealed has proteins, that which regarding native, achieve of repeated are that variety are these form. An proteins in certain a complexity general elements of rules ways increasing suggesting there in structural the β-sheets polypeptide of (see combinations to range domains of α-helices p. proteins folding of elements the from small These simple 19). and repeated motifs forming complex multifunctional structural

II. STRUCTURE PRIMARY

called of protein acids The the protein. amino in of the a is primary structure sequence folding amino genetic important function. many diseases loss normal the proteins primary sequences, proteins improper in is of result cause impairment and or of with acid Understanding structure because which abnormal to If primary used and or diagnose the information disease. normal mutated of known, be may the are structures the proteins study the this

bond Peptide A.

proteins, In amide one of group the amino group αamino linkages acids amino which covalently between by α-carboxyl of are acid and peptide the bonds, another. joined are the of formation For form example, dipeptide can valine bond (Fig. alanine a peptide through and the valylalanine 2.2). that proteins, and 20). high denature of p. to bonds concentrations as urea (see such Peptide resistant heating are conditions p. at a temperatures bonds base strong 14). required to exposure break is to these Prolonged acid or (see nonenzymically elevated

1.

and free end the amino left written (C-terminal) of end peptide: free right. the carboxyl to Naming to By convention, is the the the the (N-terminal) chain peptide end. Therefore, from amino all N-to the sequences the acid are C-terminal read For amino order example, Figure acids is the the the 2.2A, in in of valine, alanine. dipeptide amino called or Linkage results chain in a ≥50 peptide through an unbranched of acids bonds protein. polypeptide, of called amino amino the remaining peptide residue are after acid lost because the Each of atoms is is acid the in the the formation of portion bond. a water component it a or the named, -an, acid. acid of their have the is -ate) -yl, to suffixes residues changed (-ine, with peptide all amino -ic, C-terminal When amino exception and For an composed example, a a called glycine, leucine tripeptide a N-terminal is C-terminal valylglycylleucine. valine, of

2.

has bond peptide bond character, single The double-bond bond is, that than (Fig. a planar rigid is characteristics: shorter and it is partial a and Peptide 2.2B). free peptide the bond of the and This the nitrogen the carbonyl prevents bond. between rotation carbon around However, the groups groups). be the limited the α-carboxyl the R α-carbons of size freely and between the or α-amino character (although are they by bonds and can rotated polypeptide the assume to chain of allows possible a This variety conformations. always the see cis; almost trans the The peptide is of bond (instead Fig. configuration in the 2.2B), (side because steric R of large when chains) part in interference of position. the cis in groups

3.

linkages, 2–12. the uncharged, release accept = all −NH Peptide and Like polarity: amide and −C are bond neither protons O bond of peptide over nor the range of pH groups the side constituent charged any the (α-amino) the Thus, group, of ionized solely N-terminal the groups amino of consist present the present C-terminal group, groups acids. in (α-carboxyl) the in polypeptides and chains pp. and however, α-helices bonds involved example, in on −NH (for the in and −C described hydrogen The bond as and are peptide are = of polar, β-sheets), O groups 16–17.

B. the amino acid polypeptide of a composition Determining

structure and its in quantitate The of determining constituent to acids. polypeptide amino first is the a step identify primary polypeptide hydrolyzed is to 24 the A first strong hours. be acid of purified analyzed for 110°C by sample at which can cation-exchange acids, individual amino separated be This the and releases bonds peptide cleaves the treatment chromatography. by a tightly In that of column charged applied this is which is acids negatively a mixture group to resin contains a amino attached. to technique, a positively group charged, is column the becomes [Note: If an column.] the attached anion-exchange the The amino charges, depending hydrophobicity, on to affinities, other acids and column characteristics. with their bind different column by is released Each sequentially acid pH of with ionic chromatography (Fig. increasing strength eluting amino and from solutions the 2.3). quantitated contained are them amines). and acids ninhydrin amino a ammonia, heating eluate forms acids, the The amino separated column the with compound reagent in most with by that purple from (a derivative. absorbed the of by amount ninhydrin amount The measuring determined each spectrophotometrically is the of acid by light amino The amino analyzer, whose analysis using automated described in above depicted acid is performed components machine an are an 2.3. Figure

the N-terminal C. its Sequencing peptide from end

specific N-terminal Sequencing process the each a at is position beginning in stepwise the of peptide acid chain, end. at the amino identifying is residue under mildly amino-terminal Edman alkaline as (Fig. known conditions reagent, used to Phenylisothiocyanate, label the 2.4). cleaving introduces the other (PTH) in that hydrolyzed peptide can The the such instability without an phenylthiohydantoin resulting bonds. peptide derivative be it N-terminal bond can amino then be identity determined. the acid derivative of The reagent the peptide cycle. can shortened obtained applied Edman be each to previous repeatedly in now used. are sequencers Automated

D. Cleaving into polypeptide fragments smaller the

acids. have Many a structure of composed amino primary polypeptides >100 sequenced molecules Such cannot end directly from end. be to be cleaved and these specific However, at can fragments molecules sequenced. resulting large the sites purified that amino using cleaving the (enzymes can ordering on large polypeptide and/or of more the generated thereby acid providing samples separate the of complete the permit polypeptide, a of fragments (Fig. fragments, be chemicals) sequenced sequence By proper one agent overlapping than 2.5). bonds peptide that termed are hydrolyze (proteases). Enzymes peptidases [Note: into and aminopeptidases are divided at of Exopeptidases ends cut carboxypeptidases. the and proteins amino C-terminal determining acid. in Carboxypeptidases are used the protein.] a cleave within Endopeptidases

protein’s structure primary sequencing by DNA a E. Determining

acid The of nucleotides sequence the a DNA a sequence of specifies of region protein-coding the amino polypeptide. in nucleotide the determined, be sequence the the amino Therefore, code can into (see the sequence acid be of nucleotides polypeptide. of p. knowledge sequence to genetic corresponding if 447) translated allows that of to that any of see the chain acid process, indirect amino sequences although disulfide the identifying of used are modification; modified after limitations able folded and amino 459). of to p. not incorporation proteins, predict obtain has This routinely (posttranslational of acids not the positions the in into bonds the polypeptide being their of extremely tool sequence direct primary Therefore, sequencing of is important many an true polypeptides. the character the for protein determining

III. SECONDARY STRUCTURE

generally other a does polypeptide arrangements three-dimensional amino backbone not but, each regular in the instead, assume structure near of located are random linear forms acids that sequence. The the termed structure These are of polypeptide. arrangements the secondary are β-sheet, proteins. (or, encountered structures β-turn) commonly The α-helix, of and in examples βbend secondary hydrogen atoms peptide bonds the Each between is backbone. by stabilized of secondary on example of collagen α-chain p. is [Note: The helix, structure, another discussed 45.]

α-Helix A.

but are nature, found polypeptide Several in common. is most the the different helices α-helix component It to a interfering axis (Fig. chains the outward rigid, a with coiled spiral structure, tightly side acids with right-handed backbone L-amino of central core, polypeptide extending is the of consisting the from avoid packed, sterically each other 2.6). A very α-helices. of diverse group proteins contains For closely the a keratins fibrous are example, structure αhelical. entirely is nearly whose family of proteins related, rigid, hair a of They skin. are tissues and such as major component whose in myoglobin, is globular, found muscles. to also highly 26) is molecule keratin, In structure (see p. a α-helical, contrast flexible

1.

extensive that hydrogens Hydrogen between Fig. amide is carbonyl peptide stabilized part bonds: (see α-helix of the bond An the bonding are by hydrogen polypeptide backbone oxygens and 2.6). polypeptide. of peptide ahead the up group peptide extend four The to to and are residues bond in –NH of linkage the a from the parallel carbonyl the hydrogen one bonds oxygen spiral the hydrogen bonds. bond other each all and components last This peptide linked that first but through to are intrachain insures serve bonds are stabilize individually weak, helix. but to the Hydrogen collectively they

2.

per Each an turn of amino 3.6 turn: Amino contains acids. α-helix acids Thus, when four in or sequence folded three the apart α-helix. residues primary amino together spaced the close acids in spatially are

3.

determines an be to an acid its The an amino of R acids that in disrupt group Amino propensity α-helix: α-helix. is compatible rigid with disrupts because α-helix amino secondary an the the right-handed Proline not group α-helix. geometrically its spiral of it structure. inserts which chain, a the smooth, kink interferes helical in the Instead, with because hydrogen) flexibility. also is a R its confers breaker” high Glycine group (a “helix a the with first β-carbon, R bulky α-helix branch in and carbon with the tryptophan, as respectively) group at and amino R (for valine), propensity. those the charged glutamate Additionally, example, groups have acids or (such low

B. β-Sheet

in bond are β-sheet bonding involved another in of The hydrogen components is form which the of (Fig. secondary peptide all structure 2.7A). are βpleated β-sheets surfaces they called “pleated,” the often appear of Because sheets. successive results being or slightly sheet.] from above plane α-carbons the [Note: Pleating of below the β-strands as often Illustrations structure show of (Fig. arrows protein broad 2.7B).

1.

bonds polypeptide apart peptide stabilized amino by (interchain single or formed groups Formation: β-sheet in is (βstrands) chains are and carboxyl bonds) aligned by the bonds). more (intrachain chains between laterally acids two a that far different amino are A and polypeptide or hydrogen either in of other as antiparallel adjacent in arranged the to (with shown alternating each are Fig. either N-termini The β-strands or Fig. shown as each parallel 2.7B) together to other the (with in N-termini 2.7C). acids groups of the the opposite plane above the below β-sheet. On adjacent extend each in amino β-strand, directions, R and of flat when are right-handed backbone.] viewed and (twist) β-sheets [Note: have curl not polypeptide the along a 2.

the β-sheets: between (see β-sheets, Comparing extended backbone β-strands α-helices hydrogen strands bonds the fully and the to In polypeptide and the perpendicular are are almost Fig. 2.7A). backbone the polypeptide to in are hydrogen is parallel (see coiled bonds and α-helices, In contrast, the the Fig. 2.6).

formation of R result in of the amino acid making both polar the the nonpolar structures, sides in secondary β-sheet thereby them amphipathic. can residues the The and αhelix groups in these of orientation and

of C. shape. globular turns, a a it the β-Bends β-turns) helping polypeptide form β-Bends reverse compact, direction chain, (reverse usually surface the charged molecules often and include on of are They found protein residues. this because they given β-Bends often strands antiparallel name were [Note: βsheets.] of connect successive four β-Bends polypeptide amino kink that may in generally chain. acid the causes of acids, which of composed proline, are a one amino the be acid also the R β-bends. is smallest in amino Glycine, with group, frequently the found and residues stabilized bend. the last first hydrogen of β-Bends bonds between in formation the are the by

secondary D. structure Nonrepetitive

as into α-helix organized Approximately is and an the repetitive β-sheet. structures, protein one globular of average half such described polypeptide or coil having a of remainder is loop as The conformation. chain the rather These a simply not structure those secondary are have nonrepetitive regular but above. described random than structures less structure (see refers [Note: obtained coil” to disordered the “random are proteins denatured when The term p. 20).]

(motifs) Supersecondary E. structures

or (that geometric motifs. combining structural β-sheets, proteins and specific elements patterns, are secondary producing Globular is, by α-helices, coils), constructed (interior) core molecule. of region These form the primarily the at (for regions the the loop are They protein. surface by of β-bends) example, connected by close chains produced Supersecondary adjacent the of packing side structures secondary are elements. usually structural from adjacent usually not sequence are protein. β-sheets in also and acid the in α-helices (but example, For that are the final, always) adjacent amino folded the 2.8. common motifs illustrated Some of in Figure more are

with Motifs be functions. particular may associated a contain of that Proteins limited bind motifs. to DNA number an (see helix–loop–helix a number example in motif as of proteins found that The p. is function factors transcription 438).

IV. STRUCTURE TERTIARY

determines structure a tertiary chain of its The primary structure. polypeptide the domains the to function; and of the (the basic to below) in and see A. domains refers final both units polypeptide. of folding “Tertiary” structure arrangement of globular proteins tertiary packing) in atoms density compact, is The with of of aqueous in high (close structure solution core of molecule. the the a the interior, found buried Hydrophobic chains generally molecule. groups the the hydrophilic the surface are whereas on in side of are

A. Domains

fundamental three-dimensional units and polypeptides. Domains structural are functional the of consist amino Polypeptide that domains. two length acids are chains or generally in of >200 more elements (motifs). is built structural domain supersecondary combinations from core of The of a peptide of domains. of other a the usually occurs Folding chain within domain in independently folding chain. globular a that is domains domain Therefore, the characteristics the each other structurally small, has the protein polypeptide of compact in of independent

B. Stabilizing interactions

structure of is by determined each acid unique sequence. its amino polypeptide three-dimensional The of chains the guide amino the folding between structure. acid polypeptide a the side compact Interactions to form structures in the interactions four of cooperate stabilizing types of The proteins. globular tertiary following

1. residue Disulfide two the bonds: of a covalent cysteine (Fig. produce a group (−SH) cystine (–S–S–) disulfide each linkage of residues sulfhydryl is bond formed from A to 2.9). located The sequence many acids other be may from even two primary two polypeptide amino a by on of cysteines different separated or may each polypeptides. be the in The polypeptide(s) their and folding covalent proximity cysteine bonding side of brings permits residues the into chains. of the in the protein stability it the disulfide becoming contributes molecule to bond the extracellular shape of A environment. denatured from prevents three-dimensional and the of cells. found that For many as proteins by immunoglobulins bonds secreted are such are in disulfide example, Protein during reforms and bonds disulfide isomerase [Note: breaks disulfide folding.] 2.

associate hydrophobic to in interior where Amino with they tend located nonpolar polypeptide acids interactions: amino chains with be acids side (Fig. molecule, of other the Hydrophobic the 2.10). with the the tend in polar located or chains on molecule contrast, to the be charged acids contact solvent. with of amino side In polar surface that arrangement proteins environments, such membrane, reverse exhibit (lipid) Recall nonpolar the located [Note: (see Fig. in a as p. 1.4, 4).] of In segregation occurs that groups most each a case, is favorable. R energetically

3.

hydrogen alcohol peptide such groups atoms, group nitrogen-bound side a can oxygen-or a bonds containing as the oxygen serine Hydrogen chains electron-rich as (Fig. and bonds: in of form or Amino the hydrogen, bond carboxyl with carbonyl of acid such of group threonine, see 2.11; also Fig. 1.6, 4). p. groups of solvent bonds and enhances of the the of the solubility between the aqueous hydrogen protein. surface Formation polar proteins on

4. chain positively group aspartate group can lysine chain in such the charged interact carboxylate Ionic Negatively the or of in interactions: of (−NH3+) groups glutamate, the side the such (see charged Fig. side (−COO−) as amino groups, as with 2.11).

Protein folding C.

the folds acids determine the functional Interactions of polypeptide into amino side linear of the shape between a how intricate chain chains three-dimensional protein. occurs which ordered in involves the minutes, nonrandom, folding, within Protein seconds to pathways. cell by as is, groups released). folds, driven secondary structures hydrophobic peptide hydrophobic come the is effect form, together water a (that As combine larger structures. small form These to structures structure. and of events Additional stabilize secondary formation tertiary initiate structure characterized the folded, its low-energy fully achieves last state (functional) by peptide In the (Fig. a form native stage, 2.12). tertiary stable lack proteins biologically a thereof or structure. active [Note: Some segments to are as They proteins.] referred disordered intrinsically

D. Protein denaturation

in the a of bonds. without and secondary unfolding and peptide tertiary structures hydrolysis disorganization the Denaturation results protein’s of agents metals of strong bases, Denaturing detergents, heat, urea, include lead. ions as solvents, or such heavy organic acids and that is original Denaturation ideal conditions, denaturing structure when such agent native protein refolds the be removed. under its reversible, into the may, However, most remain once denatured. disordered proteins permanently Denatured are from precipitate and solution. insoluble proteins often

Chaperones in E. protein folding

protein needed folding in polypeptide. the information structure for correct is primary of contained the The favorable proteins denatured not environmental conditions. native their do However, conformations even most under resume as ATP a process folding specialized group many a proteins, is molecular referred and because, that is requires chaperones, This hydrolysis. for of proteins, facilitated to the heat known with polypeptide proteins various shock The as also (HSP), a process. chaperones, folding during interact stages at its keeping Some (for extended in Hsp70). until completed important polypeptide hydrophobic chaperones protein is example, are regions of and synthesis bind unfolded the an cage-like form Others stacked composed structures macromolecular rings. two of enters Hsp60). central The interactions, the protein example, the released folds, partially through folded is binds hydrophobic (for cage, and mitochondrial cavity chaperonins.] as chaperones sometimes are referred [Note: Cage-like to in protein Chaperones, hydrophobic polypeptides, then, facilitate preventing folding folding. and exposed, by (and premature stabilizing to binding regions aggregation-prone nascent denatured) correct

QUATERNARY V. STRUCTURE

are consist monomeric a and chain proteins. defined of single proteins as polypeptide Many two of may structurally may others However, identical be or polypeptide that totally chains more consist or unrelated. of the arrangement these subunits The structure the of protein. polypeptide is quaternary called together hydrogen and Subunits example, interactions). bonds, hydrophobic held bonds, ionic interactions are primarily by noncovalent (for either subunits 29). of work one p. which other of the hemoglobin, may other for (see or affinity subunit tetramer oxygen Subunits cooperatively, function in in each of the of oxygen may independently increases to the as binding the

perform function but have same different proteins are primary structures. Isoforms the that genes can processing of gene. a or from of tissue-specific They different arise product from single the isozymes they are If p. 65). proteins enzymes, to as referred the as (see function

VI. MISFOLDING PROTEIN

can folding molecules. complex is result that improperly a Protein process folded sometimes in and cell (see proteins p. are degraded 247). the within misfolded These usually tagged can particularly of age. control this misfolded individuals intracellular However, extracellular as not quality accumulate, and perfect, proteins aggregates is system or are associated of a misfolded number diseases. proteins of Deposits with

diseases A. Amyloid

Misfolding mutation by spontaneously particular protein. then altered or gene, caused produces in proteins a a occur may of which be an take a fibrillar abnormal of long, proteins assemblies cleavage, leads formation sheets. β-pleated spontaneous to consisting unique normal proteolytic on that after conformation the apparently protein some can, addition, In of (AD). been in amyloids, Accumulation neurodegenerative disease Alzheimer such insoluble as has and aggregates, called of disorders protein fibrous Parkinson implicated these disease amino that component 40–42 residues. dominant plaque acid the containing peptide extracellular β amyloid amyloid (Aβ), of AD accumulates an The in is and X-ray a nonbranching characteristic secondary structure fibrils. crystallography infrared βpleated sheet demonstrate spectroscopy in the disease. pathogenic characteristic the sheet aggregated This of when and leading central event peptide, a to impairment neurotoxic the is conformation, is in β-pleated cognitive the and in enzymic (by protein single (Fig. surface brain by secretases) a the deposited in transmembrane cell precursor expressed brain the on the is tissues other larger amyloid cleavages that Aβ protein, in The from is derived AD 2.13). brain the found amyloid that generating parenchyma the The peptides blood is and aggregate, around in vessels. Aβ of based, are of cases least not although cases AD Most genetically are at 5% familial. AD inside second of factor in A biologic tangles involved development neurofibrillary neurons. the is the of accumulation component is its insoluble) protein, the in (τ) tangled which, of A of in healthy and of an version, the helps structure. fibers abnormal tau form key these (hyperphosphorylated the microtubular assembly its of actions the normal The τ counterpart. appears block defective to Parkinson amyloid In is from [Note: formed disease, protein.] α-synuclein

diseases B. particle) infectious (proteinaceous Prion

causative “mad Creutzfeldt-Jakob including scrapie called humans, and disease). sheep, is of in the cattle The disease spongiform protein (popularly (TSE), encephalopathy agent prion in spongiform in transmissible cow” (PrP) encephalopathies bovine extensive scientists an were After surprised sheep of single protein with in the purification to not that species was a acid. detectable find series infectivity complexed scrapie of causing agent the was that procedures, associated with nucleic is protein designated = scrapie). (Sc This PrPSc infectious highly fibrils, insoluble to the found to and diseases aggregates amyloid brain. resistant in tends It form is of degradation similar some to other proteolytic of the present agent, brains as cellular), gene infectious the is on (C the of normal of glial A neurons encoded and = mammalian by same PrPC cells. surface the in form noninfectious protein. host a Thus, PrPC is structure posttranslational infectious have the of been alternate between differences and primary or the No normal modifications forms found protein. the of changes lies in becoming to The three-dimensional apparently the in key PrPC. infectious conformation (Fig. form a has infectious the β-sheets PrPC that present number in demonstrated αhelices replaced noninfectious in are Research of by 2.14). resistance of the is to proteolytic infectious tissue. confers presumably distinguished degradation conformational relative from what This infected permits to and be difference PrPC normal in them prions version pathogenic an agent the converting normal which conformation. to for altered is, a protein, normal thus, acts of infective The protein as template the a is invariably treatment are The that can currently this and alter fatal, TSE outcome. available no

VII. CHAPTER SUMMARY

structure native the protein Central to of conformation the understanding (Fig. is concept structural or (for example, an active 2.15), protein). which fully protein structure enzyme functional, the is folded acid The conformation amino unique of its by is that native three-dimensional its sequence. is, determined the structure, primary structure Interactions conformation structures, and the acid stabilizing cooperate the of to form secondary, the in polypeptide between the guide amino quaternary the chains side of (sometimes) protein. which tertiary, chain folding native proteins. a proper chaperones the of addition, proteins named group required of is of many In specialized folding for species protein’s results not and are unfolding hydrolysis denaturation the accompanied in bonds. which structure, Protein disorganization by of the of peptide be reversible may more or, Denaturation irreversible. commonly, disease Creutzfeldt-Jakob cytotoxic, protein disease. encephalopathies case the an normal in including occur Alzheimer apparently (AD) assumes the is Disease a conformation spongiform can transmissible that (TSE), and as when of formation take AD, abnormal consisting chemical neurotoxic of a the to conformational on leads proteins, normal processing, sheets. β-pleated amyloid state that after of assemblies peptide (Aβ) β unique In a the an normal converting prion conformation. a protein TSE, altered In version the of is normal that pathogenic infective as template agent for to protein acts

best the Choose ONE answer.

.1. is structure the following Which of one correct? protein concerning statements

consisting that one have of is by Proteins polypeptide quaternary A. stabilized bonds. structure covalent

B. the cis in configuration. in peptide most amino link that a occur protein bonds acids commonly The

protein residues participating in to a structure. in cysteine requires primary C. the adjacent be The of disulfide formation bond a the

the The loss irreversible as leads of such proteins D. secondary structural denaturation α-helix. of elements to

primary the is force protein effect. folding E. hydrophobic driving The for

is Correct environment, of a E. = folding. answer the of effect, hydrophobic in force entities to The primary or protein polar associate the tendency driving nonpolar more Quaternary by primarily present, structure noncovalent than one when and, stabilized it bonds. requires polypeptide, is peptide bond The trans. almost is always the on The acid by brought in disulfide distance polypeptides) a great polypeptide (or three-dimensional but are proximity separate in sequence a residues into two polypeptide. be formation may apart participating cysteine amino of two of the close bond the folding irreversible. may reversible Denaturation be or

.2. the segment in α-helical of mutation protein. point particular results in disruption the a structure of A mutant mutant structure likely the most in protein of primary change is: the The

aspartate. A. glutamate to

to arginine. lysine B.

proline. to C. methionine

to D. alanine. valine

because C. group, of incompatible Proline, Correct an = is its amino α-helix. secondary answer with acids, and amino are arginine branched and aspartate, acid. a Glutamate, lysine, is amino charged valine acids may α-helix. branched disrupt amino an Charged (bulky) and also R α-helix.] The flexibility an disrupt [Note: of glycine’s group can .3. only for β-sheet, to statement correct which comparing is In the β-sheet? the the α-helix

A. the Extensive the (N−H) the amide are and carbonyl formed. between of bond hydrogen peptide hydrogen (C=O) oxygen bonds

B. may be globular found typical It in proteins.

interchain bonds. is hydrogen C. by stabilized It

structure. It D. is of secondary example an

may be in E. supersecondary found structures. It

between intrachain and answer hydrogen formed a The hydrogen β-sheet bonds bonds chains of single by polypeptide interchain = regions formed is by stabilized between C. separate polypeptide. Correct however, by The intrachain only is bonds. hydrogen α-helix, stabilized secondary Statements and elements. are these for E both D, true A, B, of structural

.4. alterations of impairment man with in An 80-year-old intellectual function presented behavior. and last His reported over 6 months. family disorientation and loss memory the progressive is no of history dementia. family There patient (AD). Alzheimer was diagnosed tentatively disease The with one AD? describes Which following best of the

A. β-amyloid, abnormal with altered is an It sequence. with an amino associated protein acid

B. denatured proteins of random results that have accumulation It from conformations.

accumulation amyloid associated It of protein. precursor the with is C.

neurotoxic the deposition It peptide aggregates. amyloid is D. β of with associated

individual. is environmentally by the influenced disease It an produced genetics the of E. not

infectious the protein. F. form β-sheet by a of caused is It host-cell

brain associated (AD) consisting D. answer with long, and β-pleated Alzheimer in assemblies = found the elsewhere. Correct disease protein sheets of fibrillar is abnormal with processing disease normal is protein. a of associated The in that neurotoxic. accumulated is The β-pleated protein a altered conformation sheet occurs proteolytic on by surface protein, The protein brain in tissues. a amyloid deposited derived other β that expressed the transmembrane the is the from in cleavages single in AD brain amyloid precursor and is larger the cell cases sporadic, at cases although AD of are least of are familial. Most 5% caused (PrPC). host-cell Prion by are a (PrPSc) infectious β-sheet form Creutzfeldt-Jakob, as the of protein such diseases,

visit to please ancillary additional materials For chapter, thePoint. this related

I. OVERVIEW

the types architecture. structures tertiary mortar of bricks that previous The and are the secondary chapter of and described protein By specialized in elements are capable different fundamental constructed structural proteins be widely that of arranging combinations, diverse various functions. can these This hemeproteins. function between for examines globular relationship the chapter the clinically structure and important in proteins are 4. Chapter Fibrous discussed structural

II. HEMEPROTEINS GLOBULAR

tightly contain group Hemeproteins a group. prosthetic a bound are heme specialized as that proteins of prosthetic discussion p. groups.) (See a for of 54 created structure the is dictated role protein. by three-dimensional group The of the the environment of the by heme oxidized reduced p. is 75). of the group and an For example, electron functions heme alternately a cytochrome carrier that as (see 148). catalyzes part is group enzyme hydrogen (see of that the catalase In p. contrast, the site of enzyme the peroxide the of breakdown active the heme of (O2). group bind serves two myoglobin, heme In humans, the reversibly and in hemeproteins hemoglobin to abundant the most oxygen

A. Heme structure

(Fe2+), Heme as protoporphyrin a complex and ferrous in 3.1. of shown IX is iron Figure ring. in center held the to bonds the molecule porphyrin the by the of nitrogens four iron The of is heme The form heme of Fe2+ porphyrin can on one side ring. bonds, additional the two each planar to of residue O2 globin the is whereas one is chain available positions and other hemoglobin, coordinated the of a the (Fig. histidine myoglobin these to molecule, position bind In side of 3.2). (See pp. discussion for a 278 heme synthesis 282, and degradation.) and of respectively,

structure Myoglobin function B. and

rate functions in skeletal oxygen as that cell. oxygen transport Myoglobin, of as reservoir hemeprotein increases muscle heart a and and oxygen both the carrier the an muscle, present within an have phenotype.] Surprisingly, double an knockouts myoglobin 502) [Note: mouse apparently p. normal (see the Myoglobin of structurally of polypeptide molecule. chains individual polypeptide to a that single consists is chain tetrameric hemoglobin the similar model the properties interpreting of myoglobin more some homology makes of This for hemoglobin. a useful complex

1.

content: stretches polypeptide chain α-Helical folded ~80% of molecule, Myoglobin α-helix. a of its into eight is with compact α-helix cannot accommodated ring ionic in loops and α-helical labeled proline, Figure whose by be stabilized either 19). (see (see terminated regions, the to presence and in β-bends by or bonds an p. 16) five-membered hydrogen p. H These are 3.2A, of by bonds A termed Ionic electrostatic are bridges.] interactions salt or [Note: bonds also 2.

almost Location The myoglobin molecule polar acids. of amino amino nonpolar acid of composed entirely and globular is nonpolar the residues: interior of residues forming (see clustered between p. structure together, are interactions packed 19). these by closely They a stabilized hydrophobic the they exclusively acids form each water. located with and almost are on contrast, In with amino bonds, can where both hydrogen polar surface, other

3.

the Binding of which a of the The nonpolar crevice, lined heme acids. is amino sits molecule group heme in group: myoglobin with are (see histidine Notable residues Fig. two exceptions 3.2B). to (F8), heme. One, the histidine directly Fe2+ binds the proximal of not to the heme . second, with of distal the directly stabilize (E7), but interact The Fe2+ or group O2 helps histidine binding does microenvironment myoglobin special oxygen that of for portion creates Thus, of one globin, or permits the protein, molecule a the (oxygenation). binding the reversible heme (oxidation rarely. simultaneous loss by electrons ferric to [Fe3+] of The form) occurs the only Fe2+

Hemoglobin and function structure C.

the to function cells main tissues. (RBC), lungs capillaries red is is Hemoglobin of in found transport the its to from the where blood O2 exclusively by major the two β noncovalent together is chains chains) hemoglobin four polypeptide A, and α adults, (two (Fig. chains interactions Hemoglobin of composed in held 3.3). stretches heme-binding for that Each (subunit) has pocket described and myoglobin. hydrophobic similar αhelical chain structure to of a complex molecule structurally more the is tetrameric functionally hemoglobin than and myoglobin. However, to O2 dioxide transport from the of body. protons and (CO2) from (H+) molecules can the the example, the to cells lungs carry can carbon four of lungs hemoglobin tissues For the and with hemoglobin by oxygen-binding are effectors of Furthermore, p. 29). properties regulated the (see interaction allosteric

solely from the diffusion Obtaining organisms. greatly of limits the size atmosphere O2 by because slightly systems is also are in O2 molecules such blood. Circulatory overcome required such hemoglobin transport this, solutions only as aqueous soluble as but

1. envisioned structure: identical as be (αβ)2. dimers, of can The tetramer composed hemoglobin Quaternary two and (αβ)1 (Fig. are chains held within by hydrophobic The primarily each polypeptide tightly interactions together two dimer 3.4). on surface this but not localized a each molecule in the In only the [Note: amino are instance, in subunit. acid region the interior of hydrophobic residues also of hydrophobic interactions β-subunits associations form dimers.] in interchain the between α-subunits strong Multiple and held bonds. the dimers primarily together In two by polar contrast, are interactions dimers them with between other. respect allow to the to weaker The move one dimers positions different This in occupying compared Fig. with in as deoxyhemoglobin two (see movement relative the results oxyhemoglobin 3.4).

a.

hemoglobin deoxy (tense) of or “T,” the form form: T The form. taut called is T bonds of the interact constrain the bonds ionic and a through of movement dimers that network form, two the hydrogen chains. αβ polypeptide In the conformation The of T form the is low-oxygen-affinity hemoglobin.

b.

dimers, movement. two rupture of polar hemoglobin allowing the of between αβ of form: the The causes bonds O2 binding some the to R O2 pulls binding Fe2+ of (Fig. to iron of into heme Specifically, heme the plane the the the the 3.5). of proximal the dimers. chains iron the globin also the is the resulting (F8), movement to αβ the between alters Because linked histidine interface the “R,” or Fig. to called leads relaxed (see a structure the This form 3.4). conformation R is of high-oxygen-affinity form hemoglobin. the The

bound. not oxygen is (O2) B. heme of plane the binding. Into O2 upon the

and Oxygen D. hemoglobin binding to myoglobin

only one only bind contains Myoglobin because can it O2, one heme of group. molecule one four heme can four of O2, each molecules bind at groups. its hemoglobin of In contrast, these or as 100% myoglobin sites Figure degree sites can saturation between molecules The shown (Y) in hemoglobin all oxygen-binding sites 3.6. on (all zero of (all vary of are empty) and full), are blood differences noninvasive, and indirect Pulse based measuring deoxyhemoglobin.] [Note: of absorption oxyhemoglobin method arterial on in saturation a by oximetry of is the oxygen light 1. Oxygen-dissociation the different is curve. pressures curve: measured of of A plot at oxygen-dissociation Y oxygen (pO2) called partial may represented also be [Note: as pO2 PO2.] hemoglobin for differences The important curves show and (see Fig. myoglobin 3.6). does values at This a than oxygen all has hemoglobin. graph illustrates affinity myoglobin higher pO2 that pressure of Hg oxygen partial is and binding of myoglobin Hg 26 ~1 for hemoglobin. for half (P50) mm The mm sites saturation needed to achieve the is, more higher the tightly the P50. lower the affinity binds), oxygen The O2 (that the

a curve a. hyperbolic has for Fig. oxygen-dissociation shape Myoglobin: myoglobin (see The 3.6). This single that fact the reversibly myoglobin reflects binds molecule O2. of a simple Thus, deoxygenated and oxygenated in (MbO2) (Mb) a myoglobin equilibrium: exist

left the to as shifted to or the added is The from O2 equilibrium right to removed is system. the or muscle. [Note: low the is in at released hemoglobin designed O2 by to pO2 bind found Myoglobin turn, muscle within to Myoglobin, cell O2 oxygen demand.] in the response in releases The Fig. b. (see oxygen-dissociation hemoglobin sigmoidal for is Hemoglobin: in shape curve in that the 3.6), subunits cooperate O2. indicating binding the affinity by hemoglobin oxygen at molecule subunits of the same of the remaining Cooperative of in (Fig. that hemoglobin means binding binding subunit increases an subunits oxygen one of the the O2 tetramer four 3.7). shown upward the (see Although in the the by occurs high difficult it with to of oxygen molecule for subsequent the first near is as hemoglobin, 20–30 mm steep curve affinity, bind binding more to Hg molecules oxygen region Fig. 3.6).

E. effectors Allosteric

by of hemoglobin dioxide bind the (pCO2), ability of pH the the partial availability The pO2, of O2 the and carbon environment, pressure to is affected (2,3-BPG). of the reversibly 2,3-bisphosphoglycerate hemoglobin that These at on affect changes collectively heme allosteric the O2 one the structural the on binding causes are other molecule. interaction effectors, iron at to called the sites molecule (“other site”) because their of tetrameric site of allosteric myoglobin effectors.] [Note: monomeric binding The not influenced by is to O2 1. and one hemoglobin subunit curve initiated changes other tetramer. at to are oxygen-dissociation sigmoidal specific Oxygen: subunits The the transmitted that structural in reflects net hemoglobin is of the ~300 for bound last its affinity oxygen is that first The times molecule than greater bound. the of molecule the cooperativity affinity effect this for oxygen hemoglobin. allosteric an effector is then, Oxygen, of the form. R It stabilizes

to oxygen: changes hemoglobin a. response The in to tissues cooperative O2 relatively Loading pO2. and binding the O2 more in allows the deliver unloading of small to indicates the tissues. This seen of and Figure be capillaries lung alveoli 3.6, in the the which of the in can pO2 with saturated hemoglobin high, virtually oxygen O2. For “loaded”) concentration the lung, in becomes is example, and (or its contrast, much metabolism the in tissues releases use the in oxyhemoglobin In for O2 peripheral of (Fig. “unloads”) tissues, (or of the oxidative 3.8).

b. and the sites Significance steep the O2 of lungs curve hemoglobin deliver the concentrations occur slope carry tissues high sites curve: between of permits of from range of oxygen to low pO2. The and of efficiently sigmoidal to oxygen-dissociation that the oxygen-dissociation over the curve, release same not hyperbolic pO2. with O2 such range degree as achieve within of this of oxygen-dissociation myoglobin, A the molecule a could it have and, range no Instead, for O2 therefore, to throughout would this deliver O2 would tissues. maximum pressure affinity the oxygen

2. enhanced [H+] when an of the is is or increased) release (proton presence lowered pCO2. when hemoglobin The the Bohr in is O2 increased pH of effect: is concentration hemoglobin from the oxygen-dissociation in shift oxygen the affinity in a (Fig. to decreased right therefore, the hemoglobin and, Both of curve result 3.9). Both, then, the stabilize form. (deoxy) T oxygen the This Bohr effect. in is called binding change form. CO2 oxygen-dissociation the affinity, oxygen in results greater stabilization Conversely, the pH raising or in the of a shift R lowering curve, a the and to (oxy) the of left concentration

a. both concentration lower pH: of the that and protons of The Source H+

capillaries the higher active is observed that capillaries in released of air. of CO2 than is expired the where into the lungs, alveolar metabolically CO2 in tissues to the carbonic loses acid: tissues, becoming spontaneously is which converted CO2 by buffer): a bicarbonate In (the H+, major blood anhydrase zinc-containing carbonic

of H+ of by lowering pH. reactions pair this the contributes to The produced the lower tissues gradient in O2 lungs in pH) pH peripheral a loading favors higher and and the is, a O2 (that of the pH differential tissues lung. unloading This having the of transporter to and Thus, affinity a the molecule pH in responds hemoglobin making more oxygen hemoglobin between lungs oxygen-consuming tissues, the the small O2. shifts of efficient of

b. oxyhemoglobin. hemoglobin has the The of greater Mechanism the for H+ that reflects the a of Bohr effect: Bohr does fact effect than affinity deoxy form chains histidine such groups pKa that in side specific have higher in caused by (see p. than is 6) oxyhemoglobin. as a This ionizable deoxyhemoglobin to concentration (salt able groups ionic decrease and (resulting of pH) these Therefore, a increase H+ the in an bridges). to in causes become in (charged) bonds protonated form stabilize deoxy affinity. bonds decrease These of oxygen form producing hemoglobin, preferentially a the in then, an [Note: buffer.] important blood is Hemoglobin,

pO2 be to an can shifts effect (or increase schematically in whereas H+ in where left. lower right the the increase pO2) to a in (favoring the shifts a the an represented deoxyhemoglobin), equilibrium equilibrium as: (or Bohr decrease H+) The

3. oxygen binding 2,3-BPG an to hemoglobin. effect 2,3-BPG important the of of O2 affinity: is regulator on approximately in the its is abundant is concentration most It the where organic of hemoglobin. that RBC, phosphate intermediate synthesized the of an glycolytic pathway from is (Fig. 2,3-BPG in for 3.10; 101 a see of glycolysis). 2,3-BPG synthesis discussion p.

a.

by the binding to affinity deoxyhemoglobin: oxygen of decreases deoxyhemoglobin 2,3-BPG to hemoglobin 2,3-BPG to oxyhemoglobin. binding but not binding deoxyhemoglobin. T of preferential the conformation stabilizes This effect binding be as: 2,3-BPG The can represented schematically b. of

to of (Fig. by the the tetramer chains, a binding formed One 2,3-BPG binds center site: 2,3-BPG deoxyhemoglobin in pocket, molecule two the of β-globin 3.11). the form phosphate that amino contains groups several acids negatively charged ionic This charged positively bonds 2,3-BPG. with pocket of that of with affinity be amino RBC acids result production variants high of hemoglobin in abnormally may one Replacement [Note: (erythrocytosis).] by oxygen these for can compensated increased the causes pocket Oxygenation be and narrows hemoglobin to released. of 2,3-BPG

c.

been from Hemoglobin high shift: curve has affinity. has oxygen 2,3-BPG removed which Oxygen-dissociation the significantly the 2,3-BPG the However, as of hemoglobin, in to the of affinity RBC, reduces oxygen-dissociation presence curve seen right shifting oxygen (Fig. the 3.12). the O2 to enables affinity the hemoglobin release partial at in efficiently found reduced pressures tissues. This

sufficient hypoxia chronic in to the or receiving where The in high in such 2,3-BPG observed of disease 2,3-BPG chronic emphysema, in hypoxia, or at anemia: O2. concentration response pulmonary d. may like levels RBC difficulty increases circulating as hemoglobin obstructive that have chronic altitudes, (COPD) in chronic available needs. body’s of normal are Intracellular in RBC supply elevated than fewer are anemia, 2,3-BPG oxygen also levels which the to hemoglobin, of Elevated tissues permitting 2,3-BPG capillaries greater oxygen the Fig. lower unloading levels of affinity the O2 in (see of 3.12).

transport function in for 2,3-BPG of essential is hemoglobin. the blood: transfused e. oxygen normal 2,3-BPG blood in depletion media currently the 2,3BPG. of in storing the However, gradual results available and abnormally tissues. bound the high oxygen fails affinity properly to Consequently, O2 its displays unload stored blood in an as Thus, than hemoglobin delivery an deficient in acts oxygen 2,3-BPG an rather oxygen as system. “trap” 6–24 of restore their in hours. Transfused are depleted RBC to 2,3-BPG supplies able compromised blood. ill with large However, severely patients may if 2,3-BPG–depleted such transfused be of quantities solution treated is Stored that blood, therefore, “rejuvenation” rapidly restores a 2,3-BPG. with Rejuvenation during also storage.] lost [Note: restores ATP 4. Fig. as and (see CO2 CO2 metabolism Most binding: ion bicarbonate transported in is the of produced hydrated 1.12 p. on 9). as the Fig. to However, bound shown in CO2 carbamate as carbaminohemoglobin hemoglobin is of amino groups terminal carried (forming some as which 3.8), represented follows: schematically be can

deoxy, or T, oxygen-dissociation and form affinity the 28) curve. oxygen in hemoglobin, resulting in CO2 (see binding the of its The a p. shift a stabilizes decrease of in right the breath. CO2 the released In the from in lungs, dissociates is hemoglobin and

5. forming iron, Carbon monoxide the carboxyhemoglobin. hemoglobin to reversibly) CO binds tightly (but (CO) binding: conformation, more one heme to of the When high sites heme the binds or remaining with four CO affinity. to R hemoglobin to bind sites, causing shifts O2 the curve sigmoidal the oxygen-dissociation shifts the a left changes hyperbola. the toward shape This to normal and (Fig. to affected unable release to As O2 a is result, hemoglobin the tissues the 3.13). of than for affinity for 220 times [Note: The greater is CO hemoglobin O2. carboxyhemoglobin blood. the CO concentrations Consequently, minute produce in concentrations environment in toxic even of the of can the CO increased blood of found For tobacco in levels smokers. are example, of of direct a CO to cellular from result hypoxia toxicity the appears combination at and damage CO-mediated level.] tissue dissociation is facilitates from oxygen (hyperbaric 100% the therapy), high which with CO the CO treated pressure of O2 hemoglobin. at poisoning inhibits electron transport Complex p. (see chain [Note: of CO the IV 76).] carried oxide is nitric addition (NO) O2, to and by gas In hemoglobin. CO2, CO, also potent (see p. 151). vasodilator is NO a from (salvaged) modulating can or diameter. influencing vessel thereby up released It RBC, and NO be taken availability

F. Minor hemoglobins

and is of (Fig. to It important the remember functionally member of family a proteins, one hemoglobin that just is A hemoglobins structurally (HbA) related human 3.14). and α-globin of a these composed of (or two oxygen-carrying is proteins polypeptides (or α-like) tetramer, Each βglobin two β-like) polypeptides. although the fetal as are only synthesized synthesized development, whereas others, during Certain HbA. with compared such hemoglobins, in are as low HbA2, such HbF, at levels adult, normally HbA become by modified below). hexose can 3. also addition a covalent the (see of

1. HbF a chains γ Fig. chains to hemoglobin: found two HbA, Fetal of those identical in α tetramer consisting (α2γ2; see is plus two 3.14). β-globin are the chains members p. gene family 34). of The γ (see

(ζ) and synthesis the conception, by sac. embryonic (ζ2ε2), epsilon chains during (ε) β-like development: α-like zeta of two after as the Gower first synthesized month such hemoglobins are two yolk chains HbF In composed 1, embryonic a. Hb to synthesis the of first gestation, to and of and globin the the the In shifts, the week fifth product is site marrow, primary then HbF. liver the hemoglobin accounting major the and HbF (Fig. the found RBC newborn, fetus life of in during last of months total in fetal ~60% the the for hemoglobin is 3.15). starts bone the synthesis month replaces pregnancy marrow and eighth the about HbA gradually in of at HbF. relative 3.15 Figure life. type of fetal hemoglobin the of shows during and each chain postnatal production cells.] in adults most RBC hemoglobin of known in [Note: as represents the concentrated HbF F is <2% and b. 2,3-BPG. affinity physiologic result weakly has Under a HbF: of as HbF a conditions, binding only HbF HbA 2,3-BPG does higher oxygen to binding than of HbF chains.] in amino γ-globin for The acids that the binding are lack responsible of the chains 2,3BPG some [Note: β-globin charged positively for in 2,3BPG reduce hemoglobin, interaction higher relative oxygen serves the affinity the HbF results oxygen of between 2,3-BPG a affinity to HbA. to Because weaker and HbF have of HbA they and a affinity. then both 2,3-BPG, their if HbF similar In oxygen are stripped contrast, of oxygen of facilitates from higher HbF O2 to across circulation the maternal the the The placenta fetus. the affinity RBC the of transfer

2.

ultimately, of and, of HbA2 appearing total the A2: hemoglobin, component is Hemoglobin a hemoglobin. ~2% before adult shortly first normal minor constituting birth composed It two chains and Fig. chains see is (α2δ2; of α-globin δ-globin two 3.14).

3.

physiologic slowly the A1c: the hexose), of condensed dependent Hemoglobin being a glycation conditions, extent with of hexose. HbA the plasma concentration is glycated (nonenzymically on Under form abundant is of most glycated The HbA1c. hemoglobin (Fig. residues attached the chains the the has of amino glucose valines predominantly groups N-terminal βglobin It of to 3.16). found of Increased concentrations glucose during cells. mellitus, the of with of diabetes HbA1c contact patients with are HbA has amounts 120-day their because lifetime in RBC these higher HbA1c in blood average for levels in use diabetes.) of with of 340 a levels p. patients glucose the discussion (See assessing

III. ORGANIZATION GLOBIN GENE

synthesis direct families hemoglobin resulting to synthesis of grasp hemoglobin, and understand expressed. organized also the from diseases it how in chains, of structure they are genes, the is globin To the the which alterations gene or structurally are different how genetic into necessary

α-Gene A. family

(or on hemoglobin for families) (Fig. chains α-globin β-globin The occur located gene different of genes subunits two the chromosomes and separate coding in two the clusters 3.17). two on for α-gene chains. cluster α-globin genes chromosome 16 the The contains gene ζ an expressed that early α-globin-like in also It hemoglobin. embryonic development contains as is of component the is, genes not contain chains. globin information genetic Globin are families that [Note: globinlike produce is to used that also not their expressed, gene These are pseudogenes.] called

B. β-Gene family

located for (see chain β-globin gene on single Fig. 11 chromosome is the A 3.17). found γ and δ the an genes development), adult (which, expressed are gene hemoglobin in the embryonic four HbF), β-globin-like chain There that early Aγ two HbA2. the and like the the in in (Gγ ζ gene ε for codes minor are that expressed is gene, genes: additional globin

Steps in C. synthesis chain globin

Expression precursors, a globin transcribed. encoding the of in gene where DNA sequence nucleus RBC begins the gene the is of a precursor (mRNA) produced of The ribonucleic messenger that a the is chain. is used acid for by the (RNA) transcription RNA of a actually synthesis template globin as the this precursor removed can three stretches manner. the a Before fragments linear function, two RNA mRNA from it sequence (introns) of must joined serve remaining (exons) noncoding be and in where a The producing translated, globin chain. information is enters mRNA genetic the its resulting cytosol, mature 3.18. is of shown this summary in Figure process (A Chapters expression VII, gene in 30–32.) more A presented detailed is of description Unit

IV. HEMOGLOBINOPATHIES

Hemoglobinopathies disorders as normal or, by of group a rarely, are abnormal of molecule, both. production a synthesis caused genetic structurally insufficient of defined quantities of hemoglobin, hemoglobin = thalassemias (HbC), severe hemoglobinopathies anemia and clinical HbC the + disease can that disease Sickle hemoglobin HbSC), hemoglobin are C cell (HbS have consequences. representative (HbS), SC of normal hemoglobinopathy), of the thalassemias hemoglobinopathy). an production whereas three are altered from conditions (qualitative first by (quantitative decreased with hemoglobin result hemoglobin sequence caused amino acid production The

cell Sickle (hemoglobin S anemia disease) A.

for (a nucleotide cell anemia, of the a point the substitution gene diseases, disorder single p. see in is caused mutation, a the 449) most β-globin. common genetic sickling Sickle by RBC affecting Americans. 50,000 most disorder inherited It the the in common blood is United States, 1 American in population, newborn the infants. primarily It affecting African 500 African in American occurs disorder. cell an Sickle autosomalrecessive is anemia molecules. chains two from who in mutant It each globin parent) that the (one the of inherited β for have of occurs genes synthesis code individuals α2βS2, and the as β-globin to mutant is βS, is referred The designated [Note: resulting HbS.] chain hemoglobin, showing symptoms sufficient begin replaced (see HbF by does disease infant been can that has not the 36). An occur p. sickling until HbS so of with cell chronic susceptibility is and pain to hemolytic lifelong usually hyperbilirubinemia anemia 284), Sickle of infancy. in p. by associated increased infections, anemia episodes characterized (“crises”), (see beginning with The 120 days the anemia for hence, compared sickle of is RBC lifetime a <20 normal RBC, in [Note: cell days, anemia.] chest bone due acute symptoms hyperplasia. syndrome, changes renal to splenic stroke, Other and include dysfunction, marrow and is reduced. Life expectancy Heterozygotes, 12 have one one cell gene. sickle in African 1 representing and Americans, normal HbA, blood cells The heterozygotes individuals and trait. both and contain sickle these cell such of have HbS extreme and exertion clinical of have a with show (but dehydration) not can do under conditions symptoms life normal physical span. may They usually

1.

two contains has glutamate replaced at α-globin (βS), mutant A (Fig. HbS position β-globin of Amino in β which normal chains substitution been and with two acid molecule HbS in six chains:: chains valine 3.19). (positive HbA migrates slowly HbS more at anode pH, alkaline than electrode) during toward electrophoresis Therefore, (Fig. the does 3.20). rendering less chains, of in mobility HbS This HbA. residues two β a of than is charged thereby the glutamate HbS of altered result negatively the negative absence the routinely sickle hemoglobin Electrophoresis trait disease). cell the RBC is anemia cell sickle cell used sickle lysed of diagnosis and [Note: (or, of obtained from in analysis also (see p. DNA is used 493).] 2.

glutamate chain and forms molecule nonpolar in complementary the into replacement the the cell on fits a the site charged β valine a on Sickling of The with (Fig. β the anoxia: another hemoglobin that tissue chain protrusion of 3.21). low insoluble deoxyhemoglobin producing and S distort inside RBC. tension, stiffen of polymerizes rigid, that the At misshapen polymers forming cell, the fibrous network oxygen RBC, a capillaries. frequently the narrow cells block in blood of flow sickled the Such the the anoxia to deprivation) death ischemic in the of of tissue, causing eventually vicinity in the blockage. (oxygen of (infarction) interruption This pain cells leads supply O2 localized in and HbS. leads in deoxygenated increase to an The anoxia also is the diameter of 3–4 is RBC 7.5 of µm. whereas mean microvasculature µm, [Note: The that deform an cells tendency RBC, vessel and have normal to adhere ability to increased to walls. to Compared a sickled decreased through difficult, vessels small causing thereby moving This microvascular occlusion.] makes 3.

state sickling oxygen that the Variables therefore, (that proportion reduces of deoxy in and, enhanced the disease sickling: the is, HbS). affinity any HbS of are by variable of extent The of that severity increase the increases decreased pCO2, include decreased pH, concentration RBC. dehydration, increased increased pO2, an and of in These variables 2,3-BPG

4.

of in Treatment: antibiotic transfusions for therapy aggressive occlusion patients vessels. at risk adequate and blood if analgesics, high Therapy fatal is hydration, involves present, infection include against weighed immunologic benefits complications. complications result reduce infections, transfusions Intermittent (see of iron of bloodborne with RBC that the transfusion, risk be overload the which can p. stroke, must but the and 404), in packed hemosiderosis (hydroxycarbamide), decreases an Hydroxyurea because it therapeutically drug, is useful circulating of HbF, increases RBC antitumor sickling. which levels painful and of reduces crises frequency to decreased This mortality. leads possible. Stem cell is transplantation sickle an the begin to anemia antibiotic allow screening birth [Note: affected in newborn soon and prophylactic has therapy led with child.] The to associated morbidity mortality inclusion cell of its to panels after 5.

its among that suggests despite selective of advantage selective the in exists heterozygous state: state, Possible individuals. βS for the heterozygous mutation the high damaging The Africans, of a effects black homozygous frequency advantage for the cell to susceptible the falciparum. by severe less example, the heterozygotes parasite gene For are caused malaria sickle Plasmodium RBC. organism its in part cycle This the spends of obligatory life an normal, those HbS, these development. parasite stage theory the for like that complete homozygotes, span intracellular life a One have cannot cells of in its because heterozygous is shorter individuals in than the a heterozygotes living selective to of malaria in provide regions advantage This death. where is cause a may major Africa, For example, the of cell of in similar sickle anemia malaria. to distribution geographic that is

C B. Hemoglobin disease

sixth position a (see the the that variant in acid HbC HbS, a of Fig. hemoglobin is Like has single substitution amino β-globin chain 3.19). glutamate HbC, lysine a In with the substitution is a for valine substituted in compared (as HbS). however, causes more This toward does HbS (see anode [Note: Fig. to HbC HbA or slowly substitution than move the 3.20).] generally relatively have homozygous a for Rare mild, patients hemolytic chronic anemia. HbC not from infarctive They no and crises, do is required. specific suffer therapy

disease C. SC Hemoglobin

another diseases. is of RBC sickling the HbSC disease cell sickle β-globin disease, β-globin some in HbC In mutation disease. found this mutation, other whereas chains have carry chains the the heterozygous. are HbSC disease with [Note: Patients doubly called are both different because genes their of each other.] β-globin are compound heterozygotes They although abnormal, from disease HbSC Hemoglobin at to and tend in be may range. cell levels low anemia normal even sickle than the higher end be of the in course severe. that are of sickle and cell in less adults with of differs from symptoms clinical as HbSC frequent less anemia The such crises that painful anemia variability. is significant However, there clinical

Methemoglobinemias D.

bind the Fe3+ to which cannot methemoglobin, from hemoglobin in iron O2. Oxidation produces heme of Fe2+ may or such species p. oxygen drugs, endogenous caused 148). of certain acquired reactive This and as such action the as nitrates, oxidation (see be products by methemoglobin b5 (Fe3+) conversion methemoglobin called of NADH-cytochrome the example, result for deficiency for reductase), from the oxidation may (Fig. hemoglobin accumulation defects, enzyme reductase to to responsible NADH-methemoglobin the of of congenital leads (also (Fe2+), a The also 3.22). approximately have of RBC half adults newborns of of reduce the methemoglobin.] capacity The [Note: to those the abnormal rare hemoglobin the an reductase. is that HbM, mutations resistant chain production can α-or the Additionally, to of β-globin in cause of cyanosis” characterized coloration result and a (a dark-colored “chocolate the by The mucous brown-colored of methemoglobin. are membranes the skin as blue methemoglobinemias blood) and hypoxia and dyspnea. Symptoms to headache, and related tissue include the of degree anxiety, are and can rare cases, occur. In death coma Treatment as is with blue, methylene which is oxidized is Fe3+ reduced.

Thalassemias E.

in in globin hereditary of imbalance diseases occurs are an which thalassemias chains. the hemolytic synthesis The disorders they the common are most a single-gene group, humans. in As α-globin chain partner. β-globin Normally, synthesis each that βglobin of chains coordinated, a is has αand the chain so formation This the to leads α2β2 of (HbA). is α-or is In the hemoglobin defective, synthesis the reduced. concentration thalassemias, and β-globin either the of chain the of or many caused DNA. thalassemia by entire nucleotides gene a A of or one variety substitutions the can of mutations, be in including deletions, deletions disorder globin a in but Each classified thalassemia [Note: reduced which one are β0-thalassemia), level chains some at synthesized (α0-or produced or be (α+-or in as either chains can a are no which β+-thalassemia).] 1.

decreased In of or as absent, typically of is synthesis disorders, chains mutations that a β-Thalassemias: β-globin functional these of production result affect point the mRNA. is chain synthesis normal. However, α-globin precipitate, the form death mature RBC. and of chains initially stable cannot tetramers to Excess causing destined so premature become α-globin cells occurs. and (HbA2) also (HbF) α2δ2 in Increase α2γ2 are only (one of two 11). copies chromosome each β-globin the in cell gene each on There trait minor) individuals have anemia) they if β-thalassemia have Therefore, if defective either only (β-thalassemia β-globin (Fig. genes with gene one both β-globin gene defective defects (Cooley are β-thalassemia major or 3.23). β-globin gene appear of until several only prenatal Because after not development, late physical the birth. manifestations the in expressed months β-thalassemias is β-thalassemia make require specific minor with not β usually Those treatment. and do individuals some chains born anemic, first due usually life, ineffective severely year or However, during second of β-thalassemia are to healthy the become major those seemingly infants birth at but with erythropoiesis. changes result a extramedullary seen. of are hematopoiesis also as Skeletal transfusions regular of These blood. patients require cumulative is the the Although this is effect overload. iron [Note: transfusions of lifesaving, treatment improved iron and has Use chelation morbidity of therapy mortality.] only The available is curative cell stem transplantation. hematopoietic option

2.

of chains these decreased mutations. is α-globin In synthesis a result typically or of α-Thalassemias: deletional disorders, as absent, levels of Because contains four deficiencies α-globin several are chromosome the copies (Fig. on each genome gene of chain there each (two individual’s 16), α-globin 3.24). of “silent” the is the a genes α-thalassemia, is four defective, because carrier individual termed the one disease physical of no If manifestations of occur. α-globin are is genes as designated individual If trait. defective, having the two α-thalassemia H of individual (β4) hemoglobin anemia are genes If three disease, variable the defective, α-globin has a hemolytic severity. hydrops hemoglobin disease synthesis fetalis with defective, for results, genes Bart chains are death four α-globin are α-globin because the HbF. required all (γ4) of fetal If and against Heterozygote advantage [Note: is seen both malaria α-and β-thalassemias.] in

V. CHAPTER SUMMARY

and Hemoglobin composed is adults, (HbA), chains four in noncovalent held A of (two polypeptide interactions together β (Fig. α2β2) by two the chains, α major hemoglobin chains 3.25). oxyhemoglobin. The deoxyhemoglobin different with compared subunits positions occupy in relative Hb is or (tense), taut the conformation. called The form “T,” deoxy of a the has structure the chains. that It constrained movement limits polypeptide of T The form the Hb. form is low-oxygen-affinity of ionic and of and to the of movement dimers. causes rupture the binding of (O2) bonds heme some oxygen of The iron hydrogen the the leads or structure to relaxed, a conformation. “R,” called This is the form The of Hb. form R high-oxygen-affinity contrast hyperbolic), of is cooperate binding in myoglobin, that which curve oxygen-dissociation Hb in O2. the (in to The for that subunits shape indicating sigmoidal is an groups binding same at oxygen The heme (cooperativity). the the affinity molecule of in increases oxygen of one molecule the heme remaining Hb group reversibly pressure to is of Hb’s the of (2,3-BPG). (pCO2), the dioxide pressure partial the of O2 carbon partial the by 2,3-bisphosphoglycerate pH affected (pO2), environment, availability and bind ability oxygen the of lowered in (the the example, such the or effect), exercising of is pCO2 is curve of Bohr Hb from is oxygen-dissociation increased Hb the muscle, the the when release shifted and right. is For as enhanced to pH O2 anemia, cope in concentration red cells blood the hypoxia of of the increases. with long-term effects or To chronic 2,3-BPG and oxygen decreases its the binds to affinity. 2,3-BPG Hb It also to curve right. shifts oxygen-dissociation therefore the the tightly Fetal and a hemoglobin does HbA 2,3-BPG oxygen binds has (HbF) higher affinity. less than binds monoxide tightly Hb Carbon reversibly) carboxyhemoglobin. iron, the (but to (CO) forming thalassemias cell production either as of disorders of normal are (Fig. in a Hb sickle the Hemoglobinopathies or molecule synthesis Hb by anemia structurally primarily of as subunits abnormal caused quantities in insufficient 3.26).

Choose ONE best answer. the

.1. one the the is Which statements following of correct? hemoglobins concerning

is hemoglobin adults. abundant the most A. in normal HbA

an 2,3-bisphosphoglycerate. lower affinity a affinity has blood B. for adult does blood oxygen HbF has Fetal than for increased because

α2δ2. of HbF globin chain C. is The composition

substitution. HbA by determined differs from acid HbA1c a amino genetically single, D.

fetal appears early life. HbA2 in E.

accounts A. = HbA hemoglobin adult. of Correct in the normal a for answer 90% over HbA1c the percentage If to included, is ~97%. rises higher to the hemoglobin (2,3-BPG) reduces for affinity in Because oxygen, a HbF 2,3-BPG between for weaker oxygen HbA. interaction 2,3bisphosphoglycerate relative results the and of HbF affinity α2γ2. consists HbF of a of blood is glycated formed HbA1c form cells. nonenzymically in HbA, red a normal shortly before of age adult first levels hemoglobin, is appearing minor adult and birth months. rising of component 6 (~2% to by HbA2 total hemoglobin) the

.2. of is statements cell ability precipitate correct? of anemia concerning one crisis Which the following to sickle in acidosis a the

of Acidosis decreases HbS. the A. solubility

the oxygen affinity Acidosis hemoglobin. B. increases of

to the hemoglobin conformation. the C. relaxed Acidosis of from taut conversion favors the

the the oxygen-dissociation shifts left. D. Acidosis to curve

the decreases to ability Acidosis to hemoglobin. 2,3-bisphosphoglycerate bind E. of

right, oxyhemoglobin significantly less to HbS decreased shift form, curve with Correct pH causes the in oxygen-dissociation affinity the deoxygenated oxygen indicating Decreased (acidosis) answer S. compared the = to delivery). A. is (increased soluble This sickle of deoxy, can the or and hemoglobin of crisis. favors cell precipitate formation taut, a form the The only binds to form the 2,3bisphosphoglycerate it because increased, of hemoglobin. is deoxy of binding

.3. is by the one the binding Which of oxygen hemoglobin concerning correct? statements following of

A. a higher effect values. results lower The in affinity pH at oxygen Bohr

B. increases of Carbon by C-terminal of polypeptide groups dioxide to binding oxygen affinity the the the chains. hemoglobin

the C. The as increases of oxygen saturation hemoglobin percentage increases. affinity

The binds hemoglobin of molecules tetramer 2,3bisphosphoglycerate. D. four

affinity E. protons. the deoxyhemoglobin and Oxyhemoglobin same have for

answer at group of in Correct C. oxygen affinity increases heme molecule. the The same one groups the oxygen binding heme = of remaining the in results increased affinity. rise oxygen in pH A Carbon oxygen the lowers pH. decreases dioxide affinity it because taut, binding carbon dioxide stabilizes the Moreover, N-termini the form. deoxy to of molecule one Hemoglobin binds of 2,3-bisphosphoglycerate. oxyhemoglobin. than for Deoxyhemoglobin affinity greater does has protons a

binding important for .4. 2,3-bisphosphoglycerate. is the in of HbA 82 β-Lysine this amino by Helsinki, been In Hb acid has replaced methionine. Helsinki? concerning be true Hb should of Which following the

A. relaxed, the It should in than the be stabilized rather form. taut,

B. to tissues. oxygen delivery increased should have consequently, oxygen and, affinity decreased It

oxygen-dissociation be to curve C. to HbA. Its relative the shifted right should

anemia. in results D. It

Correct answer B. = β groups the Substitution lysine by the decreases phosphate charged of in methionine hemoglobin. subunits (2,3-BPG) of 2,3-bisphosphoglycerate to bind ability negatively of reduction affinity oxygen delivery 2,3-BPG 2,3-BPG hemoglobin, to affinity result oxygen oxygen the should in decreases (O2) increased decreased a in tissues. of and Because of high-oxygen-affinity form is The the relaxed form hemoglobin. Increased delivery) oxygen shift in a curve. (decreased affinity left results the in oxygen-dissociation O2 Decreased delivery of is RBC increased compensated for production. by

.5. emergency 67-year-old 1-week to presented of A with angina history a man the department of and shortness breath. color. that a face taken He complained had his blue and on extremities chronic dinitrate nitroglycerin. treated included stable and history with His isosorbide medical angina was for analysis brown. Blood obtained the most following diagnosis? one the of is likely Which

Carboxyhemoglobinemia A.

disease B. SC Hemoglobin

Methemoglobinemia C.

Sickle anemia cell D.

β-Thalassemia E.

heme answer C. prosthetic ferric iron Correct (Fe3+) group the the of to hemoglobin = (Fe2+) in of forms Oxidation the state methemoglobin. ferrous the such caused drugs action by of certain nitrates. may as This be chocolate-colored the methemoglobinemias as blood) cyanosis chocolate and coloration the characterized by methemoglobin. are of blue dark-colored (a The and mucous result membranes of skin a dyspnea. are headache, Symptoms related to anxiety, include and tissue and hypoxia occur. In can and cases, coma death rare a of aromatic methemoglobinemia.] anesthetic, amine is topical Benzocaine, as used cause an acquired [Note: a .6. a nonsickling C disease is hemoglobin Why disease?

as In replaced the glutamate HbC, lysine polar rather than polar by by valine is in nonpolar HbS.

.7. individuals red HbS cell of and of blood about What the be true with extent sickling would persistence in hereditary HbF?

be HbF decreased would It reduces HbS concentration. because polymerization HbS. of It deoxy inhibits also

materials this please For additional thePoint. ancillary related chapter, visit to

OVERVIEW I.

fibrous common, the elastin serve (ECM) well-characterized the that proteins and in of functions body. extracellular Collagen are structural examples of matrix as the For example, of and connective elastin sclera components and eye. skin, tissue, are vessel cornea found collagen the and blood walls, of amino specific fibrous special structural exhibits unique from by elements. is obtained resulting mechanical protein acids secondary Each structure, properties, regular, which its combining into of quaternary elements. sometimes, interactions Chapter whose secondary, (discussed tertiary, result structural between and, is in proteins contrast This shapes globular the 3), are complex in to

II. COLLAGEN

human abundant body. is most the in protein the Collagen α wound triple is around are collagen A which long, molecule a in three one helix structure typical a to (referred chains) rigid rope-like in as polypeptides another (Fig. 4.1). body, a structural role in Although particular by the the their are organization these are organ. plays collagen and dictated throughout types molecules found of humor may In be or the that collagen ECM gel some a tissues, the to vitreous structure, gives the eye. as support in the dispersed as parallel fibers tendons. in strength, provide great tissues, may In be bundled other that tight, in as collagen is light cornea transmit stacked to minimum of the as scattering. a collagen with the eye, so of In resist an to mechanical fibers of angle to as other shear from at Collagen arranged any as each direction. occurs bone so

A. Types

proteins collagen proteins domains. >25 superfamily of that collagen well includes additional types as have as The collagen-like by three hydrogen are held together The polypeptide α interchain bonds. chains the properties. Variations structural the with same the amino slightly (~1,000 different in size are but long) result acid that in amino α components acids of sequence about chains the types various tissues. These in of collagen the to form found chains are α combined three type (α13). collagen For whereas chains example, two one chain II and most collagen, type called common the chains contains (α12α2), I, α1 contains α2 called α1 (Fig. into in collagens groups, and be three organized based their on location can the functions body The 4.2).

1.

are collagen II, collagens: III described I, a fibrillar have for molecule. rope-like above and the structure Types typical and collagens Fibril-forming the In polymers patterns, reflecting banding regular staggered of microscope, (Fig. the these the linear fibril packing in fibrils molecules of individual collagen have the the electron characteristic 4.3). to supporting tendons collagen restricted elements Type example, II cartilaginous collagen I are fibers fibrils) fibers strength are in tensile collagen (composed (for structures. from type of whereas corneas), high and formed of found molecules The type derived fibers collagen prevalent tissues more distensible vessels. III are as from blood in such

2.

(Fig. fibrils distinct and collagens: than a VIII Network-forming three-dimensional rather mesh, form Types IV 4.4). a sheet or into constitutes of For basement part major meshwork assemble IV that example, molecules type membranes. a

adjacent and filtration macromolecules Basement such and semipermeable cells the for to membranes thin, function that a lung. mechanical as organs kidney in sheet-like barrier as provide the structures support are

3. bind the IX Types collagens: and fibrils one to and ECM Fibril-associated to (see fibrils, the to these another collagen surface components Fig. in linking of XII other 4.2).

B. Structure

that stabilized by collagen, hydrogen are bonds. a elongated, globular has that into compact proteins fibrous triple-helical folded structures, most an interchain protein, structure is Unlike

1.

and Amino sequence: Collagen acid both of glycine, in the formation helix. important the in are is proline of triple-stranded rich which chain chain. the helical Proline peptide its facilitates formation conformation in of causes “kinks” ring of structure each the because the α chain presence the [Note: conformation p. of helix α be helical (see α an cannot The of proline the dictates that 16).] smallest every third amino chain. polypeptide acid, the in position found the Glycine, is of fits the together. the come It three restricted into chains the of where helix spaces part a and where X −Gly–X–Y–, be is frequently proline, often residues The Fig. of sequence, hydroxyproline glycine hydroxylysine, can (but is Y are repeating 4.5). be (−Gly–Pro– α Hyp–)333. a Thus, be sequence as represented regarded can can of as most the whose polytripeptide chain

2.

and Hydroxyproline contains present (see and p. hydroxylysine, acids hydroxyproline are proteins. nonstandard 1) hydroxylysine: amino most not which in other Collagen their of hydroxylation result from They the after and lysine chains incorporation the into some proline polypeptide (Fig. of residues 4.6). hydroxylation (see the modification is Therefore, a posttranslational p. 460). the maximizes of of bonds hydrogen Generation stabilize that formation interchain hydroxyproline triple-helical structure.] [Note: 3. residues collagen enzymatically of group The be hydroxyl Glycosylation: hydroxylysine may of glycosylated. the polypeptide Most the (Fig. and are chain glucose formation attached to galactose triple-helix prior to commonly, sequentially 4.7).

Biosynthesis C.

the (or collagen chondroblasts in of of in synthesized osteoblasts of fibroblasts related and cartilage). polypeptide bone The are precursors the molecule and They ECM. form are the triple which modified gets secreted into enzymically helix, the become and cross-linked collagen modification, mature aggregate enzymic to After fibers. form the extracellular additional fibrils collagen

1.

Collagen many outside of that one of proteins formation: is Pro-α normally function cells. chain acid a their proteins α amino Like at export, produced sequence (prepro-α of special amino polypeptide chains synthesized the (N)-terminal for precursors most contain chains) ends. newly from acts sequence absence being the as cell. the signals, secretion a that, the targets in of This signal polypeptide synthesized additional for binding reticulum ribosomes to of the the sequence The of facilitates into of prepro-α (RER) directs the lumen passage the endoplasmic and signal the the RER. chain rough sequence pro-α called precursor collagen lumen cleaved a rapidly a signal The yield chain to is in of Fig. the (see 4.7).

2.

The Fig. Hydroxylation: of the processed being pro-α RER while within steps the (see are of still are number chains enzymic lumen the polypeptides a by synthesized 4.7). residues to lysine Y-position sequence in hydroxylysine –Gly–X–Y– of the found and and can form residues. be the hydroxylated Proline hydroxyproline (ascorbic acid, p. reactions 381), function prolyl hydroxylase (see reducing These are iron agent to the vitamin Fig. and oxygen, and see ferrous require unable without hydroxylating hydroxylation (Fe2+), C hydroxylase, which lysyl the enzymes, molecular 4.6). interchain therefore, impaired, hydroxylation), lysine deficiency a helix. triple of case stable as (and, formation of proline of lack formation is the a In acid H-bond is and ascorbic the cannot fibrils (see below), strength 7. fiber. the greatly Additionally, decreasing cross-linked tensile be of collagen assembled scurvy. resulting disease The known as deficiency is (bruise-like of result fragility limbs ecchymoses often capillary to scurvy blood (leakage) a show extravasation (Fig. as with due discolorations) Patients the subcutaneous on of 4.8).

3.

by or Some glucose are with glycosylation glucosyl-galactose modified residues hydroxylysine (see Glycosylation: Fig. 4.7).

4.

a procollagen, (C)terminal N-and by propeptides called chains Assembly and Fig. triple central of nonhelical of region three and that the form glycosylation, flanked has hydroxylation collagen After pro-α precursor extensions (see secretion: a carboxyl helix 4.7). C-terminal formation the procollagen chains. bonds the of interchain between extensions formation disulfide The begins of pro-α of with into favorable chains three an α the helix brings formation. This alignment for triple they through procollagen apparatus, in vesicles. Golgi are where move the The secretory molecules packaged the extracellular procollagen cell vesicles The the molecules the fuse of into causing space. membrane, with release

5.

of molecules: molecules which the cleavage their remove After the cleaved procollagen tropocollagen release, peptidases, procollagen triple-helical Cprocollagen N-and propeptides, by molecules. producing are terminal Extracellular

6.

Tropocollagen form formation: Collagen collagen associate molecules to spontaneously fibril fibrils. a staggered quarters three by (see neighbor of arranged an They in collagen its array, parallel ordered, form pattern, overlapping each adjacent a approximately length Fig. molecule with molecules a 4.7).

7.

fibrillar The as for formation: a substrate lysyl oxidase. collagen Cross-link array serves molecules of lysine in extracellular enzyme and the This some deaminates oxidatively residues of collagen. copper-containing hydroxylysine lysine covalent or (Fig. fibers collagen hydroxyallysine) thus, and collagen cross-links mature result condense to hydroxylysine reactive form spontaneously that aldehydes residues molecules in with and, can neighboring (allysine The 4.9). allysine Cross-links two residues.] between can [Note: form peroxide.

several oxidase of copper-containing Lysyl enzymes. one is dismutase ceruloplasmin (see 148), dopamine superoxide p. (see Others oxidase (see p. p. 76), c (see p. p. tyrosinase 286), cytochrome include 273). (see 404), hydroxylase and homeostasis in (X-linked overload copper causes 402). disease) deficiency Disruption p. copper syndrome) (see (Wilson or Menkes

Degradation D.

as several as molecules, half-lives stable highly years. having Normal collagens long are to and the dynamic remodeled, is connective being is response constantly However, or of tissue growth injury often tissue. in dependent is a of matrix proteolytic fibers the on family of large collagenases, of part action are which Breakdown metalloproteinases. collagen of one-quarter and specific, fragments. I length cleavage type For the collagen, site generating is three-quarter by matrix other These are degraded proteinases. fragments further

E. Collagenopathies

of and, to collagen steps by an inability tissues therefore, Defects can an of a fiber in form the disease properly any fibers in genetic normally provide one inability in with collagen. needed provided many result the to strength synthesis tensile involving collagen genes mutations have for collagen been than 23 in coding 13 of 1,000 More types. identified the of examples result that defective synthesis. following The are the of (collagenopathies) are collagen diseases

1. collagen heterogeneous the Ehlers-Danlos result syndrome: group heritable metabolism from syndrome tissue of defects of Ehlers-Danlos is disorders connective (EDS) fibrillar molecules. in a that of defects caused amino example, or hydroxylase (Fig. by caused be of sequences I, and collagen extensibility The lysyl (for or can characterized from hypermobility classic EDS V. III, type joint peptidase) enzymes a collagen-processing skin is V and collagen, in the and acid N-procollagen EDS, form mutations in by fragility of types by deficiency 4.10). collagen, most III rupture. because is type serious due associated form form, arterial vascular it defects lethal EDS the potentially with to in of is The inheritance.] show vascular forms The autosomaldominant classic and [Note: it or and is secretion, Collagen chains mutant distribution, degraded. that have contains frequently structure, altered may one result Incorporation [Note: triple of in degradation helix. the of mutant just may chain effect.] known is as dominant-negative This a 2. of trauma genetic disease,” minor imperfecta: fracture no (Fig. easily, or characterized bone that fragility syndrome, is by known disorder a This bone with “brittle bones as Osteogenesis 4.11). dominant cases α2 (OI) encode Over I 80% to α1 imperfecta are in or osteogenesis of genes by the of mutations type the caused collagen. that chains most of common cause acids glycine by chains. mutations –Gly–X–Y–) (in the side with replacement The amino bulky α formation triple-helical resultant structurally the conformation. The the chains prevent of required abnormal from to severity mild Phenotypic lethal. ranges fragility, characterized is loss, OI, blue bone most by I common hearing sclerae. form, and the Type mild the perinatal lethal most severe typically result as of the is in complications. Type II, period form, a pulmonary are Fig. (see utero In seen fractures 4.11). curvature also and sclerae. form III blue severe a humped-back is by characterized stature, and birth, to appearance, Type spinal short multiple (kyphotic) fractures leading is a at development, a imperfecta, Dentinogenesis OI. be in disorder of may tooth seen

III. ELASTIN

have connective elastin tensile In is high which tough are and protein fibers properties. collagen, a fibrous to strength, with rubber-like contrast forms that tissue walls large and the elastic the fibers found arteries, lungs, composed elastin Elastic and glycoprotein ligaments. of microfibrils in are of relaxed. is several when times length recoil their but normal force They can be their to the original stretching stretched shape to

A. Structure

Elastin example, is and that acids and a of insoluble a which generated polymer valine). is ~700 small nonpolar primarily precursor, protein amino are composed an (for alanine, glycine, tropoelastin, polypeptide from soluble scant contains rich and lysine also Elastin is but and hydroxyproline proline in hydroxylysine. is the cell secreted the ECM. Tropoelastin into by function There, as as tropoelastin which a interacts it scaffold is microfibrils, which with glycoprotein fibrillin, specific onto such deposited. oxidase, are chains by of lysyl Some polypeptides of the lysyl tropoelastin allysine residues. forming oxidatively the deaminated side chains form the side of allysyl or polypeptides plus Three from a cross-link chain one the neighboring side unaltered desmosine same lysyl (Fig. 4.12). elastin, direction produces stretch This network tissue when can rubbery that and giving interconnected, stressed, (Fig. connective elasticity any an bend extensively in 4.13). a Marfan by the syndrome, the structural Mutations cardiovascular and in the impaired characterized protein eye, are for in disorder the integrity connective fibrillin-1 system. tissue responsible skeleton, fibrillin fibrillin, microfibrils. inhibiting into formation functional With this the abnormal protein along is disease, microfibrils of incorporated with normal EDS tissue syndrome, that thinning due show have allows or Patients to [Note: blue underlying sclerae OI, to with Marfan may through.] pigment

α1-Antitrypsin elastin B. degradation in

(AAT), or proteinases) protein, body (called enzymes α1-antitrypsin of and Blood that contain a proteolytic inhibits proteases, hydrolyze destroy peptidases, and other a number fluids proteins. which named the as originally [Note: by AAT trypsinogen inhibitor of proteolytic because inhibits pancreas was The a (see p. trypsin, activity enzyme synthesized the it 248).] walls tissues a physiologic is important degrades of neutrophil elastase, and space AAT elastin of role as variety into inhibiting as of the that the well protease (Fig. has a alveolar powerful released extracellular other structural proteins in 4.14). in AAT is Most secreted found the plasma and the by liver. synthesized of also synthesis occurs. Extrahepatic

1.

normal In chronically neutrophils. from α1-Antitrypsin lungs: levels neutrophil in elastase of to activated the lung, released exposed degenerating are the alveoli the low and alveolar AAT, destroy can most elastase of action of the proteolytic elastin unopposed the if (see elastase Fig. of neutrophil by The inhibitor the in walls activity important 4.14). walls lung connective results protease and in regenerate, between an the the caused tissue of pulmonary inhibitor of its the imbalance Because destruction disease. alveolar by cannot tissue

2.

~2%– of and predisposed 5% by defects the United are States, α1-Antitrypsin with In to emphysema: AAT. inherited patients emphysema in the disease deficiency (GAG different a but purine one for resulting deficiency substitution of position for the number glutamic are most AAT in and AAG, 342 single widespread A of severe. lysine the protein, base of in acid to cause at the clinically gene mutations of mutation the known is protein) the to variant.] Z mutated is protein [Note: The the termed by normally secretion of the The resulting hepatocytes, in polymerize, within the AAT the misfold, AAT causes and aggregate to of monomeric decreased liver. RER mutation is, disease. a AAT protein therefore, deficiency misfolded decreasing the that lung. the to Consequently, amount levels reduced, blood gets are of AAT liver that liver). (scarring The in result the cirrhosis may in polymer of accumulates the In Northern United Caucasians the mutation is AAT in of European common ancestry. the States, most abnormal risk individual to alleles at emphysema. of must two for the be development inherit AAT An damage. gene, of alveoli protect heterozygote, normal levels one with a from are defective the the AAT one In and sufficient to inhibitor proteases. is target the required 358 to for binding its AAT [Note: of the in Methionine neutralize inactivation rendering Smoking and methionine, elastase. to oxidation the causes powerless of thereby subsequent the the inhibitor survival destruction elevated the and deficiency.] deficiency, of AAT nonsmokers with rate therefore, a considerably poorer Smokers have with than lung rate a be treated is, of intravenous therapy, weekly by administration that augmentation elastase deficiency of can AAT. inhibitor The AAT the lung therapeutic fluid from The in cells. it epithelial diffuses the into the reaches surrounding the levels where blood lung,

IV. SUMMARY CHAPTER

structural matrix Collagen fibrous elastin (Fig. and extracellular of proteins the are 4.15). and of proline, primary in latter an third abundance glycine, structure. contains position at the lysine, the Collagen occurring every hydroxylysine, posttranslational and formed hydroxyproline, by hydroxylysine, modification. It contains also each glycosylated collagen a are helix a Fibrillar rope-like has one wound polypeptide by α long, chains interchain in structure, which rigid in bonds. three stabilized hydrogen collagen another around triple affect bones, joints, and fibrillar skin, Diseases collagen of synthesis vessels. blood with is Elastin protein lung. a rubber-like connective as the properties tissue in such tissues liver, walls. the produced inhibits α1-Antitrypsin by degradation in primarily elastin alveolar of elastase-catalyzed (AAT), the increases A and, of deficiency cases, liver. cause degradation AAT some cirrhosis in can of elastin emphysema the and

ONE best answer. the Choose

.1. progressive of 30-year-old (shortness European presents ancestry Northern dyspnea with A of woman breath). cigarettes. denies She use of the also with her reveals problems that lungs. history sister Family her has Which the of etiologies symptoms? most pulmonary one following explains this likely patient’s

A. dietary C Deficiency in vitamin

B. α1-antitrypsin of Deficiency

hydroxylase C. Deficiency of prolyl

D. activity elastase Decreased

collagenase E. Increased activity

cause (AAT) pulmonary disorder Correct use. is α1-Antitrypsin genetic of the absence in even deficiency can damage = that emphysema answer and cigarette a B. permits increased elastase the in walls. to destroy deficiency elastin A alveolar activity AAT of deficiency in not obstructive chronic obstructive develops 45 multiple when family or AAT develop when bronchitis at members have patient of disease pulmonary younger an who be age. early suspected lung disease history chronic than age a use should a does years or tobacco refer not C, to Choices collagen, elastin. E and A,

.3. now A child a leg. crawling and “fell while over” with 7-month-old presents swollen (see x-ray trauma, secondary bones reveals and at fracture Imaging of thin to a femur, bowed a minor right). Blue noted. also sclerae are infant right multiple fractures of month, humerus, 1 the clavicle, healing various states age radius). in had and (right right At cause trauma family has the as A abuse) a of careful nonaccidental out (child fractures. ruled history bone pairing defective pathology description? of resulting this clinical the and deficient) Which a best fits molecule (or

emphysema A. Elastin and

Fibrillin B. Marfan disease and

C. collagen Type osteogenesis I and imperfecta

syndrome Type V D. collagen Ehlers-Danlos and

C and Vitamin E. scurvy

most Correct The imperfecta. C. has likely osteogenesis answer child = in type arise I the from Most defect a cases genes encoding collagen. fracture. patients prone osteoporotic, thin, and extremely bowed, in are to Bones often affected child. seen this are problems not in Pulmonary syndrome system. Individuals and eyes, the structural with skeleton, impaired of Marfan cardiovascular integrity have in collagen extensibility type form classic characterized and skin joint Defects and cause of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome V hypermobility. by the fragility fragility. caused deficiency by C capillary by is Scurvy characterized vitamin

.2. deficiency? pathology liver the in lung seen basis What of differential the is α1antitrypsin and

α1-antitrypsin deficiency, of With can AAT cirrhosis its in synthesis. result due is and the polymerization to (AAT) liver, that retention site of the elastase (a serine is due retention-based protease) lung protease of that damage AAT serine (a inhibitor) is unopposed. such the The in the deficiency to alveolar

.4. in How hydroxylated collagen? why proline and is

collagen. enzyme of endoplasmic hydroxlyated hydrogen oxygen, and by of is iron, that C. bond triple the prolyl hydroxylase, the formation, increases ferrous strengthening Hydroxylation an interchain Proline helix requires vitamin reticulum hydroxylation. C deficiency impairs Vitamin

to please materials related this visit chapter, thePoint. additional For ancillary

I. OVERVIEW

process. reactions overall reactions the in which that the mediated protein enzymes, being the of are without by all catalysts are in body Virtually increase changed rate many are pathways. substrates) reactants energetically biologic selectively possible, reactions into Among channel (called that the enzymes useful all enzymes metabolic direct events. Thus, mechanisms catalytic of of examines action. and molecules nature their chapter the these This

II. NOMENCLATURE

is two enzyme Each assigned names. recommended first convenient The for use. is its short, name, everyday be is which ambiguity. identified more complete systematic name, The when the enzyme must is without an second used

A. Recommended name

of commonly to and and adenylyl the attached (for used to of a “-ase” dehydrogenase description cyclase). example, substrate the have action names enzyme lactate suffix or glucosidase Most reaction the example, (for urease) performed the retain which trypsin reaction, pepsin.] enzymes associated original [Note: give and for of names, their hint enzymic trivial the Some example, no

B. name Systematic

divided (Fig. system, six naming the classes systematic enzymes are into In major each subgroups. 5.1), numerous with is a reaction all including complete ase the the lactate:nicotinamide of chemical substrates, the attached enzyme, For given fairly names suffix example, adenine catalyzed, of oxidoreductase. a dinucleotide description for the (NAD+) to [Note: is enzyme number. assigned a Each classification also Lactate:NAD+ is 1.1.1.27.] oxidoreductase frequently use. names be unambiguous informative are too cumbersome The but general and are of systematic to

inorganic phosphate.

oxygenase both (uses nomenclature enzyme product), are acceptor group), (no adenine oxidase acceptor, bond phosphatase is and or (NAD+ substrate), is includes a generate dinucleotide phosphate required), phosphate incorporated to a oxygen to the reaction), oxygen synthetase electron break (one in flavin phosphorylated or into phosphorylase Potentially atoms synthase water a confusing are and atoms (oxygen (requires a and (uses incorporated). not ATP dehydrogenase redox ATP), an [FAD] remove inorganic

III. PROPERTIES

Enzymes and increase consumed the reaction. the of that chemical protein reaction not catalysts are during velocity a are bonds. and Some peptide that catalyze affect (RNA) can phosphodiester ribonucleic [Note: acids reactions catalysts.] called common are much p. 434) with activity than RNAs (see catalytic ribozymes protein are and less

A. site Active

special called the site. molecules active pocket a Enzyme or contain cleft formed site, folding chains (Fig. in protein, catalysis by substrate side The participate amino contains that active acid the binding and of 5.2). enzyme noncovalently, The an forming binds substrate the complex. enzyme–substrate (ES) in that is change enzyme to thought Binding a conformational fit catalysis. (induced allows model) the cause an enzyme (EP) to ES subsequently enzyme–product dissociates complex converted product. to is and that

B. Efficiency

times 103 108 from than Enzyme-catalyzed proceeding reactions faster highly reactions. are efficient, to uncatalyzed kcat, product number . 102–104 per is substrate of called and turnover molecule or per converted second typically number, the enzyme is The to s−1 molecules for [Note: constant kcat to + the ES p. E P of conversion rate (see is the 58).]

Specificity C.

of chemical few Enzymes and one only highly interacting one a specific, are reaction. with substrates or type catalyzing The occur in made reactions set determines cell which enzymes a that of cell. in

and coenzymes apoenzymes, D. cofactors, Holoenzymes,

enzymes require for nonproteins activity. enzymic Some enzyme is its with enzyme holoenzyme nonprotein its and refers without the termed nonprotein active an is The term component, moiety whereas inactive. apoenzyme to the metal nonprotein a or a is (see zinc cofactor is Chapter (Fe2+), called ion, If moiety (Zn2+) as iron 29). such it the molecule, coenzyme. is a it it If termed organic small a is that only associate cosubstrates. called enzyme Coenzymes are with the transiently altered example; Cosubstrates 101). from p. enzyme is the dissociate in see state an an (NAD+ is to example; (FAD is original coenzyme p. with a group its an is see the 110). If permanently form, prosthetic enzyme associated returned and it the called commonly vitamins. derived Coenzymes from are For example, riboflavin (see Chapter FAD contains and 28). NAD+ niacin, contains

Regulation E.

regulated, or rate formation increased that activity can is, Enzyme product so of to the cellular decreased, responds be need. that

Location F. the cell within

within organelles cell (Fig. specific the enzymes Many are localized in 5.3). or reactions. Such to from compartmentalization competing the other substrate isolate serves product reaction for the This provides enzymes into purposeful and pathways. in present favorable of organizes cell thousands the a environment the reaction

IV. ENZYME OF MECHANISM ACTION

different be can mechanism two of from viewed perspectives. action The enzyme catalysis in that terms occur during first The changes of treats energy reaction. the reaction the favorable enzymes energetically an is, pathway alternate, reaction. That provide uncatalyzed different from site second facilitates the The describes chemically active catalysis. perspective how

A. the occurring Energy during reaction changes

Virtually the and all the products. separating chemical have reactants energy reactions an barrier intermediate, (T*), barrier, formed conversion is high-energy the reactant transition which during product. called reactants to the a state the (Ea), difference the activation and energy between of that is of energy This the the molecule Figure as to transition proceeds 5.4 the during of of shows state. through reactant it product conversion A changes in the B a energy

1.

between 5.4 difference free the conversion to energy: T*, and in of which Activation formed intermediate is energy in peak product. during energy is reactant in reactant the the Figure of high-energy, The the short-lived the of Ea, high uncatalyzed chemical of rates reactions slow. often the Because are

2.

reaction: state. For molecules sufficient of they must contain barrier transition energy energy of to react, Rate overcome to the the In enzyme, small possess of the proportion energy the enough only a and a between population an transition of achieve of molecules reactant may product. absence state to The of such of is rate molecules. determined the energized reaction by number lower general, more sufficient transition and, the molecules the rate the therefore, have faster the reaction. through In state to the energy of pass the Ea, the

3.

Fig. reaction pathway by allows with enzyme in a Ea to prevailing reaction alternate Alternate proceed lower An rapidly cell (see reaction a conditions providing an the under pathway: 5.4). energies not or free does does change not enzyme equilibrium of (see The the the 70). (substrates) reactants change of and, therefore, p. the products the reaction however, accelerate the rate is which equilibrium by It reached. does,

B. chemistry site Active

active is passive The mechanisms receptacle a the but, substrate a chemical diversity a for rather, of to of not the to complex machine site conversion product. is molecular facilitate employing substrate binding for responsible following of the examples. catalytic A including number enzymes, are efficiency the factors of

1.

in as The Fig. product that the stabilization: molecular not structure bonds the the those (see Transition-state acts substrate in or top transition conversion a substrate its the the T* binds often in template are flexible initiates curve of the to a active and like state, site the which at 5.4). accelerates that to increases intermediate enzyme greatly of the the state, transition converted thus, reaction. be concentration product By can the the the stabilizing reactive and, cannot be state The transition [Note: isolated.] 2.

provide groups formed. probability catalytic active is enhance the state transition Catalysis: the that site The can that residues In in accept participate which catalysis acid–base enzymes, in or groups acid provide amino general protons. these can some enzymes, other ES involve complex. covalent may formation a transient of catalysis In the in mechanism The an general general [Note: of catalysis. of action and of covalent protein base, includes acid, digestion chymotrypsin, the enzyme intestine, being active by to in (general site protons, the histidine the and at pK (general enzyme gains A base) histidine proteins the close loses of acid) of pH. physiologic mediated with site transient Serine covalent bond a substrate.] the active forms at the 3.

similar substrate uncooperative enzyme-catalyzed visualized removing as to conversion sweater an being Transition-state a infant from (Fig. product can to The visualization: of be 5.5). unlikely for baby the (short the garment has a requires process random arms ripping of off) Ea results the both the strategy high over an being that the it in removing head, posture. fully of because The reasonable flailing extended only then position, with as we transition baby (forming parent to envision arms and baby’s contact into coming guiding can ES) the an acting the However, vertical enzyme, a analogous first the extended, an state. in here the baby, represents forming removal of which of posture the product. the baby the facilitates disrobed (conformation) sweater, This substrate and enzyme bound in [Note: unbound energy the The (S) substrate the slightly explains to ES.] dip small at curve a at lower (ES) the is than

VELOCITY REACTION V. FACTORS AFFECTING

from in tube test be studied vitro). (that and is, in can cells isolated Enzymes a their properties changes enzymes Different pH. temperature, substrate concentration, in show to and different responses enzymes. influence section describes factors of velocity the This reaction that cells to in to Enzymic how is, us in (that function as responses give clues enzymes living factors these valuable vivo).

1. Substrate A. concentration

Maximal the unit substrate (v) to converted product or is of a time. velocity: rate per velocity of reaction The number molecules of Velocity expressed minute. formed µmol usually product per is as an increases maximal of (Fig. The enzyme-catalyzed reached concentration a (Vmax) rate is with until substrate reaction velocity 5.6). sites on the saturation enzyme high The binding rate of with the molecules of all the available off concentrations reaction leveling present. substrate substrate at reflects

2.

enzymes (similar (see reaction initial in 29). kinetics curve: the oxygen-dissociation p. is Shape that Michaelis-Menten show shape (vo) which curve myoglobin; against in p. Most to kinetics enzyme the of of hyperbolic 58), the of substrate concentration see velocity plot of contrast, allosteric a Michaelis-Menten do (see not In curve show and Fig. sigmoidal enzymes follow kinetics curve (see oxygen-dissociation to of the is 29). similar that p. shape in 5.6) hemoglobin

B. 1. Temperature

temperature: with peak (Fig. velocity with increases The a is Velocity reached reaction temperature increase until velocity 5.7). increase the result is and the molecules to sufficient of reaction. of the of This the form substrate the energy increased pass products barrier energy number having over

2.

elevation temperature-induced velocity a the result reaction causes a of decrease temperature Velocity (see enzyme of temperature: denaturation decrease higher Fig. of with the Further in as 5.7).

40°C. 35°C is The most human for optimum temperature between enzymes and at temperatures to but (see thermophilic have p. found 70°C. above temperatures 20) Human in bacteria enzymes optimum denature hot start of 40°C, springs

C. pH 1.

on in ([H+]) affects of effect pH The ionization: site velocity reaction concentration active protons ways. several or process an in state enzyme interact. to the have catalytic that chemical either requires First, specific groups unionized the usually in and substrate order ionized form that may (−NH3+). protonated require example, catalytic of an the For be activity group the in amino enzyme deprotonated rate pH, of alkaline is at the declines. reaction Because this group the

2.

molecule pH on of denaturation: denaturation of protein of the character Extremes effect chains. because enzyme, active structure the the catalytically the also ionic enzyme depends to amino acid can the on side lead of pH

3.

different in which and Variable reflects enzymes which the at enzyme enzyme the activity for is pH at the pH body. The is often different achieved functions maximal [H+] optimum: is are the an at at denatured designed to a 2, example, stomach, other environment work whereas such pepsin, acidic pH by enzymes, in digestive (Fig. For neutral pH, enzyme active maximally 5.8).

VI. KINETICS MICHAELIS-MENTEN

many of features proposed Michaelis Maude of most model a the for accounts that Menten and enzyme-catalyzed Leonor simple reactions. the In the enzyme that yields enzyme. regenerating complex an its substrate product, model, to with free form subsequently ES reversibly this combines molecule, below: the where The is one substrate. S model, involving reaction is substrate represented the E enzyme. is the is enzyme–substrate ES complex. P is product. the (or, k−1, kcat) rate k1, are constants. and k2

A. equation Michaelis-Menten

varies substrate how with equation The describes velocity Michaelis-Menten reaction concentration:

the are rate made deriving in assumptions Michaelis-Menten equation. following The

1.

percentage that substrate The bound small. much Enzyme the concentration enzyme the greater substrate of any so concentration one relative than ([S]) time by enzyme at and concentrations: substrate total the of is is

2.

The E assumption: that equal + (the ES assumption), of complex steady-state is, (to that S to the ES is of breakdown the P). concentration Steady-state of to and time formation the change does not ES of with rate + of E intermediate an of general, In of is reactions degradation. rate when its series in a rate be its to said steady to state synthesis of equal is in

3.

used reactions. analysis Initial the velocity: velocities enzyme Initial reaction in of are (vo) mixed. as substrate enzyme measured of the reaction are is the soon This means rate as and that from that back reaction to product product and be of the substrate the is of therefore, small, At time, very can concentration rate ignored. the

B. 1. Important conclusions Km the and affinity its Michaelis an enzyme the of enzyme constant, and substrate Km, for of characteristics: is substrate. characteristic that reflects the particular Km is the one half at equal which concentration velocity to the to substrate numerically is equal reaction Vmax. Km with vary not does concentration. enzyme

a. enzyme because for Small of reflects velocity that A half is a concentration the reach high low Km (low) substrate of enzyme—that numerically is half-saturate Vmax the one needed a small a Km: to substrate, to is, (Fig. affinity 5.9).

b. for Km: high substrate the Large A is (high) to substrate a a of reflects because enzyme concentration affinity enzyme. large Km needed of low numerically half-saturate

2.

proportional limiting. enzyme enzyme to concentration: not is rate the [S] reaction to directly The relationship is the concentration of Velocity because and (vo) of Vmax example, concentration are that reaction the original. the halved, the enzyme the to For if is reduced of that half of initial rates

3.

reaction substrate much Km, the order: the approximately proportional than (Fig. concentration Reaction less is of (<<) When to velocity the is [S] 5.10). The then of substrate. rate order to respect first to reaction with said be is than is to and (>>) velocity much When is greater constant the Km, equal Vmax. [S] with rate Fig. to then to of saturated (see substrate enzyme (the is concentration zero and The is with reaction is respect said substrate concentration order be substrate) independent of 5.10).

Lineweaver-Burk plot D.

is vo the Vmax when plotted achieved upward is gradual substrate because curve not of [S], has When to concentrations. at it hyperbolic of been always slope high against possible the determine a 1/[S], is versus plotted (Fig. if 1/vo However, is straight obtained line 5.11). This plot, the

enzyme be plot) of Km to calculate as used (also plot as inhibitors. Vmax a to and mechanism action the Lineweaver-Burk double-reciprocal well determine can called of

is the the equal The 1/Vmax. the − on axis and intercept to where intercept y plot the 1/Km, describing Lineweaver-Burk to equation is: the equal x is axis on Km/Vmax.] [Note: slope The =

VII. INHIBITION ENZYME

that an reaction substance inhibitor. Any decrease of can enzyme-catalyzed called velocity an the is irreversible. can reversible or Inhibitors be enzymes covalent bonds. inhibitors to through bind Irreversible example, with cysteine proteins. forms the of side chain sulfhydryl covalent Lead, bonds in for irreversibly p. heme by involved is lead. enzyme in synthesis Ferrochelatase, inhibited an 279), (see a group important the the irreversible to are enzyme are inhibiting thereby of enzyme, mechanism-based itself inhibitors the [Note: that links to by covalently it. that converted inhibitors form An They inhibitors.] “suicide” also to are as referred bind activity. results enzymes bonds of and and, reversibly recovery enzyme through the noncovalent inhibitor thus, bound Reversible of complex enzyme–inhibitor in to dilution inhibitors dissociation of the two and noncompetitive. types encountered reversible commonly competitive of The inhibition most are

A. Competitive inhibition

site. that occurs reversibly This the of inhibitor the occupy site to and, for same that competes normally inhibition therefore, when binds substrate would the with substrate type the

1.

is increasing on competitive Vmax: the concentration of inhibitor substrate. effect Effect reversed of The a by 2. [S], high the a sufficiently At

Km Effect the substrate. A competitive for on inhibitor apparent increases a Km: given Vmax. the competitive substrate that, This to needed half presence of a inhibitor, more is in one achieve means

3.

of inhibitor, reaction at Competitive the on unchanged that a (Fig. the axis is Vmax in the shows uninhibited inhibited 1/Vmax plot: inhibition the which intersect characteristic on in plot reactions reaches Vmax Lineweaver-Burk observed is and y Lineweaver-Burk velocity the the (Vmax of plots Effect absence is, 5.12).

unchanged). (see indicating − inhibitor 1/Km and that competitive apparent a uninhibited the The Fig. presence the intercepts, reactions closer because of show inhibited increased value Km negative x-axis moves in to different zero from is the 5.12). and, group that of the of state [Note: analogs, An the approximate important structure enzyme transition competitive inhibitors the bind therefore, the the more state, tightly does are transition molecules stable than substrate.] 4. biosynthesis. step competitively competitive cholesterol in examples inhibitors: inhibits of group the agents of rate-limiting This as drugs antihyperlipidemic Statin (slowest) p. reaction hydroxymethylglutaryl This reductase; 221). (HMG reductase catalyzed A coenzyme by is see CoA HMG (Pravachol), are reductase. enzyme compete effectively and such the and this Statins, analogs to structural inhibit of pravastatin as (Lipitor) CoA substrate for natural atorvastatin levels they de cholesterol inhibit By novo (Fig. synthesis, so, doing cholesterol lowering thereby plasma 5.13).

B. Noncompetitive inhibition

This of is inhibition type effect Vmax characteristic its by recognized (Fig. on 5.14). inhibition on enzyme. inhibitor sites and substrate bind occurs Noncompetitive the the different when at The either free from reaction enzyme–substrate inhibitor (Fig. noncompetitive or enzyme thereby complex, preventing the can occurring bind the 5.15).

1.

Effect substrate. inhibition overcome Noncompetitive increasing of the Vmax: be cannot concentration on by inhibitors Therefore, the Vmax of reaction. the decrease apparent noncompetitive

2.

interfere binding to the Km: not of with inhibitors do on Noncompetitive substrate enzyme. Effect Therefore, or the is, is Km the unchanged. enzyme Km same the that noncompetitive of the in absence shows inhibitor, presence

3.

a inhibitor, whereas versus inhibition plotting 1/[S] Vmax decreases noting is differentiated from 1/vo apparent readily Effect unchanged inhibition the on that is (see Noncompetitive of Km plot: competitive in by noncompetitive Fig. Lineweaver-Burk and the presence 5.14). inhibitor of p. allopurinol, of a a degradation is xanthine noncompetitive an Oxypurinol, enzyme of the oxidase, prodrug [Note: (see metabolite purine 301).]

Enzyme drugs as C. inhibitors

prescribed drugs At United half inhibitors. enzyme commonly of the most States least in act ten the as and prescribed as antibiotics, act such amoxicillin, synthesis. inhibiting βlactam penicillin For wall involved example, enzymes bacterial widely cell the by in act may also by inhibiting reactions. Drugs extracellular enzyme (ACE) by This angiotensinconverting inhibitors. illustrated is that blocking by form cleaves blood vasoconstrictor, ACE lower They plasma potent angiotensin I to angiotensin II. the pressure These reduction in drugs, captopril, vasodilation include cause a blood lisinopril, and, therefore, enalapril, pressure. which and cyclooxygenase inhibits thromboxane Aspirin, prostaglandin (see 214). drug, by a irreversibly inhibiting nonprescription and p. synthesis

VIII. REGULATION ENZYME

The an numerous the velocity is of enzymes organism reaction is of metabolic regulation its essential if processes. coordinate to The intracellular many substrate to substrates are concentration, is changes because in rates the Km. most in responsive the of level the of range of enzymes substrate the an an prompts increase concentration of Thus, substrate reaction in which concentration in toward increase rate, tends return normal. to (or synthesis physiologic effectors In are or modification degradation) covalent regulatory with they enzyme altered of changed. enzymes specialized functions and/or when some rates respond conditions addition, to show allosteric

enzymes Allosteric A.

enzymes effectors active molecules that site other bind site. a the Allosteric noncovalently by at than are called regulated regulatory binds may of site itself effector that is be the a not subunits, always distinct is composed multiple on the (allosteric) located the substrate-binding that and site and subunit enzymes These from are catalytic. almost positive termed enzyme increase that called activity those whereas are effectors, inhibit that negative activity Effectors are enzyme effectors. for substrate (Fig. the activity negative the (K0.5), or Positive and the catalytic its modify enzyme affect of maximal affinity of enzyme (Vmax), the both can effectors 5.16). rate-limiting step, enzymes [Note: the committed often Allosteric step, frequently the a catalyze early pathway.] in 1.

itself to homotropic. serves is the When effector, an effect be the effectors: as said substrate Homotropic functions effector. a as positive an Most substrate allosteric often, of presence a properties on enhances the the catalytic of enzyme such the substrate-binding the sites. at site substrate a molecule case, one other In binding exhibit their cooperativity. is, That sites show concentration, shown plotted sigmoidal as vo against in when These 5.16. enzymes Figure is a substrate curve of characteristic curve enzymes hyperbolic contrasts the with Michaelis-Menten discussed. This previously following as kinetics, oxygen of analogous (see substrate cooperativity the p. to hemoglobin binding binding of of to concept is The [Note: 29).] 2.

in to different case be from effect which The may effector be heterotropic. said Heterotropic effectors: the is the substrate, consider the example, shown 5.17. in Figure feedback inhibition For E site of example, the used increases not enzyme irreversible as has binds product, that that is the is concentration If unique D first G because an allosteric pathway the to it to it rapidly The is end converts synthesized), step (for G. the typically as inhibited. appropriate synthesizes with molecules flow of substrate provides that Feedback through amounts of the by product a pathway inhibition that needs product. the it the cell regulating commonly encountered. are Heterotropic effectors for enzyme is example, p. For enzyme (see the phosphofructokinase-1 the substrate inhibited citrate, allosterically which not is glycolytic 99). a by

Figure5.17Feedbackinhibitionofametabolicpathway.

Covalent B. modification

tyrosine of phosphate the serine, groups are the from removal most or specific residues of regulated or threonine, addition often enzymes enzyme. Many by modification, by covalent processes as cellular is ways the which primary one in recognized Protein of phosphorylation regulated. are

1.

use enzymes as dephosphorylation: catalyzed donor. Phosphorylation that are and a family by phosphate Phosphorylation of called ATP protein the reactions kinases groups cleaved Phosphate phosphoprotein by action from phosphatases are of enzymes the (Fig. phosphorylated 5.18).

2.

response phosphorylation: form to the than specific enzyme. Enzyme enzyme, unphosphorylated more Depending the phosphorylated be or less on the may active phosphorylase glycogen) glycogen glycogen hormone-mediated enzyme (an example, decreases For activity activity, degrades enzyme of of (see p. that (an that whereas synthase increases synthesizes phosphorylation 132). glycogen) phosphorylation

Enzyme C. synthesis

mechanisms molecules. enzyme above the modify activity regulatory of existing described The of synthesis. enzyme altering However, degradation rate of the amount enzyme or, by more the can regulate also present enzyme rate cells of typically, the alteration or leads population (repression) increase The of in sites. total the of to enzyme (induction) an decrease synthesis active subject to are of or that under one those at regulation synthesis needed are of stage often conditions. Enzymes physiologic selected only development of (see in glucose p. as a result key in blood involved metabolism For elevated levels an of of cause the increase insulin example, high synthesis 105). levels enzymes glucose In use in are the altering of by contrast, rate synthesis. not regulated usually constant that are enzyme enzymes in seconds or changes induction enzyme to slow minutes. a protein are compared days), regulated or synthesis levels allosterically which enzyme in repression occur (hours covalently with of of as activity, to Alterations in result summarizes enzyme 5.19 activity Figure ways that is common regulated. the

IX. Diagnosis in Enzymes Clinical

classified can major groups. enzymes Plasma two be into cell a the First, relatively certain into secreted group of types. small enzymes blood actively by are secretes involved the zymogens liver coagulation. For in example, the precursors) blood (inactive enzymes of of during number Second, released enzyme cell large normal species cells from are turnover. a plasma. almost enzymes physiologic always have function use no the and These intracellularly in cells rate rate these plasma constant are equal by the state plasma. from fairly steady is healthy individuals, of In the a damaged of from removal which represent enzymes release the in an levels into of the balanced and may tissue enzymes (Fig. plasma these Increased damage of levels indicate 5.20).

(B) cells.

blood. fluid, the Plasma of is noncellular part serum, most is by coagulate. centrifugation activity allowed Laboratory blood to assays after whole has use often of it enzyme which obtained of been Plasma in a physiologic prepared is fluid, whereas is serum laboratory. the

A. disease Plasma levels enzyme in states

into tissue of result Many release damage that diseases enzymes plasma. an the increased cause intracellular in activities other tissues. routinely skeletal are of enzymes these heart, diagnostic of of determined diseases purposes liver, muscle, for the many The in and The of frequently damage. specific tissue extent activity level in enzyme of with plasma correlates the the for determining often the elevation is particular evaluating the in useful patient. degree Therefore, of the in prognosis of the plasma enzyme activity a

B. tools enzymes as diagnostic Plasma

one relatively a enzymes in few high activity Some only or show tissues. the Therefore, levels reflects these damage of of increased tissue. the presence corresponding in to plasma enzymes alanine For p. the see (ALT; the in is aminotransferase enzyme 251) example, liver. abundant levels possible The hepatic signals of appearance in damage tissue. elevated plasma ALT to of liver of test Measurement ALT function of the [Note: part is panel.] cellular levels wide provide tissue enzymes of with a of in the value. diagnostic limits and of Increases specific a indication site less injury distribution plasma their

disease C. and Isoenzymes heart

isozymes) that same the are reaction. catalyze called (also Isoenzymes enzymes in determined do of necessarily have amino not properties differences genetically because sequence. they However, same acid the physical movement may which of electrophoresis field) different charged them acids, amino particles to (Fig. this isoenzymes contain in numbers charged of separate reason, electric allows (the an For 5.21). characteristic contain different isoenzymes. commonly proportions Different of organs in site as found isoenzymes tissue The identifying a the serve may, of pattern means plasma of therefore, of the damage. (CK) determined in plasma kinase creatine levels are (MI). of example, For the the of commonly myocardial diagnosis infarction have been episodes interpret when They such (ECG) there as previous heart are is disease. particularly of difficult to the useful electrocardiogram when

1.

contain various different isoenzymes in Isoenzyme quaternary structure: combinations. subunits Many For isoenzymes. as example, CK three occurs isoenzyme and subunits) B MM. CK3 CK1 of composed two BB, CK2 MB, polypeptides = associated = in Each combinations: = a and one dimer M is three of (called a (see Each electrophoretic characteristic CK mobility shows Fig. isoenzyme 5.21). the Virtually it brain whereas MM the in [Note: is CK skeletal muscle. all is in isoform, BB MB is rest the as MM.] In one muscle, with cardiac third about 2.

MI. with specificity myocardial Measurement Diagnosis is of used of (biomarkers) blood diagnosis in proteins of levels cardiac the of infarction: the is (MB) tissue of CK isoenzyme. only contains the total muscle activity CK2 >5% the that Myocardial as is plasma of virtually isoenzyme infarction hybrid the of Appearance for myocardium. in this specific Following acute returns of chest baseline after and to plasma ~24 in CK2 MI, hours activity appears of 48–72 4–8 onset hours (Fig. pain, an at reaches peak following a within hours, 5.22). are T Troponins (TnT) contractility. I involved and proteins muscle regulatory (TnI) in into response isoforms cardiac plasma the (cTn) released damage. to Cardiac-specific are in are damage They cardiac to for highly tissue. and sensitive specific in within 4–6 peak and in after for days. hours remain appear 3–10 elevated hours, plasma 24–36 an cTn MI, an currently ECG, characteristic the “gold the diagnosis standard” in MI. clinical considered with and the changes are in in presentation Elevated combination cTn, the of

X. SUMMARY CHAPTER

energy the lowering (Fig. state a of of transition are velocity the increase that catalysts protein the chemical Enzymes by reaction 5.23). during reaction. They not are consumed the called catalysis. the site, substrate contain that chains active molecules and amino acid binding side Enzyme which participate in a cleft contains special forming enzyme–substrate The binds (ES) substrate, complex. the site active an fit) a change enzyme catalysis. (induced the allows conformational Binding in to cause that is thought is to and enzyme ES converted product. reaction providing rapidly reaction with pathway a enzyme by energy proceed activation prevailing in to cell an the allows lower a An alternate conditions (Ea). under not not does the change enzyme the products, of reaction. or the it of free change the does the energies Because reactants equilibrium show myoglobin. Michaelis-Menten kinetics, of hyperbolic shape Most has against velocity plot and substrate concentration (vo) the similar to ([S]) the oxygen-dissociation enzymes of curve a a reaction initial substrate). Vmax constant, of Km plot of and velocity) 1/v 1/[S] affinity allows for and Lineweaver-Burk A determination which (Michaelis (maximal reflects velocity decrease an is of can Any that reaction an called the substance inhibitor. enzyme-catalyzed competitive reversible Km) (which apparent decreases The (which the increases noncompetitive and two the are of Vmax). types common apparent inhibition most the in the enzymes In multisubunit hemoglobin. similar curve oxygen-dissociation show curve contrast, a to shape sigmoidal of allosteric They step committed of typically pathway. catalyze the a are enzymes molecules than active site effectors other site. noncovalently at regulated bind called by that the a Allosteric be negative activity) activity). or enzyme can (increase Effectors enzyme (decrease either positive enzyme affinity activity (K0.5), the substrate both. for catalytic the effector allosteric can the of (Vmax), maximal An the or its of enzyme alter changes the or and of by degradation. also synthesis in by regulated Enzymes rate can be modification covalent

medicine. in have and Enzymes therapeutic value diagnostic

ONE best Choose answer. the

.1. cases metabolic that ethylene inhibitor involves the the an ethylene and to and the In of correction dehydrogenase (ADH), enzyme administration remaining glycol that acidosis. removal ethylene glycol oxidizes of its alcohol organic cause any of characteristic the poisoning treatment of glycol, acidosis, acids acidosis, of glycol alcohol) treat frequently inhibitor poisoning. the (grain given ethylene is Ethanol to and of shown using the ethanol experiments without ADH are right. with to Results of ethanol? caused type what data, is Based these inhibition by the on

A. Competitive

B. Feedback

Irreversible C.

D. Noncompetitive

Correct A. answer = substrate. given inhibitor increases a Km A the for apparent competitive Vmax. substrate inhibitor, more half a achieve means needed the one This presence that, to of in competitive is ([S]). substrate of by a reversed effect inhibitor competitive is increasing The concentration velocity absence sufficiently inhibitor. the Vmax high [S], the a reaction reaches observed the in At of

.2. (ADH) (NAD+) for Alcohol dinucleotide catalytic adenine dehydrogenase requires oxidized activity. nicotinamide is enzyme. the alcohol ADH, the dissociates NAD+ by as an reaction from reduced In to NADH oxidized an to aldehyde is and catalyzed as NAD+ functioning The is a/an:

A. apoenzyme.

B. coenzyme–cosubstrate.

group. coenzyme–prosthetic C.

D. cofactor.

effector. E. heterotropic

= answer B. Correct enzyme a changed the in transiently Coenzymes–cosubstrates molecules enzyme with an form. A organic associate that leave small and are returned organic enzyme that the Coenzyme–prosthetic to groups associate are small original enzyme. with on permanently their form molecules an and are metal Cofactors are ions. are effectors not Heterotropic substrates.

in the in 5.3 when below the product changes enzyme. graph For is shows free Questions and a converted an presence and use of 5.4, that to the reactant a absence energy represents: letter activation that reaction. energy the Select best of forward catalyzed .3. the the .4. reaction. the the of free energy

catalysts) = D. an lower Enzymes provide answers with reaction Correct energy. a B; (protein alternate pathway activation change the or the do reactant energy they However, not product. free of reaction. activation is energy the A of the uncatalyzed C reaction. the activation of the energy catalyzed is reverse

this For chapter, additional ancillary materials related to please visit thePoint.

OVERVIEW I.

energy of transfer systems. in and Bioenergetics describes biologic utilization the concerns for time and mechanism final it the the change much of the reaction states to reaction takes chemical components, occur. the not It initial how energy or free Bioenergetics from of few use ideas of basic of the makes thermodynamics, the particularly energy. a concept field in or take chemical reaction a a of the of whether energy they Because of prediction measure place. changes provide feasibility process free can energetic reaction, a allow 54). short, reaction p. rate In (see whereas if kinetics is process possible, measures the a bioenergetics predicts

II. FREE ENERGY

which change two the The and a reaction. during proceeds by the to to chemical extent are degree direction determined reaction which factors measure and the change or 6.1. change randomness products) of enthalpy of disorder a of reactants in entropy of content products), are shown Figure as and a (∆S, [∆] heat reactants (∆H, the These in the measure in the and spontaneously in is proceed reaction is whether a by sufficient determine of these quantities chemical will Neither the itself thermodynamic direction to written. it Fig. However, combined (see mathematically when entropy spontaneously be a a predicts the direction reaction third (G), enthalpy can energy proceed. used will 6.1), which quantity, and in which define free to

III. CHANGE FREE ENERGY

∆G0. change free is The ways, energy in represented two in ∆G and superscript at represents “0”), (without of products the the specified in of the free concentration reactants. first, a reaction energy ∆G any thus, The and, and direction change is a then, ∆G, variable. concentration with standard the when the of reactants which change, ∆G0 energy This and a mol/l. at change are the (with 1 products superscript contrasts “0”), free is energy mol/l be of protons The (that pH [Note: = assumed concentration to 7). 10−7 (H+) is is, a This sign for shown by be ), prime example, ∆G0ʹ.] may (ʹ it useful of different ∆G0, comparing these concentrations changes a energy represents of nonetheless Although the changes is and reactants at constant, nonphysiologic in energy products, reactions. readily determined be the equilibrium from can (see ∆G0 measurement 71). p. Furthermore, of constant and [Note: in the is ∆G, outlines D. of uses ∆G0 section described This below.]

A. reaction direction and ∆G

pressure. be predict constant ∆G to temperature and can sign The of used the a of direction reaction at 1. Consider the reaction: converted as Negative is, as of there into 6.2A. net loss is and B) the reaction negative, A is goes then energy, (that a is ∆G: ∆G written If shown spontaneously in Figure is The to be said exergonic. reaction

2.

(Fig. go energy, does is is from A ∆G: not to Positive reaction If ∆G a net gain B there positive, of spontaneously and then the 6.2B). to A. added B the to must Energy make go be to from reaction system the is The to be reaction endergonic. said

3.

is then in ∆G If Zero equilibrium. reaction the ∆G: = 0, When is continues ∆G and proceeding (that reaches ∆G is, is [Note: a equilibrium is the established.] zero until spontaneously reaction reaction negative),

B. back and reactions forward the ∆G of

to but the sign reaction energy back in → the The in reaction → is of (B B) A). equal that magnitude of opposite free forward (A the of kcal/mol, reaction the of example, kcal/mol. For that if ∆G −5 back reaction is then +5 is forward (1 kcal mole expressed kJ/mol ∆G be 4.2 kJ).] = kilojoules also can in per or [Note:

product and concentrations and ∆G C. reactant

reactant → of on and the ∆G depends reaction A B concentration The the of the product. and the R of natural actual the is temperature [A] be logarithm. free cal/mol below) the change pressure, energy the represents absolute standard (K) constant [B] following K) derived: temperature ln where are At (1.987 product can the D. concentrations gas relationship reactant and ∆G0 the constant and T (see is is the

is reaction if the ([B]/[A]) of large) in the a is, forward is (that make ratio to products negative. reactants can direction ∆G with the small proceed sufficiently A positive ∆G0 ratio to of products to reactants reaction: the consider example, For

energy free change D. Standard

The is and equal change, is, standard free change, energy Fig. 1 ∆G0, energy products (that because to ∆G, so when mol/l under standard it free concentrations; reactants conditions are called at the is 6.3B). these of and, logarithm the the previous the reactants = 0), shown therefore, page becomes: natural the bottom at the zero Under products of equation ratio of (ln1 is conditions, to 1.

reaction equal can ∆G0 direction used the and ∆G0 be predict ∆G. to these proceeds standard a under to direction: conditions, because, ∆G0 reaction is conditions, Under cannot product solely and by of altered because is reaction ∆G0 the composed [see concentrations. Keq a in therefore, not, predict or is However, constants (R, direction changes below]) it conditions substrate of 2. and physiologic under T,

2.

which as a Keq: at being is A chemical net a place between A). equilibrium to to ∆G0 reaction converted (that being is, ⇄ In Relationship fast no change further of when B B B, is A reached as point converted and takes is regardless the the the ratio the constant, [A]eq this the are state, of constant, equilibrium. of concentrations two of is and concentrations and compounds: B where of to [B]eq A and Keq [A] at is equilibrium actual In [B] temperature equilibrium, to equilibrium zero pressure, and If at the to B is ⇄ is allowed ∆G (Fig. at reaction the then, overall constant go A 6.3C). the equilibrium A and of actual and product concentrations equal to Keq. equal ratio [B]eq), where and of and Therefore, the ([A]eq is concentrations the to are their B reactant Thus,

some simple allows This predictions: 3. equation

the consecutive reactions: two ∆Gs. as ∆G0s are The of additive are reactions, consecutive of any in ∆G0s sequence example: 4. For

particular in (reactants) → in must a important …). substrates pathway: property C pass → (for A biochemical B pathways example, direction → very → a The which ∆G of additive through of ∆Gs D is if pathway long of ∆Gs is a sum ∆G. the the As can the negative, have as of even some reactions of the positive as reactions the pathway of written, the individual individual proceed reactions actual the lowering the However, reactions (Ea) rates the the by energies depend that 55). activation p. enzymes on of catalyze of the (see

IV. ATP: AN ENERGY CARRIER

p. a possible as hydrolysis endergonic across large a ATP such moving are a membrane, with with ∆G made positive of processes 87). process a spontaneous movement the such cell exergonic second, as or large have the negative of Reactions coupling a ions (see ions ∆G, against that by concentration gradient Ea.] of because In enzymes, the molecule hydrolysis stable has high absence its is a a [Note: ATP of shows model Figure energy a 6.4 mechanical coupling. reactions energy-requiring of biologic in when coupling and share intermediate. the a simplest the common occurs energy-yielding energy The example reactions

A. Common intermediates

occur of Two that first reaction the in a common substrate when reactions the a is sequentially they second. product intermediate for the chemical have For reactions the example, given

between can carrier of is energy intermediate a reactions. the the serve chemical as D two common and to intermediate linked may be The [Note: an enzyme.] Many ATP reactions a common to generate intermediate. use coupled group of a These to may the involve ATP reactions transfer molecule. another from phosphate transfer (ADP), forming reactions from an diphosphate Other the intermediate to energy-rich of adenosine involve ATP. phosphate

B. ATP Energy carried by

are (adenine consists molecule + three of phosphate groups to (Fig. ribose) attached of which adenosine ATP a 6.5). of phosphates monophosphate one ADP, adenosine produces Removal of (AMP). two produces removal and phosphate each kcal/mol For – is 7.3 of of phosphate for the the approximately groups. two terminal ∆G0 ATP, hydrolysis this high-energy ATP Because is compound. of a hydrolysis, negative ∆G0 large phosphate called of nucleotides + [Note: are ⇄ (2 ATP AMP) ADP kinase.] by Adenine adenylate interconverted

V. ELECTRON TRANSPORT CHAIN

a water in and ultimately as 6.6. molecules, series oxidation by metabolized of such are dioxide reactions glucose, carbon shown yielding (H2O), Energy-rich as Figure the forms, and adenine reduced to energy-rich coenzymes, specific and electrons dinucleotide dinucleotide metabolic (FAD), The to intermediates adenine flavin reactions form of (NAD+) NADH donate these FADH2. nicotinamide a electrons transport coenzymes reduced These the section. in turn, a can, collectively of set to donate of (ETC), this described each chain pair called electron in carriers, specialized electron free energy. down ETC, the of their lose are they passed As much electrons p. across (Pi), the and production described membrane, the H+ that ADP used mitochondrial a H+ is phosphate This inorganic on creating of gradient inner drives from move to ATP 77. energy transport ATP OXPHOS. denoted phosphorylation, sometimes The with oxidative electron of as called synthesis is coupling mitochondria. continuously proceeds that contain all It in tissues and of free [Note: to not ATP transport calcium The such reactions into ions as drive to heat.] mitochondria generate used as ancillary is trapped energy

electron chain A. transport Mitochondrial

H2O located by and is from of The ETC oxygen fuels in 75) mitochondrial see derived c, flow the reducing different pathway Fig. cytochrome p. (except body (see (O2), the electrons membrane common it to to final is the for inner which 6.6).

1. Mitochondrial an and contains space. separated intermembrane inner The an outer membranes: mitochondrion by the membrane the important special H+, to to and small ions permeable molecules, ATP, and contains a mitochondrial most the including channels metabolites Although the by specialized molecules outer pyruvate, to most is structure membrane inner other it ADP, ions, (Fig. protein (formed and porin), small membrane that impermeable making as function freely small such is 6.7). membrane. systems transport to or across are ions move this or Specialized required carriers molecules membrane is half rich are inner involved which phosphorylation. directly The mitochondrial over proteins, unusually oxidative in of in also surface convolutions, cristae, its which area. called increase greatly It contains

2. of mitochondria (interior) gel-like The the proteins. rich solution in matrix Mitochondrial also matrix: is of pyruvate, acids enzymes of as the cycle. and well of amino acids, β-oxidation) These oxidation (TCA) fatty responsible tricarboxylic the acid the for as include those (by mitochondria. in synthesis the of The of and heme matrix urea, partially occurs glucose, are forms two and NAD+ electron acceptors), contains (the and are ADP FAD coenzymes the as which the and produce required oxidized that Pi, ATP. matrix to of In addition, used contains The ribosomes.] acid ribonucleic deoxyribonucleic matrix (mtRNA), acid [Note: (mtDNA), also and mitochondrial

B. Organization

ETC The complexes, called membrane IV (Fig. the contains of that I, four and protein III, mitochondrial separate each inner Complexes part II, contain 6.8). carrier in mobile can cytochrome and next Each (CoQ) and electrons ETC the in subsequently chain. coenzyme to the accept electrons Q relatively or to donate acceptor electron can the the These c. receive complexes donor carrier from electron electrons donate an form H+ combine ultimately with electrons The O2 H2O. to and for process transport This the use the the requirement of greatest the which of accounts body’s O2. for respiratory O2 chain, makes portion electron

Reactions C.

the which are of is members With of CoQ, the ETC proteins. a exception all lipid-soluble quinone, (Fe-S) case center, the These contain contain (Cu) copper cytochromes, of iron as the a3 of iron an part the dehydrogenases, group as as of cytochrome contain flavin-containing heme iron-sulfur may does the a or as as function as complex. enzymes may is may prosthetic the porphyrin with part + in may

1.

that reduced atoms to dehydrogenases NADH remove NADH hydrogen their formation: NAD+ from substrate. by two is examples the of TCA of For these of cycle, see p. [Note: dehydrogenases the the discussion reactions, 112.] ion transferred free hydride but are one NADH Both is, to H+ electrons NAD+, H+. a (that a only forming [:H−]) plus the

2.

NADH membrane. to (Complex complex carried by the inner NADH plus transferred dehydrogenase: NADH ion protein mitochondrial in the hydride The free I) H+ are embedded a dehydrogenase, FAD I (see related structurally a Fig. bound flavin to (FMN), mononucleotide coenzyme has Complex tightly of a molecule p. + 2 accepts FMNH2. the two that 28.15, 384) becoming electrons hydrogen H+), atoms (2

dehydrogenase centers (Fig. NADH also peptide Fe-S contains subunits with 6.9). Complex to CoQ. At the I, centers then NADH FMN and iron the to electrons of from move Fe-S to electrons lose energy. As flow, they mitochondrial membrane, across to is the energy inner This intermembrane matrix the space. used pump the four H+ to from

3.

Fe-S an and succinate protein, from electrons Succinate then At FADH2, coenzyme, oxidation of to the dehydrogenase–catalyzed the fumarate to from Complex to CoQ. succinate move dehydrogenase: II, [Note:

at H+ Because in no lost this pumped no is are II.] energy process, Complex 4.

a tail. is Coenzyme isoprenoid long, CoQ quinone Q: a with derivative hydrophobic 221). p. cholesterol synthesis of from It intermediate is (see made an systems.] It [Note: it because ubiquitous also is is ubiquinone biologic called in other can (Complex dehydrogenase II) electrons mitochondrial from mobile dehydrogenase dehydrogenase and (see such electron I), and (Complex accept 3-phosphate dehydrogenases, carrier NADH succinate as from from glycerol CoQ p. a is

192). (see CoA and p. dehydrogenases 80) acyl electrons CoQ bc1). Complex to III (cytochrome transfers cytochromes. dehydrogenases CoQ link to function the Thus, a to flavoprotein the of is

5.

proteins. the The of are members remaining Cytochromes: cytochrome ETC plus (a contains heme porphyrin group ring iron). Each a Unlike its of as converted ferrous is donor to form heme of as from hemoglobin, cytochrome part the a of (Fe2+) normal iron ferric function acceptor electrons. and groups reversibly (Fe3+) an its the its the then Fig. ([Complex Electrons along passed and a3 c, chain III), (Complex from to cytochromes cytochrome are see to + a IV] bc1 cytochrome 6.8). are pumped electrons inner the across membrane at two As and H+ four Complex IV. III mitochondrial Complex flow, at space, intermembrane in is with face the the inner outer [Note: of located Cytochrome associated membrane. c loosely the CoQ, is As electron seen mobile with carrier.] a cytochrome c 6.

also coordination oxidase. the which the has (Complex carrier only iron cytochrome in react + called complex a an Because available O2, heme electron site cytochrome with c is IV) is directly it can a3: Cytochrome this that H+ electrons, (see free is and O2 are together, to reduced the H2O O2, IV, and transported At brought Fig. Complex 6.8). molecules H2O.] two Four to to electrons reduce molecule required [Note: are one of of O2 Cytochrome occur. oxidase Cu to complicated reaction c this that are contains for required atoms a CuA from cytochrome a3 to (in cytochrome association O2. to CuB) move Electrons with to

7.

and Figure illustrated in in have inhibitors: been are sites of ETC identified Site-specific 6.10. Inhibitors specific the prevent component reaction. inhibitors respiratory oxidation-reduction electrons passage to These by of binding blocking the of a the chain, the located oxidized. are the block fully whereas the all carriers Therefore, those block are reduced, electron after before processes the Inhibition synthesis because p. tightly are [Note: coupled ETC inhibits of (see these ATP 78).]

sodium NaN3 azide. =

of peroxide and ETC Leakage hydrogen radicals electrons the such as reactive (OH·). produces (H2O2), (O2−·), (ROS), hydroxyl oxygen from superoxide species and peroxidation. damage lipid DNA and cause ROS proteins defenses superoxide such and as catalase, dismutase glutathione against are p. peroxidase 148). (SOD), Enzymes cellular (see ROS

release transport Free electron during D. energy

electron agent or used an donor at electron electrons acceptor transferred to to the from agent an are Complexes free and is I, or (reducing The reductant) H+ along III, ETC pump IV. as released energy (oxidizing oxidant) be electrons to can [Note: transferred electrons The as and hydride ions hydrogen CoQ, FMN, to as FAD; as to NAD+; cytochromes.] atoms or 1.

(loss accompanied is (gain pairs: of of Oxidation one always substance of reduction second. Redox electrons) of electrons) a by NADH at reduction For to prosthetic FMNH2. shows 6.11 group, oxidation Figure NADH example, of the Complex dehydrogenase NAD+ of by to the accompanied by I, the FMN, sum one oxidation as separate the and half Such reduction (see other two reactions, the a can written of redox reactions be Fig. an 6.11). and a form redox as NADH pair, FMN FMNH2. NAD+ do and in Redox electrons. pairs tendency differ their lose to units E0 pair redox a a This is of standard a constant, by (the specified be quantitatively reduction can with characteristic and potential), tendency in particular volts.

2.

E0 be The can pairs most to ordered E0 various from potential: the of negative most Standard the redox positive. reduction E0 member electrons. reductant lose greater that of pair, of the to The the the of the redox tendency more a negative pair that member to of the the greater oxidant more pair electrons. the positive of the E0, The tendency accept Therefore, the with flow electrons pair the more from negative

to E0 E0. positive with more that the the Figure E0 in The values of for ETC shown are members 6.12. some order positive increasingly The values.] of in [Note: the components E0 are chain arranged of 3. transferred FADH2, to ∆E0: directly a number of n NADH, E0: 2 for change (1 of CoQ) the related cytochrome, ∆G0 is electrons for Relationship ∆G0 magnitude in = to where The the and of

electron-donating 4. the = pair minus mol) change (23.1 the standard = of free the the ∆G0 in pair electron-accepting F E0 kcal/volt energy of Faraday E0 ∆E0 constant = ∆G0 the ∆G0 ADP The is to ATP: kcal/mol. of phosphorylation of for ATP +7.3 electrons transport ETC of through The O2 NADH to releases of pair a 52.6 from the kcal. a energy three to and is as 3:1. ATP kcal/mol), 21.9 of sufficient Therefore, more ADP Pi three ratio = (3 three available P/O produce from reduced) per 7.3 × atom than expressed O made (ATP sometimes are ancillary The or as reactions for remaining calories released used heat. FADH2 for because 2:1 [Note: is P:O The

bypassed.] is I Complex

VI. OF TO PHOSPHORYLATION ADP ATP

electron avid NADH O2 energetically is an electron a the down donor because transfer electrons acceptor. The ETC of favored is strong and is in synthesis. the of flow However, result directly ATP electrons not does

Chemiosmotic hypothesis A.

transport ETC of by Pi. as known the (also ADP explains from the is energy The chemiosmotic the by the hypothesis how to produce generated electrons + hypothesis) used ATP Mitchell free

1.

intermembrane phosphorylation mitochondrial of I, pump: coupled and IV. the H+ from the membrane, III, at to inner by to Proton the transport ADP Complexes across Electron the space, is pumping matrix 10 are pair each electrons H+ transferred O2, of to NADH from pumped. For more the a the Figure matrix a as gradient the an the charges (with pH than the cytosolic shown This cytosolic (the matrix 6.13. and creates at in of membrane side positive is than of gradient electrical pH (chemical) side) lower side on membrane on side), (proton-motive these force) by to ATP The synthesis. is drive generated gradients sufficient energy gradient the as to couples common intermediate the Thus, oxidation that phosphorylation. H+ serves

2.

Fig. ([Complex ATP enzyme multisubunit The synthase: synthase V] ATP the 6.14) of gradient. using H+ synthesizes the energy ATP membrane membrane the that an that Fig. (Fo) inner domain contains that domain (see into matrix appears a spans as the sphere extramembranous It and mitochondrial protrudes (F1) a mitochondrial 6.13). that gradients. the passing pumped the ring the of the driving membrane, The chemiosmotic Fo inner of H+ a they pH mitochondrial of proposes channel have the reenter been and cytosolic in by rotation c and, the time, electrical after the Fo domain, through matrix H+ same at hypothesis side dissipating to + them Pi, three to that in allow causes of release conformational in bind the ADP ATP. Fo changes and ADP subunits β ATP, phosphorylate F1 to Rotation c of produces the ring ATP. complete One rotation three ADP enzyme catalyze hydrolysis Pi.] of to the [Note: synthase also also because is F1/Fo-ATPase can ATP the and called ATP subunits. contains eight H+ eight through domain. is the by of (protons) complete driven turn moving ring One Fo the F1 (ADP) changes phosphorylation to three of three adenosine resulting β diphosphates The of three allow the domain ATP.] the conformational subunits in inorganic Pi phosphate. =

transport Coupling the through synthesis phosphorylation: H+ oxidative mitochondria, coupled in ATP electron In gradient. normal to a. is the other. one process on has (or effect Increasing same decreasing) the the flow availability H+ of increases enzyme. ATP reactions increases in synthase thus, to example, of and, the substrates ADP and Pi through hydrolysis for ATP For energy-requiring and and H+ the pumping transport to increase ETC synthesis. the allow by H+ maintain ATP Electron gradient

drug b. Oligomycin: phosphorylation reentry binds “o”) to and of letter the the synthase, thereby into of domain ATP (hence H+ the channel of to matrix, closing preventing ATP. This ADP H+ inhibiting the Fo be presence difficulty pumping stops because the pH in inhibitor, Because gradients the gradient. of electron dissipated this transport electrical against of any of cannot more the and the phosphorylation steep H+ the coupling of tight dependency known the This on control of respiration as phosphorylate ability these cellular ADP the to is ATP processes. to of respiratory consequence is and

c.

including the (UCP) mammals, humans. of Uncoupling inner proteins Uncoupling occur membrane mitochondrial in proteins: ATP as reenter H+ allow mitochondrial captured form to the that energy These without matrix (Fig. being proteins channels 6.15). is is nonshivering the called as The heat, released energy and process thermogenesis. also in production the called responsible UCP1, for mitochondria-rich of is thermogenin, brown adipocytes heat mammals. activation causes [Note: of UCP1 expression.] Cold catecholamine-dependent infants energy in the its is fat, to in more cold. respiratory brown thermogenesis of fat, ~90% white response unlike In abundant used for in energy Thus, whereas is fat storage. fat in involved expenditure, energy is white involved brown have fat in Brown recently adults.] to shown been depots present [Note: be d.

shuttle the of dissipating membrane, Electron be inner phosphorylation transport also across Synthetic gradient. uncoupled that compounds can ADP uncouplers: the mitochondrial by and H+ (Fig. readily classic 2,4-dinitrophenol, that carrier H+ lipophilic is membrane mitochondrial (ionophore) diffuses through example The the a 6.16). gradient, the causes as transport without proceed electron UCP. do establishing H+ much rate at This a uncoupler to a rapid synthesize to Again, released heat energy as ATP. is used rather than being doses, aspirin phosphorylation. oxidative [Note: uncouple salicylates In other and high that This of accompanies explains these drugs.] toxic the overdoses fever

systems B. Membrane transport

The substances. mitochondrial inner to or impermeable is hydrophilic most membrane charged it the molecules However, transport that to numerous from matrix. passage proteins the certain mitochondrial of contains cytosol permit

1.

ADP hydrolyzed the inner from cytosol (where transport: in energy-requiring ATP ADP membrane where reactions) ATP Pi to many into be to The mitochondria, ATP and ADP transport is resynthesized. can requires and carriers specialized nucleotide cytosol the ATP one imports adenine An into one while matrix matrix, antiporter the cytosol the from Fig. (see into the from ADP exporting 6.13). matrix. cytosol symporter A cotransports the and the into from H+ Pi

2.

directly cannot see matrix. enter glycolysis; example, equivalent mitochondrial mitochondrial in membrane NADH transporter, cytosol The lacks p. (for the in inner produced an 101) and Reducing NADH transport: the equivalents of into transported shuttles. using NADH matrix the cytosol from However, substrate reducing the are In glycerol (Fig. 3phosphate the shuttle NADH phosphate electrons dehydrogenase. are 3-phosphate dihydroxyacetone from 6.17A), two by to cytosolic glycerol transferred isozyme as FADH2. to FAD The glycerol 3-phosphate mitochondrial the is is oxidized produced by reduced ETC the oxidizes FADH2. CoQ the of shuttle Therefore, in cytosolic the the oxidized. glycerol ATP two of results synthesis NADH 3-phosphate each for the malate-aspartate shuttle with contrasts This (Fig. ATP yielding dehydrogenase malate. 6.17B), malate (rather than FADH2) for in mitochondrial which each matrix, as NADH NADH is by oxaloacetate reduced the oxidized produces thereby cytosolic three to A malate moves protein matrix. transport into mitochondrial the

mitochondrial membrane. inner A. shuttle. 3-phosphate Glycerol aspartate B. shuttle. Malate DHAP = Q. coenzyme = CoQ dihydroxyacetone dinucleotide; phosphate; = NAD(H)

C. Inherited in oxidative phosphorylation defects

encoded in the by the mitochondria. transported required remaining polypeptides the Thirteen whereas and mitochondria, for oxidative encoded DNA, and by are synthesized of in cytosol, phosphorylation ~90 proteins nuclear are mtDNA into then synthesized that mutation which are 10 DNA. of Defects phosphorylation alterations in than a of mtDNA, likely nuclear in more rate greater has result times a oxidative about in liver) defects the system, are with ATP heart skeletal central the requirement Tissues phosphorylation. affected most by and the muscle, nervous (for example, oxidative greatest and mtDNA some degeneration, in central which optic diseases, as including responsible of of nerve. vision a occurs myopathies, cases and hereditary in disease mitochondrial neuroretinal a of optic several the are including for loss neuropathy, bilateral Mutations Leber result damage to cell sperm is the from do egg.] not mitochondria inherited the mtDNA fertilized [Note: enter because maternally

and D. Mitochondria apoptosis

(mitochondrial-mediated) mitochondrial initiated by The of (programmed intrinsic in outer the process apoptosis of formation the death) through may pores be pathway membrane. cell the cytochrome cytosol. intermembrane enter c to and pores the leave the allow These space of in characteristic There, a (the with of biochemical changes and caspases), key apoptosis. of activates cleavage factors, the cytochrome family morphologic enzymes and causing proteolytic proteins in resulting proapoptotic association c,

VII. CHAPTER SUMMARY

direction the change reaction free a energy reaction in (∆G) predicts that which during spontaneously occurring proceed. in The will free ∆G product a as substrate), has energy than (that then the negative the If is spontaneous the is, is reaction lower written. If ∆G spontaneous. reaction the not is positive, is then is = 0, ∆G in equilibrium. then reaction the If is forward reaction. reaction The to of that in sign of back but equal opposite the magnitude in the ∆G in energy standard are (∆G0). of The changes the as free consecutive any ∆G are reactions, additive sequence have reactions ∆G are a those hydrolysis. such made coupling as negative Therefore, large, ∆G ATP or by positive possible that large, have processes with that a each set heme-containing The chain. (NADH) transport coenzyme donate electrons adenine electron electron of and flavin nicotinamide Q, mononucleotide cytochromes, of of series a consisting (FADH2) iron-sulfur centers, to flavin dinucleotide collectively a pair (FMN), carriers, specialized dinucleotide the adenine a reduced coenzymes of called and inner present the positive which (O2), reduction body in has (impermeable it derived most to the different which to common final is of membrane from to oxygen substances) fuels (E0), electrons This flow potential mitochondrial water. the and a is reducing pathway pathway by large, only the terminal The is c to able O2. oxidase, cytochrome, cytochrome bind cytochrome (H+) H+ from inner Electron 10 membrane the to the oxidized. per results mitochondrial space, of the protons the NADH pumping matrix intermembrane transport across in membrane. process electrical across the gradients pH inner creates This and mitochondrial H+ pH result causing channel conformational gradients inorganic changes by subunits that H+ After of passing and reenter V), and synthesis the side matrix synthase (Complex to β through the ATP been they have the F1 the electrical ADP Fo in + the in in phosphate. of from of cytosolic the synthase transferred dissipating the membrane, ATP the transport Electron phosphorylation are in tightly ([OXPHOS] coupled phosphorylation and oxidative Fig. 6.18). one the other. inhibits process of Inhibition gradient. H+ by membrane be and such the compounds processes brown mitochondrial 2,4-dinitrophenol dissipate as synthetic can of by the all and These aspirin, uncoupling uncoupled inner of adipocytes protein-1 of which rather to synthesize In as used transport uncoupled the released heat ATP. by than electron is being energy mitochondria, produced in of inherited, for Leber mitochondrial optic diseases responsible is such hereditary DNA, cases are some as which mitochondrial maternally neuropathy. Mutations proteolytic of activation in and of caspases subsequent the cell death. cytochrome c into cytoplasm apoptotic The results release

the ONE Choose answer. best

.1. uncoupler an used 2,4-Dinitrophenol of 1930s. in (DNP), agent weight-loss phosphorylation, as was a the oxidative discontinuation its 1939. of to Reports in overdoses led fatal of the would following 2,4-DNP? taking likely Which individuals be most true concerning

are greater normal. ATP levels A. than the mitochondria in

B. a as elevated hypermetabolism. is temperature result of Body

flow. electron on C. effect Cyanide no has

proton gradient greater The the D. is inner across than membrane mitochondrial normal.

The E. transport electron is rate abnormally low. of

answer = Correct B. from expected. mitochondrial proton and, synthesis inner membrane gradient a ATP flow, therefore, phosphorylation decrease are uncoupled the When the is in impaired electron across increased. and for capture, compensate flow metabolism energy are an defect to this in electron In oxygen attempt to This temperature body fuels be elevated by hypermetabolism heat. is because largely in appearing the accompanied energy wasted, will as inhibited transport still cyanide. be electron will chain by The

.2. gain electrons? Which tendency of strongest following has the the to

A. Coenzyme Q

Cytochrome c B.

adenine dinucleotide Flavin C.

dinucleotide adenine D. Nicotinamide

Oxygen E.

in E. transport electrons chain = the electron Correct acceptor terminal answer (ETC). of is Oxygen the the (E0). down has because ETC the it positive) potential flow highest reduction Electrons to (most oxygen The E0 oxygen values. ETC choices and in precede the have lower other

.3. why malate-aspartate equivalents cytosol dinucleotide nicotinamide reducing matrix. moves the adenine shuttle the from how mitochondrial Explain and the to

the in dinucleotide transporter membrane. nicotinamide adenine (NADH) for inner no is There mitochondrial malate. can be dehydrogenase NADH (OAA) to malate by oxaloacetate NAD+ is However, cytoplasmic as to oxidized reduced as across malate where matrix to the transported it the isozyme reduced The NADH. NAD+ mitochondrial membrane to inner oxidizes dehydrogenase malate the is mitochondrial of to OAA is This coupled oxidized chain, generating of phosphorylation. by be Complex the through I transport the NADH of electron ATP oxidative three can processes

.4. electron (CO) binds transport to chain. Carbon IV the Complex of inhibits monoxide and (ADP) on this to have ATP? respiratory effect, diphosphate phosphorylation What should inhibitor if any, of adenosine

maintain gradient. CO inhibitors (H+) Inhibition to transport by the respiratory inability electron results such as an proton of in of require is phosphorylation reactions they the also to such gradient. because mitochondria, are ATP uptake ADP as Therefore, calcium inhibited, H+ as by ancillary

to Introduction Carbohydrates 7

visit chapter, additional thePoint. For related this materials please to ancillary

OVERVIEW I.

molecules Carbohydrates (saccharides) nature. in are organic most abundant the organisms, acting a mediate communication. They a in dietary functions, for as significant a providing form that have and the as of fraction some the intercellular storage of body, serving most of wide calories cell of energy membrane forms components range including cell the insects, the including a serve of exoskeleton also component the as of bacteria, Carbohydrates organisms, of cellulose plants. walls and of many structural fibrous full produced is set The its [Note: of organism carbohydrates glycome.] by an n of simpler The is name ≥3, where hence carbohydrates of formula for “hydrate carbon.” the empiric many the (CH2O)n,

II. AND STRUCTURE CLASSIFICATION

carbon of sugars) (simple the to contain. can number classified Monosaccharides be they according atoms some in monosaccharides in listed found are Examples Figure commonly 7.1. humans of can They the be carbonyl classified by they group contain. type of also with ketoses with group carbonyl an whereas (Fig. aldehyde carbonyl as are called aldoses, those group keto their called as their are a Carbohydrates 7.2). dihydroxyacetone whereas is ketose. For a glyceraldehyde is example, an aldose, have Carbohydrates suffix carbonyl free have the group -ose. that a [Note: suffix Ketoses “ul” in an their additional xylulose. have as such such rule.] as to this exceptions, fructose, There are by be Monosaccharides to structures linked (Fig. glycosidic bonds larger create can 7.3). Disaccharides units more sugar length. units, and hundreds contain monosaccharide polysaccharides units ten monosaccharide monosaccharide contain of ten oligosaccharides two and can in be to contain units, than three

epimers Isomers A. and

called same chemical the have isomers. different are have that formula but Compounds structures all are isomers having same chemical each the fructose, C6H12O6. and formula, For other, mannose, glucose, galactose of example, the atom carbon, Carbohydrate one that isomers (with around only of in carbon differ configuration exception see carbonyl the specific C.

of epimers are 1. each as defined below) other. carbon –OH galactose glucose are C-4 group only (hydroxyl) at 4. their For epimers of position structures in the differ because example, the and (that group), are carbons carbon the in The in contains at or beginning as is, [Note: the shown Fig. keto end numbered carbonyl the that sugars aldehyde 7.4.] Glucose C-2 epimers. and are mannose at and epimers (carbons galactose 4), position rather the are groups of –OH because carbons two they than in isomers 2 (see Fig. mannose and However, differ 7.4).

Enantiomers B.

of the structures A that are in mirror type found special other. of is of each isomerism pairs images the two are images enantiomers, of mirror L-sugar the an and These called pair members as designated are (Fig. D-and a 7.5). the D-isomers. The are in of sugars humans majority vast it on or the different L-isomer, on four on left. linked to the –OH groups) whereas the form, In the is the in from carbonyl group right, carbon carbon D-isomeric the asymmetric (a farthest is the atoms carbon Most able L interconvert for but are enzymes as to D-and specific form, the known enzymes the D isomerases L-isomers. either or are

comparison triose, a to glyceraldehyde. in are The green.] asymmetric shown [Note: carbons

Monosaccharide C. cyclization

the of or exists with form five the (acyclic) 1% solution. of in each monosaccharides more Less than carbons in open-chain with ketose) found a an same aldehyde has (cyclic) reacted they the a 1 the (or 2 aldose, group carbon for (carbon sugar, ring a which the form, making in in carbonyl Rather, keto) predominantly for carbon on are group hydroxyl asymmetric. carbon. carbon referred is to as anomeric This asymmetric the

1. and each are shown pair of former isomers, of other. (for example, carbon) as Figure the in Anomers: generates anomeric that new carbon α-D-glucopyranose configurations of the (the an 7.6, and α Creation carbonyl β-D-glucopyranose), a sugar anomers β of group the projects carbon the as a Fig. (see ring in configuration, same the Fischer formula anomeric In α modified on [Note: to the side –OH the projection projection (see and the is formula Fig. CH2OH Haworth trans 7.6A) in group a to 7.6B).

images, not mirror β referred diastereomers.] are forms and to as are The α they and to Enzymes use two between other able the these distinguish structures preferentially. and one are or whereas is cellulose α-D-glucopyranose, glycogen synthesized is synthesized from β-D-glucopyranose. For from example, of mutarotation as equilibrium a known (see process Fig. sugar anomers solution cyclic a β (but α The in and slowly) an spontaneously mixture, form 7.6). form 36% the of For glucose, α up [Note: makes mixture.] the one (4 + ring O) pyranose, is 1 a with is whereas ring a C termed + 1 (5 six-membered furanose. O) C five-membered a glucose Virtually is form.] in the in solution all pyranose 2. cyclized group of (see sugars: the open. not carbon anomeric E. can compound the is on below), by the a ring a hydroxyl glycosidic another Reducing If to linked sugar bond agent is The a act sugar reducing a termed reducing sugar. can and as to is to be carboxyl agents (for example, group. react oxidized reduced aldehyde causing group Such as a of with colored acyclic sugar reagent the sugars the and can Benedict the reagent) the chromogenic not sugars. are but monosaccharides, All disaccharides, reducing all sugar isomerized because be an [Note: reducing can Fructose, a is it ketose, to a aldose.]

detect urine. colorimetric a A can reducing in test sugar an urine) pathology normally is specific sugar. of more followed can be the indicative identify sugars A are present positive result not in reducing underlying (because to and tests by up

joining D. Monosaccharide

Monosaccharides and to can polysaccharides. disaccharides, oligosaccharides, form joined be (galactose + disaccharides (glucose (glucose Important + include glucose). + sucrose maltose glucose), and lactose fructose), animal cellulose include sources). sources) and glycogen starch and branched unbranched sources) polysaccharides Important (from (plant (plant glucose. of a polymer is Each

bonds E. Glycosidic

bonds. are sugars link that bonds called glycosidic The such enzymes uridine as known glucose (activated substrates. nucleotide as They formed use diphosphate that glycosyltransferases are as sugars) by sugars the first of the the connected sugars Glycosidic carbons are and bond. sugar involved of group to the according regard hydroxyl the of with anomeric bonds position named numbers in the between to hydroxyl linkage then is configuration, anomeric α If the this α-bond. the is an in β-bond. configuration, the If β a in the is linkage is then it of Lactose, for between forming a bond glucose. is synthesized 4 and of β-galactose by carbon example, glycosidic 1 carbon a β(1→4) is linkage glycosidic bond the (see Therefore, Fig. 7.3). in residue glucose Because (and, a sugar.] end not is remains the lactose) [Note: reducing anomeric it the therefore, glycosidic involved of the linkage,

Carbohydrate linkage noncarbohydrates to F.

in proteins attached acids), in proteoglycans), pyrimidine (found rings structures, and as those can (found and found aromatic purine in glycosidic glycolipids). bases noncarbohydrate nucleic (such be bilirubin), by bonds Carbohydrates steroids to including lipids in glycoproteins and (found and which is the called the group attached to noncarbohydrate an –NH2 an on the If is bond link. group, then molecule sugar N-glycosidic is the then If an the an bond link is O-glycosidic the is (Fig. –OH, group 7.7). O-type glycosidic linkages.] bonds sugar-sugar are All [Note:

III. DIETARY CARBOHYDRATE DIGESTION

principal carbohydrate the sites and digestion intestinal The of dietary are lumen. mouth glycoside glycosidic enzymes hydrolyze bonds catalyzed as by is and rapid (glycosidases) This digestion (Fig. known that hydrolases is 7.8). and components. their mixed the disaccharides Because of in sugar monosaccharide is animal endoglycosidases polysaccharides diets are that that tri-and present into and origin, primarily disaccharidases hydrolyze plant oligosaccharides enzymes little and hydrolyze reducing structure to broken. as for residue Glycosidases the of to be configuration well bond specific type the removed are glycosyl usually as and of the for be the that absorbed are small glucose, final and intestine. digestion cells The carbohydrate products by monosaccharides galactose, (enterocytes) fructose of the of are

A. Salivary α-amylase

(starch, of origin. amylose The plant and of (glycogen) major amylopectin) composed dietary and polysaccharides animal are on glycogen, starch dietary bonds. (chewing), and α(1→4) briefly During mastication hydrolyzing α-amylase salivary acts random not are the do humans but in both β(1→4)-endoglucosidases nature, There latter. produce α(1→4)-and [Note: plant we glycosidic of are cellulose, residues.] a Therefore, between bonds unable containing β(1→4) carbohydrate digest to origin glucose a known branched digest action hydrolyze, its contain which α-amylase α(1→6) dextrins unbranched and as oligosaccharides of bonds, branched and resulting mixture from cannot Because (Fig. short, amylopectin glycogen contains also the 7.9). too, also as resistant present to are are Disaccharides amylase.] they, [Note:

because halts stomach, in temporarily α-amylase. salivary inactivates the high digestion Carbohydrate the acidity

B. α-amylase Pancreatic

digestion. small are continues they the the stomach by When and process by contents pancreas, bicarbonate pancreatic of neutralized intestine, αamylase reach secreted the acidic starch the

C. Intestinal disaccharidases

the (see occur action Fig. and the upper digestive lining mucosal The of final include primarily at disaccharidases several jejunum and processes the of duodenum 7.9). example, glucose. bond each and maltose maltotriose, in α(1→4) isomaltose, in producing and maltase cleaves isomaltase bond the For cleaves the α(1→6) Sucrase bond bond α(1→2) producing lactase glucose and sucrose, producing glucose. cleaves lactose, cleaves fructose, the in the (β-galactosidase) galactose β(1→4) and in and suggests, majority are of maltose.] hydrolyzes name [Note: than isomaltase its the substrates broader and it The for an found cleaved in trehalase. fungi, other α(1→1) by Trehalose, and glucose is disaccharide mushrooms of border enzymes of the enterocytes. the are surface proteins on the luminal (apical) of These transmembrane brush

complex. functional single the a protein Sucrase of and is (SI) associated enzymic activities remain the two subunits, membrane and sucrase-isomaltase isomaltase cell that are which in into form cleaved In protein membrane that single of cleaved. is two maltase-glucoamylase enzymic get maltase contrast, one activities (MGA) not of the does α(1→4) in enzymic dextrins. second cleaves bonds glycosidic activity, glucoamylase, Its

monosaccharides of Intestinal absorption D.

the of of jejunum the products The absorbs monosaccharide upper bulk digestion. sugars mechanisms have (Fig. different absorption of different However, 7.10). that into by enterocytes concurrent ions. secondary a (Na+) active For are uptake requires taken of example, glucose (symport) and sodium transport galactose (SGLT-1). The protein glucose cotransporter sodium-dependent 1 the transport is (see ATPase the created moves Sugar driven K+ is in transport (K+) gradient [Note: Fig. the Na+ by the out enterocyte by that Na+-potassium and Na+ of 7.10).] monosaccharide transporter Na+-independent Fructose utilizes an absorption energy-and (GLUT-5). are monosaccharides transporter, from the yet enterocytes another into transported the portal three GLUT-2. All circulation by p. these 97 discussion transporters.] See of [Note: a for

Abnormal of E. disaccharides degradation

that individuals carbohydrate jejunum. The carbohydrate digestion and absorbed overall the ordinarily absorption so lower the material ingested efficient by healthy of digestible is time reaches process the all is in dietary acquired) (genetic activity only the of intestine. of a the in causes the are deficiency or absorbed, large specific However, carbohydrate passage undigested any because into disaccharidase intestinal monosaccharides mucosa large presence of a causing As of material, this is drawn diarrhea. mucosa into osmotic the active the water from osmotically consequence intestine, the reinforced flatulence. This carbon compounds causing fermentation of abdominal gas is plus (which active) and two-and of dioxide three-carbon volumes carbohydrate are (H2), osmotically the to cramps, and bacterial by large diarrhea, also remaining hydrogen the

1.

disaccharide in enzyme disaccharidases intolerance. individual Digestive Genetic result of deficiencies: deficiencies the and by disaccharide intestine. variety injure small the can a of the that mucosa also in Alterations caused of malnutrition, degradation intestinal drugs diseases, be with border enzymes causing individuals deficiency. rapidly For diarrhea, temporary, normal enzyme brush a are lost example, in acquired severe or of diarrhea. patients or products suffering cannot without from or disorder recovering a exacerbating such dairy sucrose eat the amounts drink significant Therefore,

2.

of world’s (Fig. 60% lactose intolerance: Over are intolerant Lactose adults the 7.11). certain in This manifested particularly populations. is For adults deficient. descent or are 90% of to African up of example, Asian lactase lactose origin. metabolize of they Northern Consequently, are individuals to able than are less European The loss years starting of the amount represents at produced. reduction 2 of age activity in enzyme approximately age-dependent lactase a on of chromosome small for DNA controls by sequence 2 the in to variations chromosome be also gene the on 2. caused lactase, of thought is region that It a expression and use vegetables, (bacterial Treatment or to intake; consumption in as take content) milk; such as to eating. pill this of reduce adequate for broccoli, cheeses ensure calcium green disorder well is form products; as yogurts to action lactase process decrease eat prior some lactose and aging lactase-treated for nonpersistence norm the or the rather is of the becoming is intolerance loss world’s common.] hypolactasia of lactose than adults, adult-type use [Note: lactase Because of the more lactase most terms cases Rare congenital of lactase known. are deficiency

3.

intolerance an This results autosomal-recessive Congenital deficiency: disorder sucrose. ingested of in sucrase-isomaltase people to descent Congenital of prevalence deficiency Canada. (up appears 1:20) more much European and Inuit be 1:5,000 to in of SI of the Greenland common a has in and individuals enzyme dietary therapy. and restriction of replacement the includes Treatment sucrose

4.

oral the Identification Diagnosis: deficiency performing of by tolerance with individual be disaccharides. can obtained specific tests a enzyme of instead the is for by of determining absorbed is the H2 but not intestinal reliable Measurement amount body, (see ingested test a by carbohydrate the in Fig. metabolized the breath flora which 7.11).

IV. SUMMARY CHAPTER

Monosaccharides (Fig. keto and aldehyde are aldoses, ketoses. an are those group with a called 7.12) called group containing and polysaccharides Disaccharides, oligosaccharides, by bonds. glycosidic monosaccharides consist of linked isomers. Compounds formula structures called but chemical the different are with same specific carbon) monosaccharide are differing carbon atom epimers. defined one carbonyl as around configuration in (not isomers the Two In D-and of L-isomers. (mirror designated sugar images), the the members enantiomers are as pair the on that agent reduced, oxidized reducing group a gets as acyclic an sugar sugar aldehyde chromogenic When gets a is sugar. created group. When a an anomeric aldehyde is carbon from keto the the or of sugar cyclizes, carbonyl carbon anomers. forming α β can configurations, The have sugar or two anomeric an carbon or its have linked sugar A – an can to –NH2

bonds, N-and group another O-glycosidic structure respectively. through OH on (for producing dietary initiates of starch digestion oligosaccharides. α-amylase example, Salivary glycogen), polysaccharides or continues Pancreatic the process. α-amylase occur the of The the small mucosal digestive at final processes intestine. lining [β-galactosidase], disaccharidases maltase) example, monosaccharides (for produce galactose, and fructose). Several (glucose, lactase sucrase, and isomaltase, transmembrane (enterocytes). These proteins intestinal cells enzymes are of the mucosal of luminal border brush Absorption of transporters. monosaccharides specific requires the the where result cause mucosa), drugs undigested degradation that (as diarrhea. injure osmotic deficient carbohydrate intestine, carbohydrate can pass will of or heredity, a it intestinal into large If the disease, is hydrogen Bacterial cramps, volumes causing abdominal gas, of produces diarrhea, fermentation material carbon flatulence. the large of and and dioxide primarily age-dependent lactase hypolactasia), caused by of the by deficiencies. the these of (adult-type most is loss common intolerance, far Lactose

Choose the ONE answer. best

.1. the of describes glucose? Which following statements best

A. galactose. C-4 epimer of It a is

B. a It a as ring solution. in and ketose usually is furanose exists

action It dietary produced by the is from of starch C. α-amylase.

form. is systems L-isomeric utilized biological only in D. the It in

A. Correct = answer carbon by Because that C-4 configuration are differ interconvertible galactose and only of 4, an the are glucose action epimerase. in they epimers around solution. sugar a is an that ring typically aldose exists in Glucose as pyranose furanose is ketose ring. with however, a Fructose, a not monosaccharides. does produce α-Amylase contrast are form The that form. biologic systems, is the D-isomeric in carbohydrates found amino acids found in of in typically form L-isomeric the typically to

.2. man of and physician’s office A complaining his entered young diarrhea. bloating His dehydration. were physician the sunken, of and additional noted eyes signs temperature was patient’s normal. The which He party he in contest. at an had participated ice had episode cream–eating the that a explained birthday following occurred following The episodes reported nature of of a similar ingestion products. significant amount dairy of a prior patient a deficiency picture clinical in activity This the probably is to most due of:

isomaltase. A.

lactase. B.

pancreatic α-amylase. C.

α-amylase. D. salivary

E. sucrase.

B. answer Correct = for symptoms deficiency responsible suggest physical in The a enzyme an degradation. carbohydrate reduction that the observed of following is the of age-dependent lactase patient of ingestion symptoms the dairy products enzyme. expression as in result the deficient suggest The a in

.3. a Clinitest the detecting the sugars) copper oxidase pediatric of urine asymptomatic examination with with glucose but reduction of an reducing glucose. (a Routine for test reaction positive a detecting of method reaction showed patient negative on this of (YES) which in or could individual. data, be of these show sugars chart urine (NO) Using present not the the could the below

Each glucose, listed present this in the individual. sugars, except and be could of the sucrose urine for of xylulose). reducing substances a lactose, for a color reducing positive that (fructose, Clinitest as test sugars nonspecific produces is is glucose, such galactose, urine if change in not sucrose reducing by it Because a Clinitest. sugar, not detected is is test cannot only other will oxidase glucose it and detect sugars. The detect glucose, test that sugar positive with the a test urine. reducing cannot be in The means glucose coupled sugar oxidase reducing negative the glucose patient’s

.4. are treatment with inhibitors meals, taken acarbose as in that are used miglitol, α-glucosidase and diabetes? such the Why of drugs of the should lactose? have digestion on What these effect

slow diabetic better postprandial carbohydrates, rise inhibitors glucose glucose blood dietary thereby glucose in facilitating production the in blood from α-Glucosidase and control patients. the of reducing α-glycosidic because a contains bond, drugs on lactose effect not no have lactose disaccharide βglycosidic digestion These an bond. the

Glycolysis 8 to Metabolism and Introduction

chapter, materials additional please to related ancillary visit this thePoint. For

METABOLISM OVERVIEW I.

in Chapter mechanisms 5, enzymic analyzed to effort explain reactions of were the an catalysis. In individual in isolation. reactions these occur rarely in However, cells, glycolysis (Fig. they into of that organized pathways, multistep as are Instead, sequences called such 8.1). reaction as of one substrate the In of a the product the reaction. pathway, serves subsequent (synthetic). (degradative) be can Most catabolic classified as anabolic pathways either or simple such polysaccharides, lipids, Catabolic complex break dioxide, down molecules to as example, and a few water). molecules, (for proteins, carbon and ammonia, pathways simple glycogen end products the polysaccharide of the from from form pathways glucose. example, complex Anabolic for precursors, synthesis Pathways component cycles.] regenerate a are called [Note: that purposeful reactions. forming intersect, chemical can Different an pathways network and integrated of is of changes occurring tissue, the Metabolism the a the a or sum chemical cell, body. all in involved chapters lipids, degrading amino on several acids. metabolic the in carbohydrates, and pathways next focus are The and central synthesizing that

map A. Metabolic

best its component Metabolism examining by pathways. understood is sequences, may enzyme, Each important of pathway exhibit catalytic in multienzyme features. regulatory turn, composed or is and each containing in pathways important metabolism metabolic Figure presented is map 8.2. central the energy A of an the effect an a tracing of (for visualizing “big (metabolites), depicting metabolic of movement and intermediates example, pathway the of blocked in purposeful picture” on This deficiency the flow between of if pathways, is metabolism view drug by enzyme). connections is a intermediates inherited or useful an of metabolites metabolome complement the is in [Note: organism.] full The the shown map next Figure of repeatedly part each as of be this in featured 8.2. Throughout three major will book, pathway the metabolic units under discussion

protein of metabolism. intermediates = UDP diphosphate; = P - uridine phosphate;

dioxide; = CO2 bicarbonate; = CoA carbon NH3 HCO3 = A; = ammonia. coenzyme

B. pathways Catabolic

fuel Catabolic degradation ATP the serve molecules. the to of chemical in from capture reactions of energy-rich form energy as 8.3. Figure in degradation ATP by occurs generation stages, molecules three shown of in complex pathways [Note: nicotinamide oxidative are oxidized and require dinucleotide adenine coenzymes Catabolic as typically (NAD+).] such for building needed the molecules. be of basic blocks allows nutrient stored molecules Catabolism in into synthesis converted the cells) also in complex (or diet molecules to into molecules end convergent then, common wide are Catabolism, variety few transformed a is, is a a products). (that process of

1.

complex are In down blocks. building of molecules: complex molecules stage, broken first the component their Hydrolysis into and polysaccharides monosaccharides, amino glycerol. fatty acids, to fats For degraded and proteins example, to to free acids are (triacylglycerols)

2.

simple of blocks further building A to few In simple diverse degraded stage, building acetyl coenzyme (CoA) the are Conversion second a molecules. to other intermediates: these and blocks stage ATP, Some the during produced with is energy as captured but energy compared small amount third the catabolism. of the is

3.

of (see coenzyme acetyl The the final Oxidation the acetyl tricarboxylic that cycle acid molecules of common A: CoA. in produce fuel pathway 109) p. (TCA) oxidation is ATP (FADH2) Oxidation from see of flavin dinucleotide amounts via and ([O2] electrons flow generates large oxygen CoA NADH phosphorylation acetyl of as oxidative to p. adenine

73).

C. Anabolic pathways

or a divergent is (such proteins [Fig. to in products process (such of wide In catabolism, complex, few anabolism form which acids) contrast as amino biosynthetic precursors polymeric, a variety a as 8.4]). which by (ADP) is Anabolic hydrolysis endergonic), provided (Pi). of reactions adenosine inorganic generally (are phosphate to and energy diphosphate ATP require the energy exergonic).] [Note: reactions Catabolic (are generate

(phosphorylated reducing donor 147). often is by in chemical power provided the the NADPH most frequently electron Anabolic reactions NADH, reductions see p. which involve

II. METABOLISM REGULATION

end metabolism the or be of that must pathways the the energy of cell. needs products so of of the meets coordinated production synthesis The Furthermore, part function as tissues, of isolation. not individual interacting of in community cells a sophisticated Thus, system the has a body. of communication the evolved to functions coordinate whole nutrients. cell metabolic of an that body state individual as signals a neurotransmitters, and of hormones, inform Regulatory availability include the of the the influence signals within the turn, cell in These, generated (Fig. 8.5).

A. Intracellular communication

arise within metabolic regulatory to rate cell. a can pathway of that the signals from The respond in levels substrates, be or the alterations availability influenced product of inhibition, or of example, For rate the by inhibitors. activators the may allosteric are the elicit metabolism. These of responses intracellular and important signals rapid regulation moment-to-moment typically for

Intercellular B. communication

respond for intercellular organisms. essential signals the development is survival of to and to ability The metabolism than slower gene that signals. response, expression, results seen long-range for a is with is such integration usually Signaling of change provides in intracellular and in cells a between as by surface-to-surface communication contact cells of gap mediated, example, of between by between formation be in some direct junctions, Communication cytoplasms for cells. and, tissues, adjacent can allowing the is signaling of blood-borne between the important metabolism, or chemical hormones most route communication by However, for by energy neurotransmitters. cells

systems Second messenger C.

and signal Hormones and be as neurotransmitters signals receptors can of their detectors. thought as Receptors bound in respond of reactions series ligand initiating ultimately that to by result intracellular a specific responses. a a cascade (the the the converts the so intracellular effect, are into of response. between they events or ligand molecules, because neurotransmitter ultimate messenger intervene and Second extracellular messenger that part of original (transduces) named hormone) binding calcium/phosphatidylinositol p. widely the and systems (see of 205) system cyclase) (adenylate the cyclase recognized are the which most adenylyl system, in the second regulating pathways is particularly intermediary messenger of Two metabolism. important epinephrine on as glucagon, membrane. to (GPCR) cell such G protein–coupled receptors ligands, specific or binding the (plasma) Both of the involve an that transmembrane are ligand-binding with interacts characterized an trimeric helices, (Fig. extracellular GPCR domain seven G domain, α and by intracellular proteins 8.6). a membrane metabolism, Insulin, p. [Note: binds and regulator (see GPCR.] receptor not 311) a tyrosine of another kinase key

Adenylyl D. cyclase

signal or decrease receptors, either the an triggers in activity some as by α2adrenergic adenylyl such of β-and GPCR, recognition a (AC). chemical increase a The the of cyclase enzyme This is membrane-bound a that converts

to AMP, monophosphate (cyclic or 3ʹ,5ʹ-adenosine cAMP). ATP The often which of unique of to hormones are signals type each most GPCR. binds neurotransmitters, or chemical a Therefore, be have must linked signal that several which different one to than respond tissues can more of to AC. each GPCR,

1. regulatory second of mediated the Guanosine formation of (α, specialized β, effect membrane. and triphosphate–dependent GPCR activated, messenger The indirect, the on γ proteins: subunits) proteins cell trimeric by is occupied or in proteins, of G subunit di-or (GDP guanosine These GTP), α a as and because communication triphosphates chain proteins form between link receptor AC. binds the to the the referred GDP In subunit the to protein, bound G the α is a form inactive (Fig. of 8.7). of the replacement conformational this triggering GDP binding a GTP. with receptor, Ligand in change causes the moves α dissociates The from βγ to form GTP-bound affecting subunits enzyme subunit of the activity. and AC, active molecules formed activated of one are protein Many by receptor. Gα stimulate the is inhibit or AC a Gα of depends of on or the receptor. [Note: protein The hormone type to ability to neurotransmitter that linked (see Gs, AC One stimulates designated Fig. type, another 8.7), the whereas inhibits type, enzyme shown).] Gi, (not designated short-lived in hydrolysis the to has an complex rapid GDP. GTPase Gα–GTP GTP The Gα inherent of actions the activity, resulting are of because This from Gα, reassociation dissociation with its the inactivation causes dimer. βγ its of and AC,

covalent proteins. from (cholera) different G modification of pertussis Toxins AC and activation through Vibrio (ADP-ribosylation) cause cough) of inappropriate (whooping cholerae Bordetella Gαs inhibited of is in GTPase cells. With intestinal cholera, the activity whooping respiratory tract cells. With Gαi is cough, in inactivated

2. its release causing subunits, protein its in enzymes active Protein second (PKA), messenger to Figure kinases: step cAMP-dependent is A catalytically activates of kinase family activation two the such The as kinases the PKA next protein as cAMP called a by the in regulatory shown two of of system subunits. 8.8. binding cAMP specific or subunits ATP transfer serine phosphate threonine protein from residues to These of substrates. inhibited. on may The or or, channels ion proteins act become may the phosphorylated activated if directly enzymes, cell’s protein cAMP p. described for are kinase protein example, of dependent, not kinases types Several C, [Note: on 205.] 3.

(see to proteins cleave phosphate Protein The protein Fig. removed kinases phosphatases, are groups hydrolytically phosphatases: by enzymes that added phosphate esters protein by 8.8). This permanent. protein insures are changes not by induced phosphorylation activity that in

4.

that 3ʹ,5ʹ-phosphodiester is phosphodiesterase to cAMP cAMP cleaves hydrolysis: by hydrolyzed 5ʹ-AMP cAMP rapidly the bond. cyclic not signaling is an intracellular molecule. 5ʹAMP Therefore, is the increases of cAMP the if of removed. effects terminated are neurotransmitter-or extracellular rapidly hormone-mediated signal methylxanthine is [Note: a phosphodiesterase inhibited caffeine, cAMP derivative.] by

III. OVERVIEW GLYCOLYSIS

metabolic used all provide and pathways. of pathway The energy to glucose for glycolytic intermediates by tissues oxidation the ATP) is other for (as sugars, to ultimately is virtually of the Glycolysis (Fig. diet in be arising the or can from hub metabolism reactions from all catabolic glucose at whether converted the body, carbohydrate because 8.9A). glycolysis adequate with is product mitochondria and supply of cells an in end the Pyruvate O2. of oxidation reactions is the formed series is reoxidize of to ten of This 3-phosphate required the glyceraldehyde because during NADH glycolysis aerobic (Fig. called O2 8.9B). decarboxylation cycle. pyruvate of to acetyl the fuel oxidative major sets the for Aerobic glycolysis of a CoA, TCA the stage as pyruvate NAD+ to to lactate Alternatively, is reduced oxidized (Fig. is NADH 8.9C). without glucose glycolysis can participation to it of is lactate called the of O2. because anaerobic conversion This occur tissues (for of eye) cells mitochondria or blood O2 the in deprived lack red ATP example, Anaerobic that allows (hypoxia). the of glycolysis of and sufficient cells in production [RBC] parts

IV. GLUCOSE CELLS INTO TRANSPORT

directly or by diffuse but of system. one transport ATP-independent Na+-and ATP-dependent a (Na+)-and cells into two a systems: cotransport sodium Glucose transport cannot system enters

A. Sodium-and system ATP-independent transport

mediated is glucose This by 14 (GLUT) isoforms transporter of system in passive membranes. cell found a family are to They GLUT-14. designated GLUT-1 the These conformational protein two in monomeric in transporters states membrane exist (Fig. 8.10). then its the binds diffusion. which Extracellular conformation, transporter, cell glucose glucose across facilitated membrane alters to the via transporting Because one molecule a are at time, uniporters. they GLUT transport

1.

display specificity: tissue-specific of Tissue a GLUT pattern expression.

GLUT-3 primary For the isoform is in neurons. example, is abundant GLUT-1 muscle, low but adult abundant adipose in the in and tissue. GLUT-4 in and is whereas RBC barrier muscle is blood–brain [Note: these of The by in insulin. transporters increased active is number tissues GLUT-4 (See discussion a p. of and transport.)] 311 for glucose insulin abundant liver, cells. is β the pancreatic GLUT-2 kidneys, and in have also GLUT isoforms tissue-specific other distributions. The

2.

gradient glucose movement down (that lower a no requiring energy). transporter-mediated diffusion, therefore to from a one, is, concentration In Specialized high concentration functions: facilitated a is primarily glucose example, the are from in For GLUT-1, involved blood. GLUT-3, and GLUT-4 uptake transport (for levels these either when contrast, into cells can glucose GLUT-2, blood glucose liver levels in are fasting). blood In when and these the or example, low glucose transport glucose kidneys, high during are from cells fructose unusual is that the transporter the the intestine (see and GLUT-5 glucose) in in testes small 87). it for is p. (not primary

ATP-dependent Sodium-and system B. cotransport

This concentrations from low energy-requiring Na+ its gradient. electrochemical to higher glucose concentrations) transports is transported intracellular is, extracellular concentration against gradient (up) process (that its down as by Fig. Na+potassium ATPase gradient The created (K+) the [Note: is (see p. 7.10, 87).] transporter transport Because concurrent (symport) requires the a sodium-dependent (SGLT). is of cotransporter uptake glucose secondary Na+, process active this the occurs 87), intestine type cells This tubules, of cotransport epithelial of and in plexus. the p. choroid renal (see the contains of the blood–brain barrier, part The choroid [Note: plexus, GLUT-1.] also

REACTIONS V. GLYCOLYSIS

occurs (Fig. glucose pyruvate of conversion The to two in stages 8.11). phosphorylated which phase forms correspond energy-investment of reactions five in ATP. an glycolysis expense of the synthesized at are of first to The the intermediates phase two in reactions energy-generation constitute ATP molecule subsequent 102) The formed per p. by which substrate-level molecules of a an glucose net phosphorylation (see glycolysis are of of metabolized.

phosphorylation Glucose A.

are specific and to the carriers transmembrane for through of membranes no diffuse polar are because readily sugar compounds these because do Phosphorylated too penetrate core not they cell lipid molecules there membranes. the phosphorylation of Therefore, (Fig. glucose irreversible

further the in as to glucose the and commits effectively 6-phosphate traps cytosolic cell. 8.12) it metabolism sugar the enzyme have glucose 6-phosphate. hexokinase of that of Mammals (I–IV) catalyze isozymes to phosphorylation four glucose the

1. catalyzed tissues, which is glycolysis with these hexokinase, isozymes of Hexokinases of regulatory I–III: kinase). In of phosphofructokinase three glucose most one of one is enzymes phosphorylation by and (along pyruvate of which are phosphate when hexose 6-phosphate, by inhibited is further this They the reduced. reaction product accumulates metabolism glucose therefore, for Michaelis a high glucose. affinity and, (see have low I–III 59) constant p. (Km) a Hexokinases of even concentrations when tissue subsequent This metabolism (Fig. efficient and glucose phosphorylation low of the permits are glucose 8.13). or glucose than (trap) more maximal do a the sequester velocity these However, phosphorylated phosphate can phosphorylate cell not glucose, ([Vmax] p. see the because use. have in for they isozymes glucose of cellular form 57) low phosphorylate to These specificity several addition able isozymes [Note: have substrate hexoses broad glucose.] and in to are 2. hexokinase responsible parenchymal for cells, glucokinase Hexokinase phosphorylation. predominant In isozyme) cells IV glucose is pancreatic and (the IV: β liver enzyme the a 309). glucokinase (see glucose β the functions p. In secretion insulin cells, as threshold determining sensor, for response [Note: hypothalamic p. sensor adrenergic key role glucose also a as in hypoglycemia Hexokinase in a to IV (see neurons, the serves playing 315).] hyperglycemia. the facilitates phosphorylation In glucose the enzyme liver, during enzyme of to Despite the glucokinase, sugar that name misleading specificity similar isozymes. the hexokinase of but popular other the is

a. important differs properties. I–III several in Glucokinase hexokinases from Kinetics: has for Km, a higher Fig. higher glucose For example, a concentration it much half-saturation (see requiring 8.13). vein. are of concentration of in functions Thus, high following glucose period consumption via the the is brief a when hepatocyte elevated the the of only levels liver during as meal, such glucose portal intracellular glucokinase to delivered when the carbohydrate-rich Vmax, the of portal effectively allowing glucose a blood. flood liver delivered the the remove Glucokinase has by high to absorptive prevents a following minimizing the during systemic period. such entering from thereby circulation glucose amounts large of the This meal, hyperglycemia equilibrates [Note: blood rapidly hepatocyte insures GLUT-2 glucose membrane.] across the that b. activity Glucokinase the as glucose are by not is 6phosphate inhibited directly other Regulation: hexokinases. by and glucose indirectly it (which fructose is Instead, 6-phosphate, of product is (a equilibrium 6-phosphate by substrate a in inhibited glucokinase). of is indirectly with glucokinase) glucose stimulated hepatic reversible glucokinase protein is regulatory by to achieved Regulation the protein binding (GKRP). rendering the tightly thereby inactive the GKRP nucleus, the presence enzyme to (Fig. In of is to 6-phosphate, translocated fructose and glucokinase binds 8.14). (and levels a 6-phosphate. hepatocyte, of glucose and as in glucokinase to it phosphorylates blood glucose released When the also result cytosol increase, reenters the the where the glucose is enzyme GLUT-2) in from GKRP, glucose inhibitor by of use [Note: competitive GKRP is a glucokinase.]

blood homeostasis. functions glucose as a glucose Glucokinase in sensor of 2) type hyperglycemia. 2 the young that of insulin glucokinase secretion of diabetes by and a diabetes, (MODY maturity Inactivating impaired onset form of cause rare is the are mutations characterized

Glucose 6-phosphate B. isomerization

to catalyzed The 6-phosphate 6-phosphate glucose phosphoglucose (Fig. is isomerase by fructose isomerization of 8.15). and The rate-limiting a readily not regulated reversible reaction is step. or is

6-phosphate Fructose phosphorylation C.

irreversible and phosphorylation control the (Fig. important the (PFK-1) most phosphofructokinase-1 by of rate-limiting is point catalyzed glycolysis step The committed reaction and 8.16). other PFK-1 fructose as available concentrations well controlled substrates the 6-phosphate is of ATP by and regulatory molecules. the as by

1.

elevated inhibited act high-energy levels: of compounds. PFK-1 energy as levels signal energy-rich abundance by Regulation of ATP, indicating allosterically intracellular is by an an which citrate, TCA in the 111), inhibit also of p. cycle Elevated (see levels an intermediate PFK-1. for [Note: of citrate by glucose p. glycogen the favors Inhibition (see synthesis use 126).] AMP, by high cell’s of stores is are which activated that Conversely, allosterically depleted. energy the PFK-1 concentrations signal

2.

of PFK-1 fructose most potent the is Fig. Fructose (see by activator 2,6-bisphosphate Regulation 2,6-bisphosphate: ATP to enzyme levels is the are 8.16) and activate when high. able even is 6phosphate by It from fructose phosphofructokinase-2 formed (PFK-2). a kinase to that fructose PFK-1, 2,6-bisphosphate dephosphorylates that has activity protein that 2,6-bisphosphate fructose fructose bifunctional PFK-2 activity phosphatase the 6-phosphate. the both is produces and Unlike PFK-2 liver phosphorylation phosphatase In domain activates kinase inactivates the isozyme, of the and the (Fig. domain 8.17). The in is isozyme. seen opposite cardiac the is regulated. not covalently PFK-2 Skeletal 121). p. of inhibitor gluconeogenesis an of fructose [Note: 2,6-bisphosphate (see is an enzyme 1,6-bisphosphatase, Fructose insure of of the glycolysis actions active pyruvate same not glucose to from cycle oxidation pyruvate.] futile at that are on gluconeogenesis time, (activation) (inhibition) fructose by pathways glucose 2,6-bisphosphate followed The reciprocal fully preventing both a and resynthesis a.

increase levels occur levels glycolysis and hepatic thus, (such (PFK-2 the is in the cause (see insulin Decreased Fig. 2,6-bisphos-phate in fructose state: elevated of of dephosphorylated) carbohydrate-rich well-fed and, glucagon an following of meal) as rate During a 8.17). intracellular as glucose acts fructose of abundance. signal an Therefore, 2,6-bisphosphate

b.

levels By of occur cause fasting during During 327) p. and is (PFK-2 that 2,6-bisphosphate elevated glucagon hepatic low fasting: in the decrease phosphorylated). fructose of a levels contrast, insulin (see activation in results glycolysis of and inhibition gluconeogenesis. of This

D. 1,6-bisphosphate cleavage Fructose

fructose phosphate Fig. (see 3-phosphate Aldolase (DHAP) to 1,6-bisphosphate glyceraldehyde cleaves and dihydroxyacetone 8.16). not reaction reversible and The is regulated. B, (see hepatic fructose [Note: also fructose Aldolase the in dietary 1-phosphate and p. functions metabolism cleaves isoform, 138).]

phosphate E. Dihydroxyacetone isomerization

3phosphate isomerase interconverts Triose and DHAP glyceraldehyde Fig. (see phosphate 8.16). by glyceraldehyde be DHAP to isomerized for metabolism pathway. further the must glycolytic 3phosphate net the the production of in of from molecules results 1,6bisphosphate. 3-phosphate glyceraldehyde This products isomerization of fructose two cleavage DHAP [Note: utilized is p. in synthesis triacylglycerol (see 188).]

F. 3-phosphate oxidation Glyceraldehyde

3-phosphate (1,3-BPG) of to (Fig. oxidation-reduction reaction by 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate The of is glyceraldehyde conversion first 3-phosphate dehydrogenase glyceraldehyde the glycolysis 8.18). formed continue. of there amount cell, NADH the must be the dehydrogenase glycolysis to a is in the reaction Because for NAD+ by oxidized limited [Note: for oxidizing reduction 74). NADH dehydrogenase are lactate aerobic, (anaerobic, of by (LDH) to ([ETC] and to p. the Two chain pyruvate electron mechanisms 96) NAD+ lactate see p. major see the transport reducing mitochondrial cannot malate-aspartate NADH shuttles substrate the cross to ETC NADH the inner and 3-phosphate equivalents into requires move glycerol the mitochondrial membrane, matrix p. Because (see the 79).] 1.

glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate to coupled to the a attachment group The of oxidation of the is to Pi of 1,3-Bisphosphoglycerate group. synthesis: the group aldehyde carboxyl carboxyl the This carbon 1,3-BPG of 1 p. of glyceraldehyde by conserves the 73), group, bond 3-phosphate. phosphate the by energy linked p. free oxidation a produced 69) product of high-energy (see (see to much of high-energy glycolysis. in This the reaction ATP phosphate synthesis next drives

2.

(PDHC), the to (see p. require which acid toxicity as coenzyme arsenic dehydrogenase enzymes trivalent due as a by complex (arsenite) poisoning: The such lipoic arsenic Arsenic pyruvate 110). of of the is inhibition primarily (arsenate) by net production pathway NADH the and glycolysis ATP itself. can without arsenic inhibiting prevent However, pentavalent for form with does by dehydrogenase, to glyceraldehyde Fig. competing forming (see a substrate 3-phosphate It so as complex hydrolyzes that Pi 3-phosphoglycerate a spontaneously 8.18). phosphate pathway. bypassing is transfer the the 1,3-BPG, glycolytic usually deprived the of of energy By cell obtained synthesis and from from rapidly to of domain 78), hydrolyzed.] synthase formation also ADP-arsenate p. is competes Arsenate with binding that Pi the [Note: ATP of F1 (see in resulting 3. to mutase 1,3-BPG Some by converted action (see is 2,3-Bisphosphoglycerate RBC: of Fig. bisphosphoglycerate the 2,3-BPG of synthesis in the 8.18). is at 2,3-BPG, only amounts in found (see and to 31). p. RBC trace concentration delivery which cells, in high increase serves present O2 is most in hydrolyzed (see intermediate an 3phosphoglycerate, a which is Fig. 2,3-BPG is by glycolysis to also phosphatase in 8.18). of modified by these In reactions. RBC, the inclusion glycolysis shunt is

3-Phosphoglycerate G. ATP production and synthesis

Fig. the 1,3-BPG 3-phosphoglycerate, of When to synthesize to from phosphate (see ATP high-energy used is group converted is ADP 1,3-BPG 8.18). physiologically is reversible. by phosphoglycerate unlike reaction other most kinases, This catalyzed is which, kinase, glucose of two of the molecules each molecules reaction kinase this consumed the from glucose and by earlier two molecule, are formed 1,6-bisphosphate. replaces Because 6-phosphate formation 1,3-BPG fructose ATP for the [Note: production substrate-level and This below example 113 a from rather energy a examples).] an J. for reaction the other the of than p. comes substrate from in needed phosphorylation, which of phosphate high-energy ETC (see is

shift Phosphate group H.

2 phosphate carbon to phosphoglycerate group carbon of The freely by is the from shift reversible. phosphoglycerate of mutase 3

I. dehydration 2-Phosphoglycerate

enolase substrate, phosphate by 2-phosphoglycerate dehydration the Fig. within the redistributes enol contains which forming energy of high-energy phosphoenolpyruvate The a (see (PEP), 8.18). is high-energy despite The reaction the product. of nature reversible, the water (see inhibits lactate and caries decreasing [Note: by p. Fluoride fluoridation mouth production enolase, reduces dental bacteria, 405).]

Pyruvate J. and ATP synthesis production

pyruvate (PK), conversion third reaction catalyzed glycolysis. pyruvate, The kinase of of by is the to irreversible PEP PEP phosphorylation of substrate-level high-energy used and is enol ATP ADP Fig. in example synthesize to from is (see The another phosphate 8.18).

1.

regulation: of activated 1,6-bisphosphate, is the fructose the by reaction. PK PFK-1 Feedforward product has feedback) two of of in activates PK. of the levels which elevated increased more the regulation activities: usual PFK-1 fructose the This (instead feedforward effect linking activity 1,6-bisphosphate, kinase results inhibited by PK ATP.] is [Note: 2.

liver: the by PK inactivation PKA (Fig. of leads Phosphorylation hepatic Covalent in to the of isozyme regulation cAMP-dependent 8.19). the intracellular glucose of increases only. liver cAMP, are levels in phosphorylation low, level of and blood inactivation which the elevated PK the causes When glucagon instead, pathway. in enters gluconeogenesis to Therefore, PEP and, unable glycolysis continue the is gluconeogenesis hepatic the partly glycolysis of explains glucagon. stimulation observed by and This inhibition of of results a phosphatase Dephosphorylation PK by the in enzyme. of reactivation

diphosphate.

3. glycolysis ATP kinase Because dependent for deficiency: they RBC on production. Pyruvate completely mitochondria, mature are lack for ATP the required through pumps to allows needs biconcave to RBC shape metabolic narrow squeeze is the necessary that them the meet of and flexible, of to the ion capillaries. fuel maintenance decreased observed of the reduced leading consequence The glycolytic a phosphorylation. substrate-level rate to in ATP of anemia by deficiencies production enzyme is glycolysis, phagocyte membrane alterations of the phagocytosis changes system, resulting particularly by the splenic The lead RBC in to to cells shape cell in macrophages. mononuclear ultimately, and, severe premature nonspherocytic mild-to-severe requiring death regular in lysis of and hemolytic The anemia, the with transfusions. form result RBC defects glycolytic in of enzymes, majority has a PK. patients genetic deficiency the with rare Among the by RBC isozyme. same PK is the as [Note: Liver encoded gene can liver and synthesize phosphorylation.] PK show they oxidative can because also effect no by ATP However, cells more generate 31). synthesizing the on of both 2,3-BPG depends and deficiency extent Severity increased (generally on RBC of the degree which to 5%–35% p. (see enzyme levels) levels normal by compensate of PK decreased altered all shows kinetics that Almost deficiency have with or mutant individuals stability enzyme (Fig. a 8.20). of most resistance severe forms malaria. the PK Individuals deficiency for heterozygous to have

the of use start different The the of RBC tissue-specific p. expression that gene transcription 473) the the PK of sites in results (see in liver enzyme. from encodes and

to Pyruvate lactate K. reduction

from in LDH, of Lactate, cells final formed is pyruvate anaerobic the (Fig. by glycolysis eukaryotic product 8.21). fate tissues vascularized is and poorly the in (for lactate lens mitochondria. for pyruvate of the lack that in the the major are kidney or that eye RBC Reduction medulla) and to example, cornea

1.

NAD+-linked muscle: capacity and dehydrogenases 113) skeletal glyceraldehyde the of the In exceeds the muscle, production Lactate (by cycle, see the formation oxidative ETC. of in NADH three p. exercising dehydrogenase 3-phosphate by TCA ratio, NADH/NAD+ by lactate results elevated an favoring of LDH. to This pyruvate reduction in pH, lactate in intense muscle, causing exercise, Therefore, in during resulting the a potentially intracellular drop accumulates in cramps. eventually be Much into used this diffuses bloodstream can lactate the glucose (see the to make p. 118). of by liver and

2.

LDH lactate The the on NADH/NAD+. direction pyruvate utilization: intracellular relative ratio concentrations and of on and the of the reaction Lactate depends of and example, muscle. lower exercising heart, is in than this in ratio liver For the (obtained Consequently, blood) the to from oxidize the lactate pyruvate. heart and liver pyruvate by is acetyl the that converted to is CoA in oxidized cycle. or liver, the to converted In glucose either gluconeogenesis TCA exclusively and TCA via Heart cycle. carbon oxidizes water to lactate muscle the dioxide

3.

of individual plasma, termed collapse uncontrolled acidosis), as circulatory of an in lactic myocardial when acidosis (a of or occur type shock. the Lactic the Elevated in metabolic when a such pulmonary there concentrations and hemorrhage, is is infarction, lactate acidosis: system, with embolism, to adequate tissues decreased ATP amounts The oxidative results bring failure impaired O2 in phosphorylation the synthesis. and of to ATP, lactic the anaerobic cells glycolysis as rely end the generating producing product. on survive, for acid To [Note: the reestablish to of meager tissues.] lifesaving be adequate blood flow of period even ATP the during may Production required to amounts inadequate a from O2 is the O2 availability to required has been O2 additional recover The period debt. when termed debt mortality. is morbidity O2 often or patient The related [Note: to clinical their early situations, blood detection patients lactic measuring the rapid, of levels In allows of the O2 acid debt many in monitoring and the of recovery.]

from glycolysis Energy yield L.

by production the product, in of still during substrate-level originally contained the lactate, phosphorylation Despite most glucose. energy the end of contains ATP pyruvate some glycolysis, or that is p. The TCA to release (see energy 109). cycle required completely

1. A ATP two of molecules to of molecule glucose net molecules of of converted (Fig. for lactate each glycolysis: two Anaerobic are generated 8.22). consumption no net There or production is NADH. of

2. glucose). of anaerobic gain (that glycolysis molecule as two ATP ATP a is, in net per The same glycolysis: of Aerobic the of generation is of are of per Two also glucose. produced molecule molecules NADH the the this for oxidation producing chain aerobic p. ATP by entering 77). each molecule the ETC, of NADH (see three most of NADH glycolysis Ongoing requires mitochondrial membrane, [Note: inner cross shuttles NADH required are and the (see cannot p. substrate 79).]

VI. HORMONAL REGULATION

allosteric the glycolytic Regulation occur activation/inhibition enzymes activity irreversible over effects or of of (that by is minutes is, term or short phosphorylation/dephosphorylation covalent the the hours). on number enzyme effects the on on molecules Superimposed hormonal of long-term the preexisting are activity molecules. enzyme of new effects the these over These can synthesis days. 10-to to that increases hormonal hours occur typically effects in in enzyme 20-fold result increase PFK-1, initiates administration PK carbohydrate in and (Fig. or in of of Regular insulin liver amount of glucokinase, consumption rich in an the meals the 8.23). increased an The resulting change in reflects transcription, in enzyme increase gene synthesis. of of these of conversion Increased pyruvate, the absorptive enzymes three glucose to 321). the a availability favors characteristic (see state p. element–binding transcription element–binding effects glucose) and are transcriptional mediated carbohydrate insulin and (specifically the by carbohydrate respectively. protein, protein-1c sterol [Note: of regulatory factors response The genes fatty also transcription of factors These (see regulate in involved synthesis acid p. 184).] high when is and three diabetes). Conversely, plasma enzymes glucagon as example, seen or (for fasting low gene is is in the insulin expression decreased of

VII. PYRUVATE ALTERNATE OF FATES

be lactate. Pyruvate to other products than metabolized can

decarboxylation CoA to A. Oxidative acetyl

with such oxidative a muscle Oxidative in important decarboxylation is PDHC tissues pathway of by capacity high cardiac pyruvate an (Fig. the as 8.24). p. cycle fatty irreversibly glycolysis, for end 109) carbon product the TCA pyruvate, aerobic PDHC (see (see source synthesis of acetyl a and acid 183). CoA, into p. substrate converts the

to oxaloacetate B. Carboxylation

is biotin-dependent Fig. pyruvate reaction oxaloacetate to carboxylase pyruvate Carboxylation of (see by a 8.24). the reaction (see for gluconeogenesis it and is irreversible intermediate replenishes This important substrate p. TCA cycle because 118). provides

C. Reduction (microorganisms) ethanol to

to of reactions The 8.24. by Figure pyruvate reduction two the occurs in ethanol summarized acetaldehyde pyruvate and in certain by humans. but other not of yeast decarboxylase to pyruvate decarboxylation in microorganisms occurs thiamine-requiring The

VIII. SUMMARY CHAPTER

anabolic products precursors with few catabolic (degrade a simple complex either ATP or can products to from end hydrolysis). complex (synthesize pathways ATP be classified molecules simple as production) with Most to pathway a allosteric such of metabolic rate activators inhibitors. intracellular respond signals or can The as regulatory metabolism. of for Intercellular signaling the provides integration is neurotransmitters). signaling hormones this The chemical example, (for route or primary by communication of signal responders. a or binding) messenger chemical intracellular Second transduce molecules to appropriate (hormone neurotransmitter that signals, response cell cyclic such glucagon hormones chemical cyclase and a in (AC) adenosine Adenylyl the to epinephrine. as membrane (cAMP) is monophosphate synthesizes enzyme protein activates receptor, turn, activated its that, regulatory in of AC. cell-surface protein) protein–coupled binding a hormone triphosphate–dependent is to a Following G (G guanosine activation deactivation. of enzymes, produced The kinase causing or protein phosphorylates which activates variety cAMP their A, a Phosphorylation is reversed phosphatases. by of which is an Aerobic end and cells supply in occurs the pyruvate in with adequate oxygen ([O2], product, mitochondria glycolysis,

Fig. 8.25). Anaerobic glycolysis, that cells deprived of in in lack lactic and sufficient cells occurs acid end in O2. the product, is mitochondria which 14 1 glucose (GLUT) isoforms. is across transported by Glucose membranes passively of transporter GLUT-4 adipose is in GLUT-1 and in β insulin in and GLUT-2 (which brain, cells. kidneys, is muscle and the dependent) liver, tissue, pancreatic the and abundant RBC (glycolysis, oxidation to glucose see Fig. of The pyruvate and through an ATP of phase phase which energy-generation the 8.25) synthesized are occurs is at phosphorylation. which substrate-level by energy-investment ATP phosphorylated expense an produced intermediates in in glucokinase cells tissues) hexokinase by is the phosphorylated phase, and most glucose pancreatic β (found cells). in (a energy-investment or in found liver hexokinase In high by for (low low maximal affinity Km) glucose (Vmax) velocity inhibited 6-phosphate. Hexokinase a and glucose is has and a for a has Glucokinase glucose. high a and Km Vmax high regulated 6-phosphate indirectly protein. by and glucokinase via glucose It is (inhibits) regulatory fructose (activates) to by Glucose 1,6-bisphosphate isomerized (PFK-1). 6-phosphate which is is to 6phosphate, phosphorylated phosphofructokinase-1 fructose fructose ATP enzyme and inhibited is and citrate This AMP. allosterically by by activated most whose by glucagon, activator (PFK-2) increased liver PFK-1. by and is bifunctional the potent Fructose is 2,6-bisphosphate, by insulin synthesis of phosphofructokinase-2 the allosteric in decreased are during total this glycolysis. ATP phase two used A of of glycolytic 1,6-bisphosphate pyruvate. are cleaved forming the is trioses to by that form Fructose two further metabolized pathway, ATP glucose this per produced two dinucleotide phase, molecule. During adenine (NADH) and nicotinamide are four step synthesis pyruvate pyruvate phosphoenolpyruvate is (PK). in catalyzed by kinase final The from is isozyme the 1,6-bisphosphate, enzyme via hepatic allosterically and This is by glucagon fructose inhibited the by activated cAMP covalently pathway. PK enzymes. defects inherited the all glycolytic in deficiency for majority accounts of hemolytic anemia. chronic, and nonspherocytic are to as mild-tosevere Effects restricted RBC present is enhanced and Glycolytic gene transcription insulin glucose. by to to pyruvate lactate the In anaerobic NAD+ dehydrogenase. reoxidized NADH is lactate glycolysis, via by of reduction in cells such This such that tissues the and the as chain. of exceeds oxidative in production capacity as muscle, respiratory exercising mitochondria RBC NADH occurs where lack of system occur in circulatory Elevated lactate the acidosis) shock. (lactic concentrations or with of collapse plasma pyruvate cycle to to oxidatively by (a carboxylated TCA pyruvate by reduced to decarboxylated also microbial carboxylase, acetyl 3) by be can or Pyruvate 1) pyruvate ethanol oxaloacetate 2) CoA intermediate) decarboxylase. dehydrogenase,

Choose best ONE the answer.

.1. Which and hour consumed meal phosphorylation listed an following individual a enzymes the the in of the level best hepatic who of about describes carbohydrate-rich state activity an ago? = P = PFK-1 phosphofructokinase1; phosphofructokinase-2; = phosphorylated. PFK-2

levels answer Correct C. a blood glucose increase. meal, uptake and glucose Immediately of following = hepatic 6-phosphate glucose used phosphorylated and in glycolysis. glucose to The is blood ratio in response the to insulin/glucagon In glucose, increases. rise the domain As a result, and dephosphorylated of active. is the kinase PFK-2 2,6-bisphosphate, activates Its allosterically product, PFK-1. fructose is not regulated.) covalently (PFK-1 pyruvate a kinase. activator of 1,6-bisphosphate that feedforward PFK-1 Active produces is fructose regulated, favors dephosphorylation rise pyruvate in and and Hepatic kinase is insulin activation. covalently the

.2. following true for pathways anabolic Which only? statements the of is

A. Their regulated. irreversible (nonequilibrium) are reactions

B. They they cycles called regenerate an are intermediate. if

generate few and C. a They are simple products. convergent

D. require and They energy. are synthetic

require typically They coenzymes. E. oxidized

processes (endergonic). answer Correct synthetic D. requiring = energy and Anabolic are both to and whereas only apply C A and catabolic to catabolic and processes. anabolic B apply Statements processes, E

.3. Compared muscle state, contracting skeletal the resting vigorously shows: with

decreased AMP/ATP ratio. A.

2,6-bisphosphate. fructose decreased of levels B.

C. ratio. decreased NADH/NAD+

availability. D. oxygen increased

to increased pyruvate of lactate. reduction E.

muscle lactate shows answer increase compared reduction to = Correct muscle. pyruvate resting the of an in E. skeletal with Vigorously contracting (NADH) reduced increase of the the electron exceed dinucleotide levels The oxidative capacity nicotinamide and of chain. adenine transport adenosine (AMP) of increase. Consequently, levels the monophosphate regulatory skeletal of concentration The factor 2,6-bisphosphate fructose muscle. a not is in key

.4. Glucose by: uptake

(active) cells energy-requiring transport. A. brain is through

B. intestinal cells insulin. requires mucosal

through C. diffusion cells involving facilitated liver a glucose is transporter.

is up diffusion through D. concentration simple most cells gradient. a

in brain, Correct concentration is is glucose the a adipose tissue-specific facilitated the and gradient, answer C. liver, down and tissue (GLUT). by diffusion muscle, Glucose uptake = transporters adipose for muscle In glucose tissues, uptake. required insulin is and against cells. glucose is gradient (SGLT1) mucosal energy requires concentration a and intestinal cotransporter the Moving sodium-dependent 1 with of glucose seen

.5. concentration mM, 0.1 mM, glucose at blood 5 mM? that Vmax for which 10 approach is more glucose isozyme the glucokinase hexokinase normal that of the Km closely Given of will of whereas is

Hexokinase. Correct = answer (Michaelis is Vmax velocity). concentration (maximal substrate Km half that that one constant) gives mM) blood glucose 5 (Km but will (Km = mM, concentration be saturated, When 10 glucokinase will hexokinase mM) not. 0.1 = is

.6. In inhibited. is patients whooping with cough, Gαi a lead does cyclic to this rise (cAMP)? adenosine monophosphate How in

proteins bound (AC) type their inhibit cyclase the associated by adenylyl Gαi is protein–coupled of receptor G G ligand. when of activated. cAMP is Gαi inappropriately AC pertussis is production If by inhibited toxin,

For additional thePoint. chapter, visit related materials to please this ancillary

I. OVERVIEW CYCLE

tricarboxylic metabolism. also acid cycle several in citric acid or the ([TCA roles Krebs called The cycle] cycle, the plays cycle) of dioxide being amino shown final and (CO2), converge, is carbon acids carbon where skeletons cycle. converted catabolism acids, the the It to carbohydrates, as fatty their oxidative in pathway acceptor. (O2) aerobic TCA is the final an required cycle pathway, electron The is because oxygen as intermediates (from the “filling catabolism of such some reactions. the as and amino Reactions Greek for acids cycle up”) generate the of anaplerotic called are p. skeletons such intermediates as The the important of amino p. also and acids 278). (see some 267) carbon anabolic some formation for reactions, acids provides the of heme a from cycle glucose TCA of and amino (see synthesis number be this a required. as with an system compounds Therefore, one viewed closed not entering instead, as should open as leaving and but, cycle

II. CYCLE REACTIONS

the is completed acetyl condensed group is (see In TCA (CoA) an is (OAA) first A with oxaloacetate acetyl cycle the coenzyme cycle, from as Fig. and regenerated then 9.1). the leave CO2. and Two acetyl as CoA cycle carbons two enter as

not CoA consumption the or one intermediates. to Therefore, of one into acetyl round net of lead production TCA the cycle of entry does the

CoA production A. Acetyl

PDHC). major cycle CoA complex The complex, the by is of the pyruvate acetyl TCA the of or (PDH dehydrogenase multienzyme oxidative for pyruvate decarboxylation source TCA below) not is (described the cycle. the PDHC a of However, component from by glycolysis, of mitochondrial inner end is transported carrier of aerobic mitochondrial the pyruvate Pyruvate, the the the product the membrane. into mitochondrial matrix cytosol the PDHC pyruvate matrix, the converts acetyl In CoA. to another oxidation p. acid source acetyl (see Fatty CoA of [Note: is 192).] 1. PDHC three sometimes of of protein a (E3). pyruvate ([E1] The called transacetylase pyruvate multiple component (E2), copies dehydrogenase), dihydrolipoyl PDHC dihydrolipoyl aggregate and enzymes: enzymes, is decarboxylase dehydrogenase (Fig. Each part overall the reaction of a catalyzes 9.2). Their intermediates. the the physical in reactions proper sequence links release association without of (PDH to the dehydrogenase two in PDHC CoA, the addition pyruvate regulatory kinase pyruvate conversion phosphatase). enzymes participating also phosphatase of and the dehydrogenase acetyl pyruvate to kinase) In contains enzymes, (PDH

pyrophosphate; dinucleotides; lipoic and = acid; NAD(H) flavin = and nicotinamide FAD(H2) L bond. = adenine high-energy = dioxide; thiamine TPP CoA coenzyme ~ = A;

2. five oxidants as Coenzymes: The of for coenzymes intermediates shown the contains or carriers that PDHC reactions 9.2. the in Figure act acid (TPP), and pyrophosphate E1 and lipoic CoA, NAD+. and requires E2 FAD requires E3 requires thiamine bound acid, as lipoic coenzymes–prosthetic and the function to tightly p. (see FAD are groups TPP, enzymes and [Note: 54).]

can problems. nervous or of niacin central thiamine serious system cause Deficiencies This (via because cycle) to sufficient the are inactive. TCA unable ATP produce the if PDHC is brain cells is 383). be encephalopathy-psychosis abuse an p. deficiency, (see thiamine with to Wernicke-Korsakoff, due may seen alcohol syndrome

3. E1. the Regulation: alternately two and by PDHC activate of modifications inactivate the enzymes Covalent regulatory and (Fig. inactivates phosphorylates kinase whereas and phosphatase dephosphorylates E1, E1 activates PDH PDH 9.3). CoA, and ATP, kinase allosterically itself is acetyl activated NADH. by The these is PDHC turned of the products, off. in the Therefore, high-energy presence that (adenosine [Note: affects actually ATP/ADP CoA/CoA in the diphosphate), It activity.] the enzymic acetyl rise or ratios NADH/NAD+, is inhibitor of potent Pyruvate a PDH is kinase. maximally elevated, will E1 pyruvate concentrations if active. Therefore, are be (Ca2+) activator Calcium of activity. strong a phosphatase, E1 is stimulating PDH where skeletal thus, is release and, contraction energy in during Ca2+ This stimulates production. muscle, important the PDHC particularly product by inhibition.] primary, is covalent regulation also acetyl and to phosphatase (NADH and subject Although [Note: CoA) the the PDHC is kinase 4. tetrameric most E1 is A of of of the congenital subunits lactic common PDHC, Deficiency: the very α of deficiency although the component rare, cause the biochemical acidosis. a 103). deficiency convert lactate acetyl lactate decreased to via be shunted causing in The p. (see CoA, pyruvate dehydrogenase to pyruvate to to results ability its the acidosis. brain, creates for problems particular This TCA most sensitive for and cycle of on particularly the is which to energy relies form, spasticity, in are neonatal-onset and, Symptoms include the muscle death. and neurodegeneration, early variable linked, females The as is because males and α for gene classified the X X-linked both may and subunit dominant. is deficiency be affected, the thiamine and patients. proven is reduce carbohydrate may deficiency, of select no there PDHC in dietary symptoms with for Although restriction supplementation treatment

the encode progressive, genes rare, syndrome necrotizing Leigh primarily of a ATP proteins of in (subacute that is defects as caused result the ETC, neurodegenerative in PDHC, disorder production, mitochondrial by a ATP mutations or encephalomyelopathy) synthase. Both nuclear DNA affected. mitochondrial can be and

5. thereby step, decreasing ATP As p. 101), production. interfere poisoning: Arsenic glycolysis pentavalent described 3phosphate glyceraldehyde can at the arsenic with (see previously (arsenate) enzyme (see PDH, due poisoning require to α-ketoglutarate complexes a acid and p. is of coenzyme, below), dehydrogenase lipoic as dehydrogenase primarily However, inhibition branched-chain (see including 266). α-keto arsenic that E. acid serve lipoic the a (the unavailable with forms that groups Arsenite trivalent making as to of (−SH) coenzyme. of compound stable thiol complex a form acid, arsenic) PDHC, lactate) in acid binds to (and, the it When pyruvate consequently, lipoic accumulates. neurologic death. disturbances As this with causing PDHC brain, deficiency, particularly and affects the

synthesis B. Citrate

citrate and cycle The irreversible enzyme initiating acetyl tricarboxylic synthase, is form by catalyzed CoA of to the citrate the OAA condensation (Fig. TCA of acid) (a 9.4). ([∆G0] aldol has This p. free which favors formation. condensation citrate in highly a see 70), standard change energy strongly negative inhibited citrate The inhibition). (product is by enzyme Substrate synthase. means availability regulation of citrate another for is enzyme’s for of binding increases greatly The OAA CoA. acetyl the affinity 183) a being cholesterol in Citrate, of intermediate fatty (see addition to acids TCA source acetyl is p. p. for cytosolic an the 220). CoA (see in cycle, [Note: the synthesis and of rate-limiting carboxylase fatty activates CoA inhibits glycolysis rate-limiting of (the also the see phosphofructokinase-1 p. (PFK-1), 99), (see and p. acetyl acid enzyme of synthesis, enzyme Citrate 183).]

Citrate C. isomerization

group (aconitate to iron-sulfur through isocitrate hydratase), isomerized aconitase Citrate Fig. (see catalyzed migration an protein hydroxyl by is 9.4). as fluoroacetate, a that toxin Aconitase is plant by inhibited [Note: pesticide. used a is condenses fluorocitrate, to fluoroacetyl with of form Fluoroacetate aconitase.] inhibitor converted potent OAA CoA a to is that

decarboxylation isocitrate of D. Oxidative

irreversible three of α-ketoglutarate, first NADH isocitrate the Isocitrate the the produced catalyzes molecules dehydrogenase oxidative decarboxylation cycle of the by yielding CO2 first (see and release of to

Fig. 9.4). the rate-limiting the is steps of This one of cycle. TCA and signal) by of low-energy abundant (a NADH, by the inhibited are which Ca2+ and cell ATP energy allosterically The activated elevated enzyme is has is stores. and ADP levels when

α-ketoglutarate Oxidative E. of decarboxylation

to catalyzed The conversion enzymes three of (Fig. dehydrogenase complex, by is aggregate succinyl of the irreversible CoA protein copies of α-ketoglutarate a α-ketoglutarate multiple 9.5). pyruvate oxidative very is of the The this that conversion mechanism similar of for by CoA to PDHC. the to decarboxylation acetyl used second the produces second and The the of releases NADH CO2 reaction cycle. the FAD, NAD+, TPP, are required acid, and coenzymes lipoic CoA. The Each that catalytic functions mechanism the the part PDHC as analogous described in to of for way 110). p. a (see CoA. acetyl the The reaction similar a negative formation of ∆G0 of CoA, large high-energy succinyl favors to thioester complex by The activated inhibited its NADH CoA, by . and and Ca2+ dehydrogenase is αketoglutarate succinyl products, reactions phosphorylation/dephosphorylation it is the described by regulated not as PDHC. However, for oxidative the acid 252) p. α-Ketoglutarate amino and the is [Note: of also (see (see transamination produced deamination p. by glutamate 250).]

A cleavage coenzyme F. Succinyl

of reverse Fig. bond Succinate CoA cleaves succinyl synthetase, high-energy called thioester reaction) (see the succinyl thiokinase the for named (also CoA 9.5). (GDP) guanosine reaction (GTP). This phosphorylation coupled triphosphate to of to diphosphate guanosine is GTP and by the diphosphate ATP energetically nucleoside reaction: interconvertible are kinase

102). of substrate-level (see of phosphorylation is another by p. example thiokinase The succinate GTP generation 193) metabolism produced from p. amino [Note: from number CoA acids an from is acids pp. of the of metabolism carbon of with Succinyl CoA atoms and also several derived fatty odd (see propionyl the (see 265–266). for It p. gluconeogenesis (see to used synthesis or p. heme pyruvate be (see in 118) converted can 278).]

oxidation Succinate G.

its FAD reduced dehydrogenase, Succinate coenzyme to is fumarate FADH2 (see by is Fig. to as oxidized succinate 9.5). TCA cycle Succinate enzyme in is of inner the membrane. the mitochondrial the that dehydrogenase is embedded only of p. the As II as Complex ETC functions 75). (see it such, reducing the NAD+.] reduce than of rather power succinate NAD+, FAD, electron [Note: sufficient acceptor is to is not because the

Fumarate H. hydration

Fig. freely is malate in hydratase, hydrated to a reversible by see Fumarate reaction (fumarate fumarase catalyzed 9.5). is p. (see synthesis urea Fig. in Fumarate also 255), (see purine the produced [Note: by cycle on 22.7 of the p. p. and phenylalanine during 294), tyrosine (see amino and acids catabolism 263).]

oxidation Malate I.

oxidized Malate to OAA is by malate (Fig. dehydrogenase 9.6). third the This reaction the final NADH produces cycle. of and positive, exergonic the the highly reaction. synthase ∆G0 by The reaction of of but OAA is the reaction in direction the citrate driven is acid OAA the is p. acid aspartic (see the amino produced [Note: also transamination by of 250).]

III. ENERGY THE PRODUCED CYCLE BY

pair Four electrons cycle: reducing and the NAD+ TCA pairs FAD during reducing one to to FADH2. NADH of three are one turn pairs transferred three of three of leads formation whereas one ATP oxidation of the (see FADH2 to ATP, p. produces two ETC Oxidation by of NADH 77). ATP shown the acetyl is Figure The one from 9.7. in of oxidation of total CoA yield TCA the summarizes reactions the Figure of cycle. 9.8 involve The does not the intermediates. of production net consumption or [Note: cycle CO2 are entering CoA exiting.] balanced as two acetyl Two by carbons di-and = GTP = dinucleotides; guanosine phosphate. triphosphates; GDP and Pi inorganic

IV. CYCLE REGULATION

In several controlled (see the regulated to of cycle contrast regulation is PFK-1, by the which Fig. primarily glycolysis, enzymes by TCA is 9.8). ∆G0: citrate enzymes most dehydrogenase, that αketoglutarate highly regulated those with dehydrogenase catalyze complex. isocitrate and are negative the reactions The important of synthase, these decrease oxidative a TCA response phosphorylation needed the processes by for generated the in Reducing are cycle, both and are to ATP/ADP PDHC in ratio. the equivalents upregulated and

V. SUMMARY CHAPTER

cycle for tricarboxylic (TCA) decarboxylated is which producing (Fig. oxidatively the A major (CoA), the pyruvate the fuel dehydrogenase is coenzyme acetyl Pyruvate (PDHC), by acid complex 9.9). CoA. requires dinucleotide nicotinamide adenine thiamine (NAD+), flavin lipoic acid, pyrophosphate, multienzyme coenzymes: five (FAD), and dinucleotide The PDHC adenine PDH Phosphorylation The and inhibits by modification kinase PDHC of regulated by decarboxylase) phosphatase: (pyruvate E1 PDH is covalent E1. by is inhibited and allosterically NADH pyruvate. ATP, and activated kinase CoA, PDH by acetyl The phosphatase (Ca2+). is activated calcium by cause biochemical congenital lactic is of acidosis. deficiency E1 most the common affected dominant is particularly this disorder. brain The in X-linked lipoic of Arsenic by poisoning to acid. inactivation causes PDHC the binding by by which CoA synthase, (OAA) inhibited acetyl is cycle, the oxaloacetate product. citrate and TCA is citrate In synthesized from is isomerized to Citrate hydratase). (aconitate by isocitrate aconitase α-ketoglutarate, by dioxide producing NADH. isocitrate Isocitrate decarboxylated dehydrogenase is carbon and (CO2) oxidatively to inhibited and and (ADP) activated . is The by ATP adenosine enzyme diphosphate Ca2+ NADH by and CO2 CoA succinyl α-ketoglutarate is oxidatively and by decarboxylated producing the NADH. complex, dehydrogenase α-Ketoglutarate to uses very the The coenzymes. PDHC similar the and is enzyme same to activated CoA inhibited is regulated. and NADH dehydrogenase covalently by The succinyl but α-ketoglutarate Ca2+ not and is by complex (GTP). (also succinate Succinyl triphosphate cleaved CoA by synthetase), CoA producing called succinate succinyl guanosine and is thiokinase of example phosphorylation. This substrate-level an is by fumarate Succinate dehydrogenase, FADH2. oxidized succinate producing is to (fumarate Fumarate is is NADH. to producing malate malate malate to oxidized and hydrated hydratase), by fumarase by OAA dehydrogenase, one produced one are of FADH2 and by TCA cycle. NADH round Three the an PDHC also pyruvate the acetyl the NADH. oxidation The of via produces of CoA generation by Oxidation yields ETC by of 14 NADH and ATP. FADH2 the the in yielding be ADP by of the nucleoside by cycle can transferred another kinase, produced phosphorylation terminal phosphate the substrate-level GTP TCA The diphosphate to ATP. the pyruvate are 15 Therefore, total mitochondrial of a ATP of from oxidation produced complete to CO2.

adenine ADP NAD(H) adenine dinucleotide; guanosine nicotinamide triphosphates; Pi diphosphate; GTP di-and = = phosphate. flavin GDP FAD(H2) = = dinucleotide; inorganic = adenosine and

answer. Choose best the ONE

.1. to pyruvate dioxide: conversion The coenzyme and carbon A acetyl of

of involves A. the participation acid. lipoic

is the the B. in phosphorylated decarboxylase ATP. complex of by when pyruvate is PDH presence activated (PDHC) pyruvate dehydrogenase of kinase

C. reversible. is

D. the occurs in cytosol.

coenzyme biotin. E. requires the

reaction. the of answer group the acetyl in Lipoic acid is A. = intermediate formed Correct acceptor an acid and a lysine Lipoic functions with residue “swinging [Note: that E3.] in E2 allows to linked interaction a E1 arm” as inhibited reaction irreversible an catalyzes The is the component phosphorylated. (E1) is when PDHC that decarboxylase mitochondrial matrix. The PDHC is the located in utilized not Biotin is by carboxylases, decarboxylases.

.2. one coenzyme of cycle? oxidation citric Which of A the the acetyl following acid conditions the by decreases

A. of A availability calcium high

B. CoA/CoA A ratio high acetyl

ratio ATP/ADP C. low A

low D. NAD+/NADH A ratio

(oxidized NAD+-requiring low reduced Correct ratio to D. nicotinamide rates the dehydrogenases. NAD+/NADH = adenine answer A the dinucleotide) limits of coenzyme High substrate calcium (acetyl of availability and

tri-to ATP/ADP A) the cycle. stimulate diphosphate) (adenosine ratio and low a

.3. citric The is acid following the the of cycle. three in steps sum A C FADH2 + H2O FAD + + + + NADH B →

lettered missing “C” the answer that in corresponds “B,” the “A,” Choose equation. and the to

+ H2O → oxaloacetate = Correct + + FAD Succinate + FADH2. answer B. + NADH NAD+

.4. 1-month-old male and neurologic acidosis. lactic A problems shows skin of of activity pyrophosphate extracts low of the assay TPP. but Enzyme dehydrogenase normal activity of activity on with thousand-fold normal for fibroblasts thiamine cultured a a showed contained 80% complex (PDHC) concentration pyruvate of when (TPP) assay higher 5% concentration following correct? is statements concerning patient this Which the one of

A. his and reduce improve expected lactate Administration is level to his serum thiamine of clinical symptoms.

B. for patient. be be this diet A high-carbohydrate beneficial to expected would

from is to increased. expected glycolysis be production C. Citrate aerobic

expected to the PDH a active. kinase, is D. regulatory PDHC, enzyme of be

= Correct answer A. PDHC thiamine-responsive patient to The appears have a deficiency. fails concentration to coenzyme. decarboxylase bind at PDHC low pyrophosphate activity (E1) the of The shows of pyruvate but concentration at thiamine the component high a significant coenzyme, but the in which some, present Km This of mutation, the deficiency. enzyme cases all, affects for of (Michaelis the PDHC not constant) is the is of carbohydrates part carbohydrate enzyme to metabolism, expected the low PDHC blunt the Because deficiency. of diet would in an a be integral effects substrate Aerobic pyruvate, the PDHC. generates the of glycolysis activity substrate a complex production of citrate synthase. the of for coenzyme acetyl decreases A, Decreased inhibited pyruvate, kinase Because allosterically it inactive. is is PDH by

.5. glycolysis and the both used by Which cycle? acid tricarboxylic in is coenzyme–cosubstrate dehydrogenases

used by glyceraldehyde acid and dehydrogenase, and nicotinamide cycle. dehydrogenase malate α-ketoglutarate of isocitrate tricarboxylic the dehydrogenase, dehydrogenase dinucleotide by adenine is glycolysis 3-phosphate Oxidized (NAD+) of oxidized E3 requires and pyruvate (FAD) the NAD+.] dehydrogenase adenine flavin dinucleotide complex [Note: of

thePoint. to additional this visit please ancillary chapter, materials related For

I. OVERVIEW

a tissues, medulla, and and kidney the eye, of blood red brain, continuous as exercising as (RBC), metabolic testes, Some glucose muscle, cornea of supply fuel. require lens the a cells such for meet needs the of (see in of an <24 glucose, postprandial source absence essential carbohydrate 125). these Liver p. of dietary can hours intake glycogen, is depleted, are and a stores prolonged During glycogen precursors. glucose from fast, however, made hepatic noncarbohydrate in because of standard glucose by pyruvate simple glycolysis is of is, [∆G0] not reversal equilibrium occur formation formation a the strongly (that The negative). the overall does of favors energy glycolysis, change free is pathway, which novo enzymes. synthesized mitochondrial special a requires Instead, and glucose gluconeogenesis, cytosolic both by de of hypoglycemia.] cause [Note: gluconeogenic Deficiencies enzymes fast, gluconeogenesis an kidneys. During remaining with the ~90% in the liver, in of occurs ~10% overnight the occurring However, of contributing glucose organs, during ~40% kidneys the the prolonged production. total glucose-producing fasting, major become glucose.] [Note: also can intestine make small The Figure gluconeogenesis the of of other to relationship energy pathways metabolism. shows essential 10.1

dioxide. carbon

II. SUBSTRATES

that be to used Gluconeogenic synthesis of can precursors produce a glucose. net are molecules from important α-keto obtained glucogenic and lactate, acids acids. The the precursors are most of metabolism gluconeogenic amino glycerol, but two [Note: (leucine All p. amino lysine) are glucogenic acids (see and 262).]

A. Glycerol

of the during to and in the p. hydrolysis (TAG) delivered tissue by the triacylglycerols liver. is released Glycerol (see blood adipose 190) is 3-phosphate, is kinase glycerol Glycerol by glycerol phosphorylated to

Lactate B.

by anaerobic by cells is Lactate into that blood skeletal glycolysis from released as such muscle RBC. exercising and mitochondria lack the is and which that to the liver taken back circulation pyruvate is is converted Cori the into (Fig. up this glucose, released to the lactate oxidized cycle, In by 10.2).

acids Amino C.

by major of the produced during hydrolysis Amino glucose of acids sources are a proteins tissue fast. form or generates converted can such oxaloacetate that direct metabolism (TCA) tricarboxylic Their enter and precursor (OAA), that to α-keto of a acids, cycle phosphoenolpyruvate is pyruvate glucose, as α-ketoglutarate the acid (PEP). lysine, and give glucose. [Note: leucine) compounds a (for acetyl rise (CoA) and coenzyme only Acetyl A cannot synthesis that net CoA example, to of to give acetoacetate, rise the (PDHC), p. This pyruvate (see of the dehydrogenase irreversible of is because nature which acetyl converts CoA pyruvate complex 109). to instead bodies p. These rise give ketone (see compounds to

195) and are termed ketogenic.]

III. REACTIONS

the synthesis pyruvate. in reactions reversible glycolytic lactate from of used or Seven are and are glucose energetically irreversible the and are favor three glucose. reactions must of However, be four glycolytic that reactions synthesis alternate by circumvented together gluconeogenesis, are to described below. unique reactions, These which are irreversible

A. Pyruvate carboxylation

(PK). to overcome roadblock conversion in is of first PEP the synthesis in glucose to pyruvate irreversible of The glycolysis from the by pyruvate kinase pyruvate to (Fig. carboxylase by pyruvate is PEPcarboxykinase converted pyruvate gluconeogenesis, is to which PEP (PC) (PEPCK) carboxylated by In OAA, 10.3).

= GDP diphosphate. mitochondrial and tri-and diphosphates; ADP of guanosine cytosolic adenosine malate = GTP isozymes and dehydrogenase;

1. group Fig. 385) the PC the enzyme bound (see (see residue of ε-amino biotin in lysine coenzyme to covalently the requires Biotin: a p. 10.3). carboxylates pyruvate an drives intermediate, to of hydrolysis enzyme–biotin–carbon which OAA. ATP formation (CO2) form dioxide then HCO3− provides the CO2.] [Note: cycle and liver cells PC for that has and of the kidney allow important in to PEP, mitochondria the purposes: intermediates that production substrate become may The reaction occurs of depleted. to provide replenish OAA an two gluconeogenesis, can and TCA only the contain replenishment do PC synthesize use and cells OAA also glucose. the product for Muscle not purpose (anaplerotic) but mitochondria.] moves [Note: Pyruvate protein into from carrier the pyruvate cytosol

is biotin. of PC require that carboxylases one several propionyl carboxylase CoA 183), carboxylase (p. CoA include methylcrotonyl (p. 194), (p. acetyl Others carboxylase 266). CoA and

2. regulation: acetyl allosterically activated CoA. Allosteric PC is by required. OAA which state in acetyl signal a is of metabolic levels mitochondria increased Elevated CoA of synthesis in the occurs used when gluconeogenesis OAA kidneys. liver in and this for example, during For is fasting, is oxidized inactive, TCA Conversely, PC at CoA can the levels that pyruvate low largely by oxidized of further 109). p. be PDHC is CoA, cycle acetyl the and acetyl (see to primarily by

transport Oxaloacetate the cytosol to B.

to continue, to gluconeogenesis converted must be For OAA PEP by PEPCK. requires of in out OAA of PEP production cytosol transport the mitochondria. is malate no inner first and transporter (MD). malate OAA mitochondrial dehydrogenase membrane, to reduced there OAA However, the in by mitochondrial is reoxidized as (NAD+) OAA the NADH nicotinamide to adenine is transported into cytosol (see by cytosolic and Malate is MD dinucleotide reduced Fig. to 10.3). 101), reaction is the to in reduction The by 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate of (see dehydrogenase and used glyceraldehyde glyceraldehyde common NADH glycolysis to p. 3phosphate a 3-phosphate gluconeogenesis. pyruvate NAD+ is When is lactate oxidized reduced. [Note: as to abundant, OAA, the be into PEP to and mitochondria isozyme is which converted transported PC of by to The mitochondrial PEPCK. by carboxylated pyruvate can cytosol. is transported PEP to the aspartate converted that to is also can OAA into be the cytosol.] transported

decarboxylation Cytosolic oxaloacetate C.

is OAA and cytosol in to PEPCK. the by PEP decarboxylated phosphorylated ([GTP] hydrolysis driven Fig. by triphosphate see is of The reaction guanosine 10.3). pyruvate PEP. favorable to energetically an pathway provide actions and from of PC PEPCK The combined glycolysis reverse until by reactions the the becomes fructose of it then PEP in 1,6-bisphosphate. direction acted is on running

energetically with decarboxylation would otherwise The unfavorable. be of drives reactions pairing carboxylation that in strategy used acid fatty (FA) 184). also This p. synthesis is (see

D. 1,6-bisphosphate Fructose dephosphorylation

kidneys, fructose 6-phosphate pathway (Fig. an fructose favorable in found fructose and 1,6-bisphosphatase, provides irreversible the the of bypasses reaction by and for Hydrolysis of the 1,6-bisphosphate glycolysis phosphofructokinase-1 of (PFK-1) formation liver energetically 10.4). important an site is of gluconeogenesis. This reaction regulatory

1.

energy inhibited in cell. Regulation intracellular ratio, in levels: monophosphate which rise a a the by Fructose signals state adenosine is by low-energy (AMP)/ATP 1,6-bisphosphatase the ATP stimulate pathway. and an low gluconeogenesis, levels energy-requiring AMP high Conversely,

2.

2,6-bisphosphate, Regulation by inhibited effector by concentration the insulin/glucagon by 2,6-bisphosphate: ratio. Fructose whose allosteric fructose influenced is an fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase is by When effector not and is PFK-2 phosphatase p. hepatic made high, is the (Fig. 99), is (see glucagon active thus, the 10.5). fructose 2,6-bisphosphate) oxidize glycolysis, effect glucose reciprocal opposite energy, that control gluconeogenesis high (high activate fructose of and energy, 2,6-bisphosphate) signals pathways on (see synthesize p. low or have (low [Note: inhibit that providing the The the 100).]

6-phosphate E. dephosphorylation Glucose

the 6-phosphate the for free 6-phosphatase of hydrolysis favorable and reaction hexokinase/glucokinase energetically glucose pathway formation by an glucose Glucose irreversible bypasses provides (Fig. 10.6). primary The 6-phosphate. free is organ the liver glucose from that glucose produces transports complex the phosphate, requires a (see This 6-phosphatase, translocase, membrane, process of only found proteins and Fig. endoplasmic the (ER) glucose glucose which which in glucose across free producing two removes 6-phosphate 6-phosphate gluconeogenic tissue: glucose reticular 10.6). required [Note: final also p. glycogen 130). degradation proteins the ER These of for (see are membrane step severe by translocase, fasting produced the storage glycogenolysis.] phosphatase is by are characterized Glycogen or glucose the deficiencies Ia gluconeogenesis respectively, and to hypoglycemia, either diseases unable because from in free caused Ib, be and responsible cytosol free transporters are blood. glucose and for moving the Specific into into then the

F. the reactions of of gluconeogenesis and Summary glycolysis

(Fig. to the are free convert Of required by 11 reactions glycolytic enzymes 7 pyruvate reversible glucose, catalyzed to 10.7). hexokinase/glucokinase, by by circumvented PC, PFK-1, are 6-phosphatase, reactions and reactions by PEPCK. 1,6-bisphosphatase, irreversible (catalyzed 3 catalyzed glucose and The PK) fructose PEP, gluconeogenic 6-phosphate, and essentially reversible glucose synthesis glucose the toward equilibria as In gluconeogenesis, reactions of pushed the fructose are the by a of enzymes. glycolytic the formation of result irreversible cleavage [Note: (see high-energy stoichiometry NADH from molecules of one glucose of oxidation two two bonds the and Fig. of of pyruvate with the molecule couples the formation The phosphate gluconeogenesis six 10.7).]

IV. REGULATION

by is regulation determined substrates. the circulating The gluconeogenic the glucagon by primarily of level of availability and moment-to-moment gluconeogenesis of In or or synthesis an addition, both. in rate changes adaptive alteration amount of slow the from result enzyme degradation enzyme in glucoregulatory [Note: of the system in control Chapter is presented 23.] Hormonal

(see pancreatic cells mechanisms. peptide 313) by α This islet gluconeogenesis p. from hormone three stimulates

1.

fructose 2,6bisphosphate, 1,6-bisphosphatase favoring hepatic allosteric PFK-1 and Changes Fig. fructose glycolysis Glucagon in gluconeogenesis lowers (see resulting in thereby activation over inhibition, effectors: 10.5). [Note: See pp. for role 99–100 the regulation.] of 2,6bisphosphate glycolysis in fructose 2.

an A (phosphorylated) binds enzyme (see conversion in of Glucagon inactive Covalent modification (cAMP) AMP form. activity: PK G the via hepatic cyclic 95) and protein– its activity, protein to its p. stimulates coupled elevation of and, receptor level cAMP-dependent kinase which to pyruvate, effect PEP conversion of to decreases (Fig. the PEP diverting This has gluconeogenesis 10.8).

the enzyme. isozyme hepatic subject [Note: is the regulation.] Only to covalent

AMP.

3. Induction PEPCK levels via the response of during for of this factor (CREB) gene as of synthesis: enzyme increases the enzyme fasting. element– protein, of substrate availability transcription its the Glucagon rise thereby binding cAMP increasing transcription glucocorticoid) of also expression.] [Note: the gene, increases insulin (a expression decreases whereas Cortisol

availability B. Substrate

amino precursors, gluconeogenic of the particularly rate acids, significantly availability synthesis. glucogenic influences of glucose The the muscle levels acids protein for from Decreased skeletons provide amino mobilization favor carbon insulin gluconeogenesis. to of coenzymes primarily ATP oxidation. FA are provided and NADH The required gluconeogenesis for by

activation CoA Allosteric by C. acetyl

fasting. occurs CoA activation acetyl by hepatic during PC Allosteric of hydrolysis with adipose liver in (see the of 330). is flooded result FA tissue, p. increased As a TAG the by CO2 and capacity rate formation liver it the β-oxidation of CoA these to of oxidize acetyl of to of The water. exceeds FA

acetyl PC. accumulates CoA As activates and a result, CoA p. [Note: the (by Acetyl kinase; see inhibits PDHC 111). activating PDH this Thus, pyruvate from gluconeogenesis compound away toward TCA single divert cycle the (Fig. can and 10.9).]

Allosteric by inhibition D. AMP

is PFK-1. that Fructose inhibited 1,6-bisphosphatase by activates AMP, a compound (see 121). seen and This gluconeogenesis glycolysis reciprocal in fructose previously regulation of 2,6-bisphosphate results p. with stimulates Thus, energy-producing and elevated inhibits [Note: ones.] AMP energy-requiring pathways

CHAPTER V. SUMMARY

tissue, glycerol example, αketoglutarate (for lack and amino mitochondria and adipose acids derived triacylglycerol include by released that skeletal Gluconeogenic acid by α-keto during glucogenic exercising released cells metabolism precursors (Fig. hydrolysis lactate pyruvate) from in and muscle, 10.10). gluconeogenesis are and are the of of reactions for used kidneys. the glycolysis liver and Seven in reversible catalyzed Three kinase, and by physiologically are reactions, pyruvate circumvented. and glucokinase/hexokinase, must be phosphofructokinase-1, irreversible and ). oxaloacetate by (PEPCK pyruvate phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase (PC) converted to PEPcarboxykinase (PEP) then is Pyruvate and to requires acetyl ATP coenzyme and A. and guanosine triphosphate. PC PEPCK biotin by is requires allosterically activated cortisol of and decreased by by increased its insulin. Transcription is gene and glucagon is Fructose fructose by to converted fructose 6phosphate 1,6-bisphosphatase. 1,6-bisphosphate high inhibited (AMP)/ATP by is enzyme adenosine a This ratio. monophosphate the allosteric by activator of also inhibited glycolysis. fructose is 2,6-bisphosphate, primary It glucose is 6-phosphate dephosphorylated 6phosphatase. glucose Glucose by to reticular the membrane in glycogen endoplasmic This the and final enzyme of gluconeogenesis in catalyzes step degradation. hypoglycemia. fasting severe, deficiency Its results in

dioxide.

ONE Choose answer. the best

0.1. gluconeogenesis of following statements one Which correct? concerning is the

A. an (exergonic) energy-producing process. is It

B. glucose 2-day during fast. blood is It a in maintaining important

It a is insulin/glucagon ratio. C. in fall by inhibited the

in cells. the It cytosol D. muscle of occurs

acid fatty uses degradation. E. provided carbon It skeletons by

answer Correct B. = a gluconeogenesis blood fast, glucose. maintains are During and glycogen 2-day stores depleted, primarily the becoming energy-requiring (both the fasting. GTP producers an get hydrolyzed) ATP pathway occurs major in in that This glucose liver, is kidneys with prolonged (endergonic) and fall uses is a stimulated by cytosolic mitochondrial the and both ratio. in and insulin/glucagon Gluconeogenesis enzymes yields Fatty which acetyl A to acid degradation be cannot glucose. (CoA), converted coenzyme carbons the tricarboxylic dehydrogenase acid and of from gain there pyruvate the net because no is acetyl complex physiologically CoA is This is in cycle, irreversible. of that most are glucogenic. It carbon amino the skeletons acids is

0.2. be inhibited protein of Which the the diagram an in that in amounts avidin, reaction of below binds egg large would biotin? presence and white sequesters

is a Correct = Pyruvate pyruvate to by biotin-requiring enzyme. carboxylase, answer C. oxaloacetate carboxylated requires nicotinamide pyrophosphate, requires and E A; NAD+), thiamine (transaminase) NADH. coenzyme pyridoxal (lactate complex) B and adenine D dinucleotides acid, and (FAD dehydrogenase phosphate; lipoic dehydrogenase) flavin requires (pyruvate

0.3. is following to the unique gluconeogenesis? of reactions one Which A. → 3-phosphoglycerate 1,3-Bisphosphoglycerate

→ Lactate B. pyruvate

phosphoenolpyruvate Oxaloacetate → C.

Phosphoenolpyruvate pyruvate D. →

C. common to and = glycolysis. answer The reactions both Correct gluconeogenesis other are

0.4. listed glycolysis. on of monophosphate show (AMP) adenosine to below of gluconeogenesis the and 2,6-bisphosphate chart the enzymes the and effect Use fructose

2,6-bisphosphate of inhibit 1,6-bisphosphatase adenosine gluconeogenesis phosphofructokinase-1 glycolysis. fructose activate and and monophosphate fructose Both of regulation in pathways. This two results reciprocal of the

0.5. metabolism adenine the form. produces reduced from dinucleotide ethanol of (NADH) (NAD+) oxidized by The nicotinamide alcohol dehydrogenase to NAD+/NADH is on in ratio fall have expected the gluconeogenesis? What effect the Explain.

the availability of NADH. as because increase the direction is of malate oxidized The (OAA) the oxidation in tricarboxylic acid NADH the to OAA by dehydrogenase ethanol in malate driven of decreases reversible cycle reverse is by oxaloacetate driven by reduction NADH. lactate to of lactate pyruvate reversible by dehydrogenase the to is Additionally, lactate ethanol pyruvate, the substrates, Thus, NADH during decrease and important two of increase gluconeogenic metabolism. as a OAA result in Consequently, decreases. gluconeogenesis

0.6. acid gluconeogenesis? be substrate a for cannot for gluconeogenesis, why essential fatty production that is oxidation Given its in coenzyme A acetyl

pushing A pyruvate the pyruvate complex gluconeogenesis from away dehydrogenase Acetyl oxidation. activates to inhibits pyruvate carboxylase, and coenzyme and

please materials to visit additional thePoint. this chapter, related For ancillary

I. OVERVIEW

life. glucose of source is requirement constant absolute blood A for an human red no for such preferred greatly source cells or required the is energy mature the the Glucose with few cells. blood and source for energy mitochondria as brain as where exercising source is anaerobic the an glycolysis. muscle, essential for also for is substrate it Glucose energy can glucose Blood the primary sources: obtained three be gluconeogenesis. degradation, and glycogen diet, from not intake always (a the and diet, as glucose monosaccharides, depending is such of starch of is on source a sporadic precursors, and, polysaccharide), reliable Dietary glucose. glucose disaccharides, blood and provide responding 117) in it (see is blood glucose, but contrast, gluconeogenesis of to sustained slow p. In somewhat synthesis a level. glucose falling can glycogen. developed of a glucose rapidly in mobilized storing namely, the for form, a supply body has mechanisms Therefore, is glucose, this absence In rapidly from glycogen. the dietary of the into a blood of source released sugar liver source. an to degraded exercising that Similarly, extensively in glycogen important with provide muscle tissue energy is muscle sources for and gluconeogenesis using are as glucose When amino novo, acids carbon specific glycogen synthesize de lactate, tissues (see pyruvate, Chapter stores 10). glycerol, depleted, synthesis pathways metabolism. the reactions of as shows glycogen and degradation essential energy of Figure 11.1 part the of

II. STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION

their stores most skeletal liver, main own and use. small although amounts glycogen are The other of store found in cells of muscle for glycogen a for contraction. as synthesis of during is ATP serve of muscle The glycogen muscle to fuel the function reserve to the glucose of concentration, (Fig. maintain particularly glycogen stages fast the a liver early of That blood is during p. also 329). 11.2; see blood [Note: hours.] glucose Liver glycogen maintain can for <24

A. liver Amounts and in muscle

glycogen well-fed make of weight to fresh of of ~100 g glycogen 10% and the adult muscle, of a g make 1%–2% of liver. 400 weight up of up the fresh resting Approximately these levels clear. production glycogen not at of limits What the is Fig. storage (GSD) (see in glycogen some However, diseases the and/or the in of liver significantly amount 11.8), glycogen be muscle can higher. liver than mass. muscle In mass the body, is greater [Note: glycogen is skeletal muscle.] Consequently, of in found the body’s most

B. Structure

branched-chain Glycogen a from α-Dglucose. is made polysaccharide exclusively an primary α(1→4) linkage. bond The glycosidic is an is linkage an α(1→6) branch (Fig. there 8–14 a After containing residues, of average glucosyl 11.3). 55,000 single glycogen A glucosyl residues. up can to molecule contain cytoplasmic large, glucose synthesis degradation. These granules for (particles) glycogen as of also enzymes of polymers the exist and that spherical, necessary most contain

C. fluctuation Glycogen store

(see are (see during during fast 329). increase the well-fed and 323) p. glycogen state depleted p. a stores Liver days) affected prolonged few in (weeks). glycogen periods fasting moderately and of Muscle only is not decreased is short (a fasting by following depleted stores glycogen have muscle exercise. after is Muscle strenuous they to synthesized replenish been Glycogen and go degradation on [Note: continuously. synthesis determines states.] difference of glycogen the stored processes levels of two between the during these rates The physiologic specific

III. SYNTHESIS (GLYCOGENESIS)

α-D-glucose. synthesized molecules Glycogen of is from energy by (UTP). requires occurs and The phosphorylation in cytosol triphosphate process the (for supplied and of ATP uridine the glucose)

added is are that A. the to of residues glucosyl source the to glycogen molecule. Uridine glucose attached synthesis (UDP) growing all the diphosphate α-D-Glucose diphosphate uridine UDP-glucose (Fig. 11.4) synthesized by from UDP–glucose UTP glucose pyrophosphorylase (Fig. 1-phosphate is and 11.5). phosphates pyrophosphatase. the is two (Pi) inorganic hydrolyzed to the second (PPi), of by reaction, Pyrophosphate product proceeds UDP–glucose is the exergonic, of hydrolysis insuring in production. pyrophosphorylase reaction the UDP-glucose that direction The from Glucose generated by [Note: phosphoglucomutase. 6-phosphate glucose is 1-phosphate this (Fig. reversible obligatory reaction an intermediate is in 1,6-bisphosphate Glucose 11.6).]

B. and synthesis requirement Primer

in the linkages Glycogen glycogen. synthase α(1→4) makes acceptor glucose chain cannot molecule UDP-glucose. of glucose free synthesis using of an initiate a enzyme This from as already existing elongate therefore, can it Instead, and, primer. requires a chains of only glucose glycogen A a can fragment primer. as serve of the from glycogenin glucose absence protein an fragment, can the as UDP-glucose In of Fig. (see acceptor a homodimeric serve of 11.5). at attached. in protein the glucosyl The which is the the unit hydroxyl side-chain initial of tyrosine-194 site is group autoglucosylation, by catalyzed Because an itself glycogenin reaction is glycogenin enzyme. via the is catalyzes glucose a from four glucosyl at transfer of molecules least the chain. Glycogenin short, α(1→4)-linked UDP-glucose, then producing of to This a chain be able as which is elongated recruited glycogen below. is serves as synthase, that short in glycogenin, described by primer by C. a with [Note: Glycogenin glycogen stays forms associated core the granule.] of and

by Elongation glycogen synthase C.

glycosidic the between (see the to of glucosyl 4 group glucose chain the anomeric of new involves growing carbon forming chain, bond the accepting end of a the 1 activated and nonreducing of the carbon Elongation a UDP-glucose Fig. glycogen hydroxyl of of glucose residue transfer from 11.5). is terminal The nonreducing end the sugar the which is in nonreducing [Note: carbon by another sugar of carbohydrate to glycosidic p. a terminal making anomeric one bond linked of a molecule, (see chain the 84).] α(1→4) making in synthase. enzyme linkages is responsible the The glycogen for glycogen glycosidic when kinase phosphorylated can (UDP new UTP + ATP ADP; made UTP [Note: α(1→4) by bond p. to The released be the + diphosphate is UDP nucleoside see ⇄ 296).]

formation D. Branch

linkages. linear acted residues other the the enzyme structure be resulting on (unbranched) would a attached synthetic chain glucosyl of no α(1→4) chain, If by called is tissues compound is a in and found amylose. plant Such residues glycogen on (see branched, located, eight tree-like in a highly average, branches Fig. In glucosyl resulting structure has apart, contrast, unbranched amylose. 11.3) far soluble that more is than the Branching ends of added the residues be described IV. (and increases glucosyl to in also also, new which number can nonreducing as occur the which increasing dramatically rate removed), thereby the residues which of these below, the glycogen molecule. synthesis greatly be glycogen can can and from size at accelerating

1.

enzyme, by of action synthesis: Branch are the made branching amylo-α(1→4)→α(1→6)-transglycosylase. the Branches of transferase. thus residues nonreducing a residue by α(1→4) attaches glycogen another to a the end linkage, residue as glucosyl This α(1→6) set eight and chain, to it enzyme an 4:6 chain, glucosyl to removes breaking of the a the bond nonterminal on from six an functioning (see end nonreducing The resulting in Fig. new, “i” in residues as (see were the 11.5), which to Fig. end as eight well from nonreducing “o” the old removed six elongated synthase. can further glycogen now be by 11.5),

2.

their ends be additional been Additional can accomplished, six eight to to make these glucosyl branch residues two After terminal and removed synthesis: branches. has elongation used of

IV. (GLYCOGENOLYSIS) DEGRADATION

of is pathway the in mobilizes reactions. degradative stored muscle synthetic skeletal glycogen liver not a that and The reversal Instead, set of required. enzymes separate a is cytosolic breaking by glycosidic the α(1→4) primary obtained is glycogen degraded, is When glucose 1-phosphate, bonds. product each point). free is α(1→6)–linked (branch In released from residue glucose glucosyl addition,

A. shortening Chain

glucosyl chains by simple cleaves at phosphorolysis the until each Glycogen units point of chain α(1→4) ends a remain (Fig. (producing nonreducing four 1-phosphate) phosphorylase the glycogen the glucosyl sequentially glucose on at residues between bonds glycosidic the branch 11.7). it The phosphorylase structure resulting cannot dextrin, and (Fig. any limit called is degrade a further 11.8). see phosphate coenzyme.] as vitamin [Note: Phosphorylase p. (a derivative a 382) requires of B6; pyridoxal

B. Branch removal

protein, the (see activities debranching enzymic the bifunctional Branches are removed a enzyme single two by of Fig. 11.8). activity oligoα(1→4)→α(1→4)-glucantransferase four a glucosyl residues the at three remaining the removes outer branch. First, of nonreducing another next It accordingly. of end them transfers lengthening it to the chain, and enzyme transferase. functions α(1→4) the as an 4:4 a and broken made, is bond an α(1→4) is Thus, bond hydrolytically an glucose glucose. residue linkage α(1→6) by in removed is remaining Next, the (nonphosphorylated) attached activity, free amylo-α(1→6)glucosidase releasing now reached. available four branch again chain phosphorylase next glycogen glucosyl degradation are is The in by until glucosyl units the for

6phosphate isomerization C. Glucose glucose to 1-phosphate

by glucose Fig. 1-phosphate, is cytosol glycogen to 6-phosphate phosphoglucomutase the (see Glucose produced isomerized phosphorylase, by in 11.6). 6-phosphate by In glucose glucose liver, endoplasmic the 6-phosphate translocase. is reticulum the transported (ER) into to it is gluconeogenesis; dephosphorylated glucose (the last by 6-phosphatase same step There, of p. in see 121). glucose the enzyme used the The is the glucose transported from to cytosol. then ER the help levels Hepatocytes until glucose actively pathway the blood gluconeogenic is release into glycogen-derived blood glucose maintain glucose. to producing 6-phosphatase. lacks glucose Muscle [Note: 6-phosphate blood. be glucose into and Consequently, sent the cannot dephosphorylated enters needed glycolysis, contraction.] Instead, energy muscle for it providing

D. degradation Lysosomal

degraded (acid acid glycogen by (1%–3%) the small maltase). A is enzyme, of lysosomal α(1→4)-glucosidase amount this purpose of autophagic is unknown. pathway The vacuoles deficiency causes disease in of a lysosomes, the in II: accumulation glycogen Pompe enzyme of in GSD resulting (see Fig. type serious this the However, 11.8). a is disease.] GSD the storage Pompe [Note: lysosomal only that disease is

degradation amount or Lysosomal lipids accumulation or activity of to carbohydrates decreased lysosomal primarily genetic of are characterized their due storage acid lysosomal abnormal amounts resulting disorders hydrolases. decreased by from of diseases the

REGULATION AND GLYCOGENESIS V. GLYCOGENOLYSIS

the the glucose and storage degradation regulated. importance of levels, blood synthesis its form glycogen of Because tightly maintaining of are glycogenesis when the whereas periods accelerates periods during liver, glycogenolysis body accelerates fasting. has been during of well the In fed, at muscle glycogenolysis soon is exercise, as active skeletal rest. In the as and again muscle, glycogenesis during occurs begins degradation Regulation synthesis accomplished two levels. on and is of glycogen phosphorylase phosphorylation/dephosphorylation) a synthase the of body glycogen (by the covalent First, needs and to regulated whole. as hormonally meet are are the of allosterically effector particular meet needs molecules) a these regulated Second, enzymes tissue. to (by same

A. of glycogenolysis activation Covalent

The protein–coupled p. glycogen such to degraded, hormones, membrane plasma or signals 94) energy for glucose to exercising epinephrine, receptors to binding blood muscle. elevate the provide either as be of or to need glucagon ([GPCR] see G for levels

1. Binding glucagon specific to their epinephrine G a or protein–mediated activation activation: myocyte epinephrine the of to results or Protein kinase adenylyl A GPCR, cyclase. GPCR, specific of in of hepatocyte cyclic This which protein (cAMP), activates cAMP-dependent monophosphate of adenosine enzyme (PKA). the A synthesis catalyzes kinase binds subunits regulatory that of cAMP releasing subunits catalytic individual PKA, two active tetrameric the (Fig. two are 95). see 11.9; also p. of activity. several phosphorylates enzymes glycogen affecting then their PKA metabolism, removed, the is [Note: tetramer When cAMP reforms.] inactive page.) on next catalytic subunit.

2.

Phosphorylase two form. an active exists an “a” “b” inactive Phosphorylase activation: in and forms: form kinase kinase the phosphorylates Fig. the “a” phosphorylase “b” active form PKA producing form (see kinase, of Active inactive 11.9).

3.

a activation: “a” exists Glycogen “b” Glycogen form and phosphorylated, form. in active inactive a dephosphorylated, also phosphorylase phosphorylase is phosphorylates that only phosphorylase enzyme kinase form, glycogen then Phosphorylase begins active glycogenolysis Fig. b to “a” the a (see its which 11.9).

4.

of above Signal described glycogenolysis. amplification: The reactions cascade activates few hormonal that number sequential a molecules molecules). of to activated activate GPCR binding serves The each signal hormone the kinase their of effect (that amplify molecules in a many large can steps number of phosphorylase is, being PKA to result the production glycogen of the molecules active can that a many causes glycogen. degrade phosphorylase This

5.

inhibitor because also protein to hydrolytically in phosphatase-1 Fig. the phosphorylase phosphorylase to that proteins are (see removes maintenance: is activated and and cAMP inactivated are to added kinase by response the in Phosphorylated that phosphate, response groups The state phosphate cAMP maintained (PP1), phosphorylated enzyme 11.9). cascade activated insulin PP1 by by [Note: (see signal initiated a Fig. is 311). 27.7 p. on Because the also effects it of cAMP, and degrades phosphodiesterase opposes epinephrine.] that glucagon the insulin activates

glycogenesis Covalent B. of inhibition

form inactive synthase, the the “a” and glycogenesis, in in enzyme form. two glycogen forms, active also regulated “b” exists The contrast dephosphorylated, enzyme, whereas proportional the glycogen to is level of with phosphorylase phosphorylation the degree the and several of at form in of However, synthase the form is kinase (Fig. active phosphorylated to inactive phosphorylase, the inactivation on sites 11.10). different catalyzed (for response signaling by (see cAMP below). mechanisms C. and several or Phosphorylation phosphorylase PKA protein in to kinase) example, kinases other is reconverted the Glycogen by to synthase can be b “a” form PP1. metabolism. summarizes the 11.11 of glycogen covalent Figure regulation

subunit; = ADP regulatory catalytic = adenosine = diphosphate. subunit; C

of Allosteric and glycogenolysis C. glycogenesis regulation

addition needs of hormonal glycogen In and cell. the respond metabolites of to phosphorylase energy and the glycogen to signals, synthase levels increased glucose glycogenolysis is stimulated when when energy whereas energy and and glucose levels are high, Glycogenesis are low. levels is the of This response hormone-mediated a allosteric can override of the a rapid effects and needs regulation cell covalent regulation. to allows of the “b” of less equilibrium (relaxed, p. metabolism (tense, The (see conformations 28). T “a” are glycogen forms and [Note: allosteric enzymes active) each in R more the active) between and an directly the shifts The of equilibrium and modification.] the binding without activity enzymic covalent altering alters effectors 1. muscle by in present which 6phosphate, is and the in the Regulation well-fed glycogen liver b state: activated well-fed elevated concentrations in glucose In is state, (Fig. allosterically both synthase 11.12). a by phosphorylase by is as 6-phosphate, inhibited glycogen In as well ATP, signal. high-energy allosterically contrast, a glucose of In is [Note: allosteric inhibitor but glucose phosphorylase glycogen also liver, a.] an muscle, free not and muscle (B). (A) = phosphate; monophosphate. = AMP adenosine P

2. liver the extreme (myophosphorylase), in presence concentrations the glycogen the under is depletion. conditions by Muscle of ATP activation occur high AMP of anoxia isozyme, phosphorylase not that Glycogenolysis AMP: and active but activation binds b, AMP (see without phosphorylation causing glycogen phosphorylase to its Fig. 11.9). Recall glucose [Note: oxidized.] glycogenolysis allowing from p. phosphofructokinase-1 AMP glycolysis also (see of 99), activates be that to 3. muscle activation response to adrenergic response cells released and in in is binding into neural the Calcium receptors. to (Ca2+) stimulation in to (myocytes) Glycogenolysis sarcoplasm by calcium: in the epinephrine α1 liver distributed member most proteins. of the (CaM), a Ca2+ The to small, calmodulin Ca2+-binding family widely binds of binding molecules, of of the are four this enzymes, a complex in molecules (Fig. of complex absence inactive binds The and such protein Ca2+ change often that activates that Ca2+–CaM to conformational to triggers activated CaM the 11.13). essential complex of proteins. functions an many Thus, CaM as subunit be PKA. Ca2+ phosphorylated without the (CaM) of form the protein such activated need binding is by by its the “b” is phosphorylase tetrameric kinase, to whose subunit kinase One to for δ the receptors through at Ca2+ rise cAMP, (see [Note: β-adrenergic in signals not p. a Epinephrine 131).] a.

muscle and kinase a activation: for Muscle During is contraction, phosphorylase need ATP. rapid urgent there of glycogen supplied glycolysis. It the to muscle 6-phosphate, by degradation which is enters glucose impulses sarcoplasm of Ca2+ myocytes. which reticulum Nerve release cause promotes the depolarization, from membrane the sarcoplasmic into subunit, CaM complex (see muscle activates the binds kinase and Fig. b Ca2+ the The phosphorylase 11.9).

b.

is released kinase signals need medulla stress, from and Liver the glucose. for phosphorylase During blood physiologic activation: adrenal the epinephrine initially glycogenolysis. from This hepatic glucose comes α1-adrenergic hepatocyte to epinephrine Binding of

results into GPCR of ER Ca2+ 205) the a the movement cytoplasm. in phospholipid-dependent from cascade activates p. that (see activates complex forms and CaM b. phosphorylase Ca2+– kinase A hepatic Ca2+ C also phosphorylate inactivate) [Note: can (therefore, a.] The kinase that helps released synthase glycogen activate protein to

VI. GLYCOGEN DISEASES STORAGE

required by diseases synthesis. a defects rarely, or, GSD are caused glycogen more of in genetic degradation group enzymes glycogen for excessive of a of impaired of degradation. glycogen an specific accumulation either amounts has They abnormal the in result as in normal result glycogen structure or formation that in tissues of defective as muscle defect a enzyme more kidneys. the or single in muscle liver in be the may generalized, affecting variety (causing of such be weakness), particular tissue, such heart tissues, as the hypoglycemia) and (resulting A a may or that ranges from not early Severity disorders to in threatening. fatal are life mild childhood illustrated more 11.8. in Figure prevalent the GSD of Some are metabolism GSD primarily occurs [Note: cytosol.] glycogen lysosomal II in because Only the is

VII. SUMMARY CHAPTER

maintain the found a a fast. ATP main fuel in concentration, are they for used of and blood during body muscle, stores of glucose skeletal reserve synthesis muscle as the contraction, are serve the where stages in The glycogen liver, where to in the the early they particularly of during is α-D-glucose. highly a Glycogen polymer branched of α(1→4) linkage. The an primary bond is glycosidic linkage. about a branch residues, is 8–14 containing glucosyl an α(1→6) there After UDP–glucose from the (UDP)-glucose, is 1-phosphate diphosphate of block UTP glucose building (Fig. and glycogen, synthesized pyrophosphorylase by Uridine 11.14). linkages. by of α(1→4) is the transferred nonreducing makes Glucose chains from which to UDP-glucose glycogen synthase, primer-requiring ends glycogen the by primer glycogenin. is The made amylo-α(1→4)→α(1→6)-transglycosylase in linkage), the end by are and chain. (a residue 4:6 the nonreducing an to residues α(1→4) glycogen formed which to another Branches the of an glucosyl transfers six making set eight chain of a transferase), α(1→6) linkage (breaking from ends bonds glucosyl of glycogen cleaves the glucose nonreducing producing Pyridoxal the glycogen chains, phosphorylase phosphate–requiring at α(1→4) 1-phosphate. residues between the glucosyl units four before until a sequential remain degradation branch continues This point. is debranching resulting is that structure the The bifunctional limit a by enzyme. called dextrin degraded glycogen released outer and branch glucose another activity phosphorylase. end a be transfers them of nonreducing as at 1-phosphate removes the 4:4 where the of to residues by they three chain, the Oligo-α(1→4)→α(1→4)-glucantransferase (a glucosyl can transferase) four is removed the attached an debranching glucose. glucosidase of residue linkage amylo-α(1→6) in activity α(1→6) by enzyme, hydrolytically remaining glucose The releasing single free 6-phosphate Glucose is phosphoglucomutase. by converted glucose 1-phosphate to enters 6phosphate glucose In muscle, glycolysis. 6-phosphatase by beginning enzyme of the is that endoplasmic liver, the releasing glucose at free (an maintain glucose the to levels a be membrane), In of fast. phosphate glucose can removed reticular used blood fast. free provide of (von phosphatase Ia the and glycogen results of deficiency to storage liver glucose causes A in during a disease) inability disease to the body the Gierke an affects gluconeogenesis. degradation It glycogen both and (namely, effects). opposite signals insulin results Glycogen overall epinephrine, synthesis to whereas decreased meet the level reciprocally level increased in needs whole-body glycogenesis regulated hormonal glycogenolysis, causes the an and elevated are by elevated degradation same or an and glucagon, and compound on adenosine some family cyclic of enzymes are by by are of epinephrine. dependent Key increased a which protein kinases, a (cAMP), phosphorylated monophosphate glucagon elevated to by phosphatase-1 groups are insulin when protein levels). inactive is removed its (active inhibitor in Phosphate response kinase, tissues’ and In glycogen phosphorylase addition phosphorylase synthase, are needs. to regulated allosterically regulation, covalent to this meet the phosphorylase by 6-phosphate, ATP. inhibited is by glucose In glycogen well glycogen state, by activated glucose synthase but as 6-phosphate well-fed as is of liver, free inhibitor also the serves phosphorylase. glucose glycogen an In allosteric as in phosphorylase liver binding during in activates calcium muscle response calmodulin rise to in in kinase and the exercise by epinephrine to The enzyme’s subunit. the enzyme phosphorylase, causing to activate glycogen degradation. thereby This allows glycogen in muscle. phosphorylase (myophosphorylase) activates AMP glycogen

best the answer. Choose ONE

(GSD). diseases selected the enzyme finding in glycogen Questions storage For clinical 11.1–11.4, to the deficient match

1.1. in intolerance, during exercise lactate no rise blood Exercise with

glycogen-derived isozyme in answer degradation glycogen prevents muscle glycogen deficiency E. phosphorylase) in Correct (the of muscle muscle, lactate. glycolysis McArdle of = resulting decreased and Myophosphorylase anaerobic product, its glucose, depriving disease) (or,

disease), (branching and Transferase Correct branches with deficiency results fewer answer enzyme) in (or, Andersen in solubility. D. glycogen defect = glycogen a synthesis, decreased 4:6

Correct answer B. = Pompe prevents brought Acid lysosomes. glycogen deficiency (or, degradation [acid any into of α(1→4)-glucosidase] maltase disease) affected, most from of variety resulting severe with pathology damage. A are heart tissues the

von the glucose answer prevents hypoglycemia, A. into deficiency 6-phosphatase from blood, disease) free lactic (or, liver hyperuricemia, hyperlipidemia. Gierke acidemia, Glucose = severe Correct releasing fasting the and causing

1.2. 1.3. and chains progressive with outer cirrhosis glycogen longer-than-normal Fatal, glycogen, Generalized hypotonia, failure severe accumulation and 1.4. from heart of death 1.5. hyperlipidemia hypoglycemia, and lactic acidemia, hyperuricemia, Severe fasting following hepatic the glucagon metabolism? glycogen and one which have Epinephrine on of effects

A. Both phosphorylase different activated rates. and significantly are but phosphorylation at glycogen synthase glycogen by

resulting synthase rise is phosphorylase by in Glycogen whereas is the B. inactivated glycogen activated. calcium,

Glycogen is and glycogen is active, synthase and inactive. whereas phosphorylated phosphorylated C. phosphorylase

increased. D. of The synthesis glycogen net is

glycogen in through Epinephrine of liver of C. answer key enzymes glucagon degradation modification Correct covalent cause and both glycogen (phosphorylation) the synthesis and = decreased metabolism. increased form), and Glycogen (“b” is form). phosphorylated active synthase and phosphorylated whereas phosphorylase glycogen (“a” is inactive does Glucagon not calcium. cause a rise in

1.6. of contracting sudden a In result skeletal muscle, in: the elevation will concentration sarcoplasmic calcium

cyclic kinase A. of monophosphate adenosine (cAMP)-dependent protein A. activation

of cAMP conversion AMP by phosphodiesterase. to B.

glycogen of b. direct synthase activation C.

b. kinase phosphorylase D. direct of activation

action the a protein by E. phosphatase-1. phosphorylase kinase of of inactivation

this the “b” thereby to from released the D. binds of subunit kinase, sarcoplasmic (Ca2+) = the form allosterically of activating Correct enzyme. calmodulin phosphorylase answer dephosphorylated exercise Calcium reticulum during elevation of Ca2+ The other cytosolic . an not by caused are choices activates also kinase hepatic Ca2+ [Note: phosphorylase b.] 1.7. VI hypoglycemia type severe, is deficiency) Ia that (liver glycogen seen phosphorylase is (glucose disease seen why mild. deficiency) type storage 6-phosphatase the Explain with with whereas

free glucose generate or is either Ia, 6phosphate. glycogenolysis produce from With unable gluconeogenesis to both processes because type liver the glucose gluconeogenesis, glycogenolysis the VI, able liver is With from inhibited. glucose free still to but type is produce

thePoint. this additional visit ancillary please For chapter, to materials related

I. OVERVIEW

by most the consumed its has Glucose and monosaccharide common been already discussed. is metabolism humans, important energy make amounts significant disaccharides) in metabolism. to Two the monosaccharides, galactose, in contributions occur other and fructose diet also in (primarily and addition, important galactose component In of proteins. an glycosylated is of energy metabolism. metabolism as galactose and pathways part 12.1 fructose of the Figure essential the of shows

II. FRUCTOSE METABOLISM

in by (~55 calories 10% fructose the g/day). the supplied of are diet About Western releases is disaccharide major amounts and of equimolar fructose cleaved the sucrose, the when The intestine, source fructose which, glucose. in of which is many and syrup Fructose soft p. is glucose), foods 364). 55% a and honey, monosaccharide used fruits, to in 45% free many fructose (see and in (typically, sweeten found also as high-fructose corn drinks in not 97), into is glucose, glucose fructose secretion that insulin cells does (unlike tissues; and, into insulin. contrast the dependent of see promote transport not to p. Fructose certain of in

A. Phosphorylation

metabolism, of intermediary must enter (Fig. pathways be fructose first For the phosphorylated it to 12.2). hexokinase or This by can accomplished either fructokinase. be enzyme. serve (see cells p. phosphorylates several in glucose Hexokinase body of and can additional this substrates most for 98), hexoses the as a (that a has low constant 59) for p. affinity it is, Michaelis [Km]; However, see high fructose. of saturating unless hexokinase. unusually the high, becomes Therefore, intracellular means concentrations that is glucose little presence of concentration normal the of fructose fructose phosphorylated by phosphorylation primary mechanism for the Fructokinase (see Fig. fructose provides 12.2). see low velocity] 57). Km enzyme a p. The a fructose and ([maximal has high Vmax for fructose), the converts most liver fructose dietary It intestine to of 1-phosphate, (which the using the found the processes donor. phosphate small fructose and ATP and as is in kidneys, contain discussed B.] three section B, in tissues also [Note: These aldolase

B. Fructose cleavage 1-phosphate

(see 1-phosphate by trioses, glyceraldehyde. 6-phosphate fructose to B 99) to (also but phosphate aldolase Fructose is dihydroxyacetone called is and aldolase) 1,6-bisphosphate two not is fructose (DHAP) fructose 1-phosphate phosphorylated p. cleaved as in A brain. aldolase most three aldolase different genes): in in small isozymes Humans intestine; liver, B the of [Note: aldolase and tissues; express three C (the kidneys, products and the aldolase cleaves fructose glycolysis 3-phosphate p. during (see 1-phosphate.] produced B and cleave All aldolase glyceraldehyde to 101), but DHAP only fructose 1,6-bisphosphate illustrated in DHAP a can pathways, in by number be Figure glyceraldehyde glycolysis gluconeogenesis, used as can 12.3. be whereas of or metabolized

C. Kinetics

because is The p. that metabolism step (see rate the from rapid than 99). triose glycolysis of rate-limiting in phosphofructokinase-1, fructose more production glucose 1-phosphate major bypasses of fructose

Disorders D.

metabolism a of kidney in one the as (essential required result of deficiency of either and result live a fructosuria) births a ~1:20,000 [HFI]), result (see pathways a for aldolase condition in liver deficiency Fig. fructose which into A deficiency intolerance fructokinase of the of benign metabolic enzymes or (hereditary of as can entry key severe disturbance occurs B fructose 12.3). from HFI and appear first symptoms baby is or a when food fructose. of begins containing sucrose milk lactose-containing The weaned ingesting and, the accumulates, therefore, in resulting drop in ATP level production. inorganic 1-phosphate of Fructose of (Pi) phosphate a adenosine monophosphate (AMP) rises. ATP falls, As see 299). p. hyperuricemia lactic The acidemia; causing (and degraded, AMP is synthesis availability essential blood-clotting vomiting) ATP (causing gluconeogenesis proteins). decreased and hypoglycemia a decreases hepatic in The with protein and (causing factors other decrease of is reabsorption of Renal also Pi decreased. glycogenolysis in (see p. inhibits Pi The also drop [Note: 128).] made be cells, basis of enzyme can urine, (see Diagnosis by liver DNA-based of using Chapter fructose HFI assay 34). the in or testing on the With be from must and failure liver the well HFI, sucrose, prevent as possible diet removed to as death. fructose, to caries.] dental of have display an HFI with [Note: consequently, absence an Individuals aversion and, sweets

conversion 6-phosphate E. Mannose fructose to

glycoproteins of p. an the component is of (see 166). 84), Mannose, p. glucose important C-2 epimer (see Hexokinase is in 6-phosphate reversibly 6-phosphate, phosphorylates phosphomannose to which, fructose producing isomerase. isomerized turn, mannose, mannose by preexisting by intracellular mannose hexokinase. fructose is from by of produced is glycoproteins salvaged degradation the mannose [Note: and or synthesized Most Dietary little contain mannose.] carbohydrates

to Glucose F. fructose conversion via sorbitol

phosphorylated sugars are Most following rapidly cells. into their entry trapped phosphates within Therefore, without because freely membranes cells, transporters. cannot cross are organic the specific they by is (sugar polyol monosaccharide to producing convert it thereby group. additional a an alcohol) a for metabolizing mechanism alternate hydroxyl an of An the to reduction group, aldehyde

1. glucose, synthesis: sorbitol Sorbitol glucitol; producing reductase Aldose (or, reduces Fig. the but 12.4), Km is high. many including This enzyme and ovaries, seminal vesicles. found kidneys, peripheral is the lens, in retina, nerves, tissues, sorbitol and Fig. enzyme, fructose oxidize cells in vesicles to second dehydrogenase, the can (see ovaries, of A seminal liver, sorbitol 12.4). use vesicles which to pathway glucose sperm in seminal benefits two-reaction fructose as major fructose cells, from the a energy carbohydrate The source. can the by mechanism provides available a liver which sorbitol from a to any into substrate glycolysis. The pathway enter converted that sorbitol fructose is in

2. not glucose example, is these kidneys, sorbitol large during insulin peripheral in cells may for the cells diabetes). amounts and of glucose lens, enter of Hyperglycemia required into (for hyperglycemia of uncontrolled nerves, entry of Because metabolism: the retina, and times (NADPH) (see efficiently the the inside through which dinucleotide therefore, Elevated remains trapped to increase intracellular supply produce cause cannot and, sorbitol, reduced amount cell of a adenine concentrations pass membranes nicotinamide Fig. cell reductase phosphate in aldose an significant adequate of glucose and 12.4). low sorbitol the peripheral exacerbated or of cells lens, in nerves). is when and (for absent example, dehydrogenase kidneys, This retina, is swelling these strong water As and to cells, result, and influx osmotic in sorbitol accumulates due effects retention. cell causing a associated this with partly leading the stress, and to and formation, diabetes microvascular pathologic 345). retinopathy (see p. including problems alterations cataract can neuropathy, attributed Some be osmotic nephropathy to peripheral of reaction Use decreases the [Note: the reduced complications.] (see diabetic glutathione, to of important of NADPH 148), in p. aldose related an may reductase generation antioxidant and be

III. METABOLISM GALACTOSE

milk galactose and source products. lactose obtained β-1,4-glucose) from is milk The major dietary (galactosyl of (lactase) of of p. the mucosal on discussed [Note: membrane cell The lactose by βgalactosidase intestinal digestion was 87.] obtained and glycoproteins can galactose also of Some degradation lysosomal be glycolipids. by not galactose fructose insulin mannose), (and into the of Like is transport dependent. cells

Phosphorylation A.

Like it fructose, phosphorylated galactose be be must further can before metabolized. enzyme produces (Fig. galactose this galactokinase, specific purpose, Most a for 1-phosphate have which tissues 12.5). phosphate donor. the ATP As kinases, is other with

B. diphosphate–galactose Uridine formation

first cannot converted glycolytic the it unless diphosphate pathway uridine (UDP)-galactose Galactose is 1-phosphate to (Fig. enter 12.6). Fig. (see in an reacts in reaction, This with glucose producing 1-phosphate occurs and 1phosphate, UDP-glucose galactose which exchange UDP-galactose 12.5). catalyzed galactose uridylyltransferase (GALT). by reaction is 1-phosphate The The can 6-phosphate, to product enter be glucose dephosphorylated.] glucose isomerized 1-phosphate can be glycolysis [Note: which or

C. UDP-galactose UDP-glucose to conversion

the its UDP-glucose, UDP-hexose it be to glucose For UDP-galactose to must first epimer, C-4 enter isomerized mainstream 4epimerase. of metabolism, by UDP-glucose participate GALT original biosynthetic can from (for reaction. (produced well example, in reactions as as UDPgalactose) in This “new” the glycogenesis) the [Note: See Fig. for a interconversions.] summary of the 12.5

in UDP-galactose biosynthetic reactions D.

a (see including units lactose pathways, of in as donor IV. of number serve synthetic can synthesis of the UDP-galactose galactose 166), and glycoproteins 158). (see p. (see below), 210), glycosaminoglycans glycolipids p. (see p. all provided example, when are met from intolerant), 1-phosphate it for lactose 4-epimerase uridine glucose efficiently lack released triphosphate [Note: is β-galactosidase by of can tissue Fig. requirements and in who the people cannot be owing UDP-glucose, on to (see be which action the a If diet (for by lactose produced is not galactose UDP-hexose from of UDP-galactose 12.5).]

Disorders E.

GALT deficient galactosemia is in individuals (see severely with Fig. classic 12.5). In and, this galactose accumulate. therefore, galactose 1-phosphate disorder, are is those but of consequences 138), similar Physiologic in spectrum p. (see HFI broader to tissues found a affected. pathways of production. such that is The galactose as accumulated side galactitol shunted into is same reaction aldose the p. by catalyzed reductase, 139). glucose enzyme (see reduces This to that sorbitol newborn of GALT is screening panel. the deficiency part galactosemia galactose Treatment and from removal of lactose the of diet. requires disorders galactose metabolism, in of common (see Fig. severe galactokinase the cataracts [Note: although and result Deficiencies less in epimerase are 12.5).]

IV. LACTOSE SYNTHESIS

of β(1→4) molecule to consists Lactose is attached β-galactose a a by a glucose. linkage that of disaccharide Therefore, galactosyl lactose is β(1→4)-glucose. lactose of products sugar) dietary (milk-producing) is and by mammary milk the are Because made lactose. other dairy lactating (milk sources glands, which in transfers the is releasing by Lactose to lactose from Golgi glucose, synthesized UDP-galactose (Fig. galactosyltransferase), galactose (UDP-galactose:glucose UDP synthase 12.7). enzyme This composed is two and B. proteins, of A of number is is body in found Protein tissues. A β-D-galactosyltransferase and a a from important UDP-galactose p. this structurally than glycoproteins enzyme the producing 167). In same transfers lactating component linkage found lactose, N-acetyllactosamine, (see β(1→4) tissues the and in other N-linked a mammary to N-acetyl-D-glucosamine, forming of galactose gland, the contrast, In protein in is glands. only mammary B lactating found It stimulated its the is synthesis and prolactin. by αlactalbumin, is peptide hormone Protein a for rather protein complex (by the the changing B A, so specificity transferase Km with glucose) lactose, enzyme, of that forms that the decreasing than

Fig. N-acetyllactosamine, is produced (see 12.7).

CHAPTER V. SUMMARY

disaccharide equimolar fructose (Fig. glucose sucrose, releases fructose cleaved, the of The of is which, source when major amounts and 12.8). insulin cells Transport of independent. into is fructose to by cleaved B first then phosphorylated Fructose fructose to fructokinase dihydroxyacetone is aldolase phosphate glyceraldehyde. by and 1-phosphate and in found kidneys, enzymes liver, These and the intestine. are small hypoglycemia causes aldolase failure causes death and fructose to if fructose A fructokinase lead (essential the liver benign a whereas intolerance not deficiency from removed severe diet. condition (HFI), which in is (and deficiency fructosuria), a B sucrose) of of hereditary isomerized mannose of important phosphorylated phosphomannose which is to by an 6-phosphate to fructose Mannose, reversibly by isomerase. component is glycoproteins, hexokinase 6phosphate, and Glucose lens, nerves, the retina, in including to by (glucitol) sorbitol reduced peripheral kidneys, many tissues, ovaries, aldose can be vesicles. reductase seminal and second liver, ovaries, can to a produce fructose. oxidize sorbitol In enzyme, sorbitol vesicles, seminal dehydrogenase, the in the sorbitol of cells Hyperglycemia those sorbitol in results dehydrogenase. accumulation lacking in cell and nephropathy, neuropathy, diabetes. events may retinopathy osmotic contribute and formation, the resulting cataract peripheral cause seen swelling The to of is major dietary lactose. source The galactose transport into cells is insulin galactose The of independent. 1phosphate. is deficiency phosphorylated by first results galactose in to Galactose cataracts) galactokinase (a with galactose compound by 1-phosphate uridylyltransferase nucleotide (UDP)galactose diphosphate by supplied UDP-glucose. converted to uridine This the is (GALT), galactosemia. this causes of classic enzyme A deficiency by Galactose galactose aldose galactitol excess to and is reductase. 1-phosphate converted accumulates, damage, damage, liver cataracts. This brain and causes removal from (and diet. requires of Treatment lactose) galactose the first must UDP-galactose isomerized to enter be For to mainstream metabolism, by glucose the 4-epimerase. it UDP-hexose UDP-glucose of UDP-galactose the for used glycoprotein enzyme from also produce and This former glycolipid to synthesis. required is be can UDP-glucose when galactose glucose. a is disaccharide of Lactose and and of dairy dietary sources are other lactose. the Milk products synthesized mammary Lactose glucose synthase in the lactose from and by is lactating gland. UDP-galactose where most galactosyltransferase stimulated the The N-acetyllactosamine) prolactin). a mammary (which has protein is subunits, cells protein found is by hormone whose B two in which synthesizes peptide enzyme in and only lactating found (α-lactalbumin, it synthesis and is A glands, subunits produces are transferase the present, When lactose. both

answer. Choose best the ONE

2.1. on A female classic nursing galactosemia a is galactose-free with diet. lactose to is in breast milk because: She able produce

be produced can isomerization. A. fructose galactose from by

galactose B. from glucose by a epimerization. be produced can metabolite

efficiently hexokinase phosphorylate can C. galactose to galactose 1phosphate.

mammary the gland. in by galactosemia produced D. in is activated enzyme the affected hormone a

thereby converted Correct of B. (UDP)-glucose UDP-hexose by diphosphate the 4-epimerase, synthesis. answer to Uridine appropriate galactose providing form = for is lactose UDPgalactose fructose body. does to Isomerization of galactose human occur not the in is hexokinase. converted not to by Galactose 1phosphate galactose no galactose. galactose-free diet provides A uridylyltransferase) of deficiency. the result enzyme an is Galactosemia (galactose 1-phosphate

2.2. physician A because is 5-month-old night sweats, brought and tremors. vomiting, his of to boy were fruit began breast after juices he these symptoms to milk. diet History as off weaned was introduced being that his revealed for hepatomegaly. physical was The examination remarkable glucose. were the reducing Tests sugar but baby’s positive urine on for negative for of: most from a deficiency The infant likely suffers

aldolase B. A.

B. fructokinase.

C. galactokinase.

D. β-galactosidase.

Correct A. = answer deficiency hereditary symptoms The intolerance, suggest a aldolase in B. fructose urine. characterized blood and in the relatively benign Deficiencies result or or in fructose elevated conditions levels of fructokinase galactokinase by in galactose lactose (milk ability sugar). a to (lactase) results Deficiency in in degrade decreased β-galactosidase have would lactase different much this presented deficiency baby Congenital (and symptoms). and is quite earlier with in rare (adult at hypolactasia) deficiency later presents lactase age. Typical a

2.3. essential production is of by the milk Lactose in mammary synthesis glands. synthesis: lactose In

galactosyltransferase transferred A. is galactose glucose (protein A), to generating galactose 1-phosphate from by lactose.

exclusively is in used B. protein A lactose synthesis.

the protein affinity regulates C. specificity its decreasing of B) (protein for by A glucose. α-lactalbumin

is protein expression stimulated B prolactin. D. by

expression by B) prolactin. the is increased Correct answer = D. (protein α-Lactalbumin hormone is used form by the A). (protein galactosyltransferase diphosphate–galactose the Uridine the N-acetyllactosamine. of the amino in is synthesis involved A sugar Protein also B decreases glucose. Michaelis Protein (Km) for protein A and, increases the constant so, of affinity the

2.4. cataracts. is 3-month-old A girl developing than visually, track social not objects able all smile having are other girl’s aspects the Other being examination of normal. or to a the negative reducing for Tests glucose. sugar on are positive urine baby’s for but most enzyme is girl? Which this deficient likely in

A. Aldolase B

Fructokinase B.

Galactokinase C.

uridylyltransferase D. 1-phosphate Galactose

galactokinase is appropriately answer girl galactose. and = unable in C. deficient to Correct is The phosphorylate the (and urine). blood Galactose accumulates in galactitol, by aldose of cataract In a sugar reduced eye, lens which in galactose osmotic the causes reductase that result formation. to effects alcohol, is the in 1-phosphate and also but by galactose uridylyltransferase effects. liver of characterized neurologic Deficiency is cataracts damage results Fructokinase condition. benign a deficiency is with is B tissues. deficiency effects severe, several Aldolase on typically are Cataracts not seen.

this chapter, For thePoint. to materials please ancillary visit related additional

I. OVERVIEW

shunt) occurs monophosphate cytosol. pathway in The phosphate the (or, pentose hexose phase, It by sugar–phosphate (Fig. includes reversible a of followed an series irreversible interconversions oxidative 13.1). glucose one is phase, released phosphates adenine 6-phosphate molecule the sugar-phosphate of oxidative two reduced 1 dioxide carbon nicotinamide In and are pentose carbon as (NADPH) dinucleotide produced. a (CO2), plus demand and for supply the intermediates are rate determined direction by pathway. The of of the reactions of the reversible and provides as a body’s portion reductant. phosphate NADPH, The of a major which the biochemical functions pentose pathway glycolysis. of intermediates to required for 293), hexose and It ribose sugars p. provides nucleotide for conversion pentose biosynthesis produces of and also 5-phosphate, (see the triose mechanism a produced or directly is ATP consumed the No in pathway.

II. REACTIONS IRREVERSIBLE OXIDATIVE

formation glucose two irreversible the that of consists of for oxidative phosphate reactions lead (Fig. and each pathway molecules portion 5-phosphate, of pentose CO2, molecule 6-phosphate to the NADPH The ribulose of of oxidized three 13.2). is This for liver, and NADPH-dependent red of (see the particularly for and p. tissue 186); in mammary ovaries, the (see steroid (RBC) 148). acids (see of NADPH-dependent in the biosynthesis the NADPH-dependent p. fatty portion adrenal biosynthesis the 237); placenta, hormones lactating cells pathway glutathione for important p. reduction in blood and glands, of of cortex the adipose testes,

A. Glucose dehydrogenation 6-phosphate

oxidation glucose NADP+ (G6PD) gets 6-phosphate dehydrogenase as to 6-phosphate catalyzes the coenzyme reduced the 6-phosphogluconolactone Glucose to of NADPH. the of is reaction step and pathway. This the rate-limiting, initial committed, regulated ratio is the potent under competitive metabolic a NADPH high inhibit to enzyme substantially G6PD, inhibitor sufficiently of conditions. NADPH/NADP+ is the and most of the response with enhanced NADPH/NADP+ decreases, in increased G6PD. activity through of increases and the demand NADPH, pathway ratio for flux However, the of to p. through gene increases pathway absorptive G6PD, Insulin and expression upregulates the (see in the for the flux state [Note: of 323).]

5-phosphate 6-Phosphogluconolactone B. second step. hydrolase formation in Ribulose the by hydrolyzed is 6-phosphogluconolactone 6-phosphogluconate, the decarboxylation The of product, dehydrogenase. 6-phosphogluconate by is catalyzed oxidative of 1 (from step carbon CO2 (a molecule of phosphate), sugar– irreversible glucose), 5-phosphate ribulose third a This and second produces pentose

NADPH Fig. (see 13.2).

III. NONOXIDATIVE REACTIONS REVERSIBLE

all nucleotides synthesizing and types phosphate reactions the in nonoxidative occur The nucleic of cell pathway acids. pentose three carbons sugars catalyze reactions seven interconversion Fig. containing to (see of These the 13.2). 6-phosphate is, (needed ribose of (that fructose see nucleotide pathway) be p. to 5-phosphate and by intermediates portion to to glyceraldehyde reversible 3-phosphate). either (produced 5-phosphate synthesis; 293) the the for ribulose These permit glycolysis oxidative reactions of or converted reductive that greater for reactions than biosynthetic NADPH ribose need carry 5-phosphate. a For out for example, have many cells (which fructose transaldolase 5phosphate pyrophosphate thiamine end and (which produced the two-carbon in reaction) units) ribulose which transfers transfers transketolase an units and glyceraldehyde convert In 3-phosphate oxidative 6-phosphate, intermediates. three-carbon case, of [TPP]-requiring phase product as are the to a this glycolytic ribose from steps greater in and 3-phosphate the the nucleic the and nonoxidative oxidative the for (Fig. contrast, acids reactions the provide 6-phosphate absence for can In demand the than of when fructose need ribose 5phosphate glyceraldehyde NADPH, nucleotides is for 13.3).

(see transketolase, p. the (see branched-chain dehydrogenase (see acid dehydrogenase 112), pyruvate cycle 266). of p. α-ketoglutarate is branched-chain required 110), α-keto to p. In the complexes catabolism addition TPP dehydrogenase acid acid by and of multienzyme amino tricarboxylic

IV. USES NADPH

of NADPH one group on phosphate the from (Fig. only nicotinamide a (NADH) units dinucleotide The of coenzyme differs by presence adenine the ribose 13.4). that unique cell. enzymes allows This interact have with NADPH-specific to NADPH small seemingly change the in roles in structure favors steady-state of in biosynthetic the ~0.1, NADP+/NADPH reactions. the hepatocytes, which example, in of For reductive use is NADPH ratio cytosol the which with contrasts This oxidative (~1,000), the ratio high an NAD+/NADH for NAD+. role favors biosynthesis and some NADPH-specific section functions in important reductive This detoxification summarizes reactions.

biosynthesis Reductive A.

be can as high-energy NADPH thought a molecule. of NADH, Like electrons However, are (see p. 74). the as NADPH is to reductive rather used with of transfer for chain for electron transport biosynthesis, NADH than the seen fatty p. with potential Thus, a pathway, used (see a part steroid the the the reactions cholesterol be 76), of synthesis. glucose in conserved electron pentose (see 6-phosphate an such acid requiring hormone as 221), transformations reduction (see metabolic p. p. that, energy in 237) of in 186), phosphate is donor, can molecule of (see and therefore, negative p. NADPH,

peroxide reduction B. Hydrogen

that of are partial of from a oxygen oxygen the reduction molecular one formed reactive family (ROS) ([O2], Hydrogen peroxide Fig. of species is (H2O2) 13.5A). with as are drugs These of byproducts antioxidants level creating reactions condition the environmental toxins, formed oxidative or stress. of through the aerobic all when metabolism, compounds continuously diminished, is of and lipids serious proteins, death. cause can and oxygen damage These unsaturated reactive highly can cell DNA, and intermediates lead to chemical to disease, and reperfusion cancer, injury, number including of processes, in inflammatory implicated have pathologic aging. been a ROS compounds. of has cell several minimize The potential that protective mechanisms the toxic these generated can killing in blood microbes also of the ROS D. [Note: see (WBC; by white be cells below).]

B. of enzymes. antioxidant Actions G-S-S-G G-SH glutathione. glutathione; = oxidized = reduced [Note: Fig. See regeneration the for of G-SH.] 13.6B 1. present cells, a chemically (γ-glutamylcysteinylglycine) (GSH), H2O2 can reactions tripeptide-thiol Enzymes in Reduced antioxidant glutathione that catalyze detoxify (Fig. most 13.5B). longer oxidized by (see selenoprotein which protective This peroxidase, forms 407) p. the reaction, has glutathione glutathione properties. no (G-S-S-G), catalyzed source reductase, a The reducing a G-SH regenerates glutathione reaction cell using catalyzed by in as of equivalents. NADPH NADPH indirectly H2O2 of electrons Thus, reduction for provides (Fig. the 13.6).

products ROS the of (see catalyze superoxide other harmless to dismutase Fig. conversion and such Additional catalase, enzymes, as 13.5B). guard serve defense As of system effects as the a enzymes to these toxic ROS. group, against a

glutathione.

2. (see to (see as number laboratory. such chemicals ascorbate thereby, vitamin 381), of agents, detoxify E and reducing the 395), p. 386), intracellular A are able p. (see in reduce ROS Antioxidant β-carotene and, p. been antioxidant compounds with of correlated as as well in certain health a Consumption types has of foods certain frequency chronic other reduced of risk these rich for decreased problems. cancers are, toxic in of their to of speculate the the compounds quench tempting Therefore, that of these it ROS. is part, to expression ability effects effect an dietary clinical beneficial effects. However, clear antioxidants with to supplements as have failed show trials supplementation of In increased rate of the the case cancer than with dietary smokers lung β-carotene, rather in decreased. which compounds. many health-promoting not interaction occurring fruits naturally complex of Thus, a vegetables likely reflect of compounds, the isolated has among duplicated by and been effects antioxidant consumption dietary

system monooxygenase P450 Cytochrome C.

hydroxyl atom substrate a water one with group), into the reduced incorporate O2 being Monooxygenases (H2O). atom to oxidases) from other (creating a (mixed-function (Fig. required equivalents the system, reactions (CYP) series of In by cytochrome the this NADPH provides reducing monooxygenase P450 13.7). performs two locations system different functions separate This in cells. in may or other steroid, overall drug, by The is be a reaction enzyme CYP catalyzed chemical. where R a reactions. a actually of CYP in of a participate that heme-containing enzymes variety monooxygenases superfamily broad related, [Note: are reflects 450 the at the P450 absorbance name in The by protein.] nm the 1. mitochondrial the found biosynthesis of with monooxygenase the system function important is the hormones. inner CYP steroid associated Mitochondrial An of system membrane used compounds placenta, makes the such p. 237). steroidogenic hydroxylate a as soluble adrenal cholesterol it these hormones, In process testes, to ovaries, to the is (see in tissues, of and steroid more cortex, conversion hydrophobic intermediates water that p. The liver bile same synthesis (see acid uses system this in

D3] 390), hydroxylation active and biologically hydroxylate of 25hydroxycholecalciferol the uses to it 224) 1,25-dihydroxylated p. to and cholecalciferol form. its vitamin kidney ([vitamin D3 the to see

2. smooth foreign the associated the reticulum (xenobiotics). in The in (particularly membrane of system the endoplasmic system microsomal with functions monooxygenase found of CYP primarily Microsomal detoxification compounds the liver) pollutants and drugs such numerous products petroleum and varied as include These pesticides. of CYP (for hydroxylate I). be to toxins can system these used enzymes (phase the example, CYP3A4) microsomal two-fold. modifications these is purpose The of urine or toxic and the facilitating a in make soluble, a itself excretion its feces. activate may compound or inactivate thereby drug First, it second, more with such significantly II). polar however, molecule, p. hydroxyl Frequently, glucuronic conjugation which serve for as increase a group compound’s the solubility as 161), new will acid will (phase (see the site a the enzymes differences [Note: 491) can to Polymorphisms for in CYP in drug lead metabolism.] p. genes (see

D. microbe cell White and phagocytosis blood killing

neutrophils particles, (leukocytes) of by microorganisms, cellular such and by macrophages as ingestion and (monocytes). endocytosis the Phagocytosis foreign receptor-mediated is WBC debris infections. particularly mechanism, an It is important defense bacterial in oxygen-independent monocytes for bacteria. killing and Neutrophils with and both mechanisms oxygen-dependent are armed

1.

and Oxygen-independent pathogens. destroy use mechanisms phagolysosomes enzymes pH to Oxygen-independent in lysosomal changes

2.

oxidase bacteria killing Oxygen-dependent NADPH the myeloperoxidase work in (MPO) that enzymes Oxygen-dependent (Fig. and together include mechanisms 13.8). the the of is most MPO system Overall, the potent bactericidal mechanisms. by is system a on An antibodies phagocytic cell. attacked the by receptor a bacterium and that bind to recognized it immune invading activated NADPH O2 ( microorganism After surrounding membrane, ), reduces cell oxidase, located the the in is of free oxidized. superoxide to NADPH from tissue the as leukocyte has and internalization radical occurred, a ROS, rapid of O2 is accompanies of The the consumption respiratory that referred burst. to as formation from cytoplasm upon is activation additional plus a NADPH peptides the that [Note: of containing complex membrane-associated the Active translocate a leukocyte. oxidase flavocytochrome flavin adenine and move nucleotide (FAD) via Electrons from heme, NADPH . to O2 inflammation) cause the characterized destroyed.] (CGD) disease areas deficiencies that that formation Rare NADPH persistent in bacteria by granulomatous were of oxidase genetic chronic the sequester not severe, of granulomas and (nodular infections spontaneously catalyzed by (also or a converted H2O2 ROS), superoxide Next, dismutase. either is to phagolysosome, the ([HOCl] the In component enzyme of ions plus within acid bacteria. to lysosomal the bleach), the of converted hypochlorous present kills a heme-containing MPO, are household peroxide which presence major chloride also the peroxide to The be a partially can (OH•), hydroxyl radical reduced

H2O ROS, peroxidase. catalase reduced to by glutathione fully or be or MPO bactericidal.] Deficiencies do susceptibility because oxidase increased infection is [Note: confer to peroxide in from NADPH not

NADP(H) G; = OH• = nicotinamide = phosphate; acid; H2O2 HOCl = adenine = superoxide; hydroxyl radical. hypochlorous hydrogen dinucleotide peroxide;

E. oxide Nitric synthesis

is (NO) array of a biologic mediator in Nitric broad recognized a as systems. oxide the endothelium-derived relaxing muscle. NO by smooth vasodilation causes that factor relaxing vascular is and a as It aggregation, acts prevents neurotransmitter, function. in role also plays an essential platelet macrophage is a and a and with species (RNS). reacts because short (O=NOO−), nitrogen peroxynitrite (3–10 nitrates reactive it very half-life into and has including It tissues in seconds) nitrites O2 converted is NO as radical the (N2O), is “laughing and a is that an nitrous is gas chemically confused oxide often anesthetic used stable.] free [Note: gas” that with 1. substrates for Fig. Nitric Arginine, oxide synthase are cytosolic synthase O2, NADPH NO and ([NOS], 13.9). are and products heme, 268) FAD, the (FMN), Flavin of mononucleotide coenzymes, tetrahydrobiopterin and NO citrulline p. (see and are reaction. of have a isozymes, Three each identified. NOS different gene, the been product at (Ca2+)–calmodulin (CaM)-dependent a 133). are (synthesized enzymes (see Two rate), p. constitutive constant calcium and constantly (eNOS) primarily vasodilation They in of neural for and produce found endothelium low (nNOS) NO are neurotransmission. and levels tissue very can against be as (iNOS) neutrophils, including expressed early Ca2+-independent and an enzyme macrophages many cells, pathogens. in inducible, An defense cell such tumor proinflammatory type (TNF-α) with lipopolysaccharide iNOS as as (LPS). factor-α inducers necrosis for endotoxins and bacterial and The vary (IFN-γ), and include interferon-γ such specific cytokines, being promote of result over of in large even which compounds NO hours or iNOS, can days. synthesis amounts These produced

2.

Nitric smooth is of in mediator muscle tone. vascular an NO control and oxide endothelium the important vascular diffuses where monophosphate form (cGMP). of muscle, smooth by is to and guanylyl form NO it guanylate cyclase) eNOS in cytosolic cyclase synthesized to cyclic guanosine (or, the endothelial activates vascular cells (cAMP) cyclase to reaction analogous (see is formation of cyclic monophosphate adenosine adenylyl by This p. [Note: the 95).] entry in smooth resultant G, of muscle activation Ca2+ channels, causes Ca2+ causing rise cells. into protein kinase of cGMP The phosphorylates decreased which smooth favoring activation muscle decreasing of light-chain decreases and the myosin thereby Ca2+–CaM kinase, relaxation. This contraction blood such pressure. lowers to vascular metabolized Vasodilator which and, causes as relaxation nitroglycerin, NO, muscle nitrates, are therefore, smooth of envisioned as an NO Thus, be nitrovasodilator. endogenous can to can [Note: to NO, conditions, (NO2−) hypoxic nitrite be deoxyhemoglobin. binds which Under reduced into causing The flow.] vasodilation increasing NO and the released blood, is blood 3.

the and oxide In infection. bactericidal synthesis significantly but by activity by bacterial of is to low, macrophages, is of release activity IFN-γ response enzyme LPS normally stimulated Nitric and macrophage iNOS NO radical. Activated combine highly that form with to bactericidal decompose, that the macrophages OH• producing form intermediates radicals

4.

adhesion functions Additional the potent inhibitor platelet NO activating (by of aggregation cGMP a is and pathway). peripheral It neurotransmitter central in also is a nervous characterized as the systems. and

V. DEFICIENCY G6PD

G6PD to hereditary condition is by agents. by inability anemia hemolytic a characterized the detoxify caused deficiency oxidizing disease-producing worldwide. abnormality the in >400 most deficiency humans, G6PD individuals affecting common is enzyme million prevalence This the the parts and and Asia, tropical of Africa highest Mediterranean. has deficiency the East, in Middle different is, is fact, in of and of deficiency a G6PD the G6PD. in gene encoding deficiencies mutations linked number a family by X caused Only of cause protein symptoms. variants some clinical the resulting after clinical neonatal [Note: manifestation of 1–4 appearing G6PD jaundice In birth. to addition is days a hemolytic deficiency anemia, The may (see bilirubin jaundice, increased p. unconjugated typically from production of be severe, which results 285).] of severe The of be a chronic complications span G6PD with may shortened of deficiency a as somewhat result form hemolysis. life arising individuals from negative increased advantage This has falciparum of effect Plasmodium an malaria. by deficiency resistance in in balanced evolution an been survival, to G6PD and also thalassemias resistance Sickle trait confer to malaria.] cell [Note: the

G6PD cells in A. red blood role

activity maintenance cell that of form impairs essential G6PD the NADPH to the pool. G-SH ability of is the the Diminished for the formed results (Fig. free cell and within peroxides in This of in radicals a the the decrease detoxification 13.10). of also G-SH in hemoglobin. maintain sulfhydryl proteins, helps including states the reduced groups insoluble groups (Fig. that of attach (called masses the that those RBC Oxidation to proteins bodies) to form sulfhydryl leads formation denatured Heinz membranes of 13.11). oxidation in the Additional removed causes (less from spleen they by deformable), membrane be macrophages liver. of rigid RBC to circulation the and and proteins are generating of means G6PD Although occurs pathway pentose where all cells is of in provides affected in severe it most NADPH. individual, deficiency the the only the RBC, phosphate renew cannot or no supply the the of Additionally, RBC ribosomes enzyme. has its and nucleus Thus, enzyme particularly with variants diminished vulnerable RBC stability. are to reduced.] source [malic keep of G-SH see have Other that tissues an [Note: 186) alternative p. (NADP+-dependent can malate enzyme]; dehydrogenase NADPH phosphate pentose pathway.

B. G6PD factors in Precipitating deficiency

G6PD individuals not have they one Most who are of do show clinical (that is, mutations asymptomatic). manifestations the inherited with patients beans, some hemolytic develop are G6PD treated contract fava deficiency they ingest However, oxidant if infection. a an severe or with anemia drug,

1.

with deficiency hemolytic drugs Oxidant that used or example, G6PD (for produce anemia quinine), antimalarials not patients sulfamethoxazole example, chloroquine are remembered chloramphenicol), in acetaminophen). mnemonic primaquine antipyretics Commonly from but but antibiotics example, not (for drugs AAA: the best and (for acetanilide and

2.

the in (broad) the bean, a dietary G6PD Favism the forms for region. hemolytic of staple deficiency, to of Some the Mediterranean example, are particularly susceptible Mediterranean variant, effect fava Favism, beans, the deficiency, with have effect patients observed but individuals all fava in G6PD favism G6PD hemolytic is with deficiency. not of ingesting all

3.

the Infection is G6PD in precipitating factor deficiency. most Infection hemolysis of common response inflammatory of results The in infection the radicals macrophages. generation to free in damage. the The cause and RBC into can oxidative radicals diffuse

G6PD properties Variant C.

449) mutations (see caused variants for the are G6PD Almost in all gene by p. point G6PD. Some affect mutations enzymic activity. do not or 6-phosphate. activity, stability, mutations affinity or decreased catalytic of other NADP+ alteration However, result for decreased an in glucose binding tetramer. or as a homodimer G6PD exists [Note: Active Mutations at affect subunits the between stability.] interface can the The severity in enzyme patient’s activity correlates disease of the RBC. of amount the usually residual with For shown as can in variants classified Figure example, 13.12. be the moderate form III) G6PD (class of the is disease. prototype the of A– but normal enzyme contain with younger of most the activity G6PD, and the The RBC (Fig. RBC kinetically reticulocytes in present unstable an 13.13). removed enzyme oldest the preferentially are in Therefore, the hemolytic activity a level lowest episode. of and have RBC self-limiting. affect younger cells, the episodes hemolysis Because not does are severe the a more G6PD II) (class Mediterranean of deficiency. prototype is mutations are are (rare) stress. anemia, chronic Class the even with which hemolytic associated nonspherocytic in the I most absence severe and of oxidative occurs

D. biology molecular G6PD

DNA cause that its of 34) of G6PD cloning deficiency. mutations (see Chapter gene G6PD permitted identification of the the and sequencing for the have The More and that finding explains than identified, a biochemical phenotypes clinical variants have numerous that been 400 the been have G6PD described. deficiency the missense region. p. enzymic in are result coding mutations Most (see mutations in 449) that that A− a from G6PD by single amino enzymes Mediterranean and the G6PD differ acid. mutant respective normal variants represent Both frameshift activity G6PD Large been not deletions suggesting likely lethal. identified, or is that absence complete of have mutations

VI. SUMMARY CHAPTER

phosphate includes series reversible a pentose pathway of oxidative followed irreversible (Fig. The interconversions phase sugar–phosphate an by 13.14). or No is directly pathway. consumed the ATP produced in detoxification dinucleotide reduced of providing biosynthesis portion pathway nicotinamide phosphate and in for adenine important The (NADPH)-producing is the reducing equivalents oxidative reductive reactions. to 6-phosphate irreversibly ribulose and is In glucose two this 5-phosphate, are part converted of produced. NADPH the pathway, step inhibited NADPH/NADP+ which by regulated dehydrogenase a in glucose catalyzed the strongly is 6-phosphate rise by ratio. (G6PD), is The Reversible nonoxidative reactions interconvert sugars. 3-phosphate or and (glycolytic intermediates). nucleic required nucleotide pathway ribulose converts synthesis, and for 5-phosphate the to This glyceraldehyde acid of fructose ribose part to 6-phosphate 5-phosphate, gland; the biosynthesis, a of and reductive adipose in in equivalents is fatty the source hormones liver, mammary and and such liver; testes, cholesterol reducing adrenal placenta, tissue, in in the cortex. acids of ovaries, production the steroid NADPH as It hydrogen for cells reduction. by is peroxide (RBC) blood also required red the peroxidase Reduced water. by to is used reduce (G-SH) glutathione peroxide to glutathione glutathione as using oxidized (G-S-S-G) NADPH of electrons. source is the reduced reductase, by The produced glutathione acid in hormone for synthesis which liver, liver kidneys. steroidogenic system, reducing NADPH synthesis P450 in provides equivalents mitochondrial in used the the steroid and and D is bile cytochrome the in tissue, vitamin monooxygenase activation microsomal of compounds to pollutants. NADPH (xenobiotics), a such system foreign variety drugs The as detoxify and uses microorganisms. process for provides NADPH in equivalents phagocytes the invading reducing the of eliminating (O2) molecular dismutase. superoxide in by produce be can peroxide from oxygen NADPH turn, to which, superoxide electrons radicals, to converted uses NADPH oxidase and acid formation Myeloperoxidase of chloride hypochlorous the catalyzes from and ions. bactericidal peroxide and characterized disease NADPH defects granuloma severe, in formation. infections Rare chronic cause by oxidase genetic persistent, granulomatous gas oxide required vasodilation of prevents bactericidal by NADPH platelet acts for macrophage that vascular nitric synthesis is causes activity. as important aggregation, and an neurotransmitter, relaxing the radical mediate helps a (NO), free smooth muscle, is from synthases NADPH-dependent and NO (NOS). made three arginine O2 different NO by The and (nNOS) vasodilation neuronal isozymes very produce levels of respectively. neurotransmission, NO endothelial constantly for low (eNOS) and of amounts inducible pathogens. for The against (iNOS) defense NO large produces isozyme the the maintenance to pool. the the of essential deficiency for NADPH G-SH impairs ability is that form cell G6PD of the of because do additional not have affected The most cells they RBC NADPH. sources are hemolytic X-linked by ingestion or peroxides is by characterized following oxidant severe beans, of the caused free deficiency radicals of drugs, anemia administration of an production disease and G6PD infections. fava the on depends the enzyme. of extent residual anemia amount The of nonspherocytic hemolytic I least with most chronic the are common), severe associated Class (and anemia. variants, jaundice. Babies neonatal deficiency experience with may G6PD

the ONE best Choose answer.

3.1. to where preparation primaquine a an In for India malaria is given of a man young trip is endemic, chloroquine-resistant area prophylactically. thereafter, in condition a hemolytic glucose he develops to due a Soon 6-phosphate dehydrogenase. deficiency level A the following underlying of is a of of which the the the of enzyme and deficiency consequence cause hemolysis? less-than-normal

6-phosphate A. Glucose

of dinucleotide B. Oxidized form nicotinamide adenine

D. glutathione Ribose form 5-phosphate of C. Reduced

for (G-SH) answer by in essential = C. integrity phosphate (NADPH)-dependent is glutathione cell is adenine maintained Correct Glutathione reduced red form nicotinamide (functional) and reductase. this dinucleotide of portion phosphate The oxidative pathway. pentose from is the the NADPH 6-phosphate this reduced. and, of a Individuals a G-SH the NADPH pathway, to regulated decreased of dehydrogenase to ability have enzyme generate glucose a (G6PD), keep therefore, decreased with deficiency ability oxidant G6PD deficiency When a drug anemia. develop with hemolytic treated patients with an primaquine, as some such Primaquine not levels. glucose does 6phosphate affect is nor coenzyme a dinucleotide G-SH pathway the reductase. (NAD[H]) used adenine produced as by Nicotinamide neither by cause 5-phosphate ribose does A decrease hemolysis. in not

3.2. pressure) refractory to arterial (low acute failure bacterial response inadequate by organ circulatory from hypotension to perfusion persistent infection. shock, characterized Septic fluid a a resuscitation, of severe and results inflammatory blood state is level nitric associated mortality rate with oxide. has It changes the in and a high of correct? is shock statement concerning likely Which most septic

causes oxide endothelial an synthase oxide. A. increase in nitric of nitric Activation

B. is mortality oxide. of the half-life nitric of the High long result

the deaminated by oxide bacteria. C. for nitrogen nitric Lysine, synthesis, is source

oxide hypotension. cause the nitric enzyme is of Overproduction a by the calcium-independent D. of

oxide results long-lived) to = synthase calcium-independent, nitric in by vasodilation Correct (not D. excessive answer (iNOS) leading of (NO) inducible nitric short-lived hypotension. oxide Overproduction endothelial constitutive The at produces of NO rate. consistent is and levels enzyme low (eNOS) a of the lysine, as the not use NOS source arginine, nitrogen.

3.3. of of lower effects. the prescribed high in intake juice, been level advised because grapefruit levels is drug increased increasing in of individual of cholesterol consumption risk an drug recently (atorvastatin) the the who results side to a blood, limit the reportedly An has to juice inhibits Atorvastatin enzyme and substrate a P450 for is grapefruit the cytochrome CYP3A4, juice enzyme. the is concerning most statement enzymes Which correct? likely CYP They:

dinucleotide. reduced adenine from electrons nicotinamide A. accept

hydroxylation molecules. B. hydrophobic the catalyze of

C. from synthase contain nitric in they that oxide differ heme.

oxidase. D. function an with association in

B. Correct answer = hydrophobic them soluble. CYP hydroxylate more compounds, The enzymes water making (NADPH) phosphate pentose electron Reduced donor. from the the pathway dinucleotide phosphate is nicotinamide adenine Both heme. and contain enzymes nitric oxide CYP synthase the the isozymes

3.4. 6-phosphate X-linked are cells In consequences glucose liver. in male more pathophysiologic are in the dehydrogenase deficiency, who such for patients blood apparent as in than cells red (RBC) hemizygous other reasonable explanation the following most provides response? this for Which the one of different

A. can channeled cellular RBC, glycogen, damage. not liver, Excess in to 6-phosphate be glucose the thereby but averting in

dinucleotide integrity. adenine required cell to B. in supplying nicotinamide Liver reduced alternative cells, the contrast RBC, for for phosphate have mechanisms maintaining

the depends pentose the ATP on not exclusively RBC required 6-phosphate cell have of production do pathway. to maintain to glucose integrity C. of shunting mitochondria, phosphate Because

cells, liver in RBC, D. decreases 6-phosphate, contrast damage. activity cell of resulting glucose level glucose the in In 6-phosphatase to

Correct answer B. = than related amounts large to directly RBC are pentose generating no have reduced the Cellular to needed, nicotinamide phosphate of (NADPH) cell which for decreased other of regenerate dinucleotide of glutathione, means ability is damage NADPH. the reduced pathway phosphate adenine and that substrate (NADPH), is decreased not product (glucose It the increased 6phosphate), problem. is not 6-phosphatase. glucose do RBC have pathway pentose The does not generate ATP. phosphate

3.5. several vitamin enzymes for is derived thiamine. essential metabolism from An the of coenzyme to in thiamine could blood be used of the activity cells determine Measurement what red in of the enzyme status body?

pyruvate the that so, do such pyrophosphate cells Red have not not thiamine as mitochondrial mitochondria do thiamine-derived require (TPP). coenzyme and, dehydrogenase blood enzymes contain status. do clinically whose to transketolase, used thiamine assess the is they TPP-requiring contain activity cytosolic However,

Proteoglycans, and Glycoproteins Glycosaminoglycans, 14

related materials chapter, please to visit thePoint. ancillary For additional this

GLYCOSAMINOGLYCAN OVERVIEW I.

Glycosaminoglycans of negatively charged (GAG) are large complexes heteropolysaccharide chains. a up typically small to 95% associated are with They protein), which forming carbohydrate. consist (core of amount protein proteoglycans, of generally and fibrous producing of thereby the special GAG water, as structural proteins amounts ground which, ability proteins have collagen, along substance, such such the body’s up matrix extracellular large the to the fibronectin, of makes the basis fibrillin-1, and forms as with elastin, matrix adhesive gel-like that bind (ECM). of the serve with the for as proteins, The and adhesive and materials interacting sieve, ECM. influencing flexible hydrated GAG a a structural through molecular as movement support ECM, the GAG, of secretions also of as properties compounds the presence lubricating to which naming mucous The original from of viscous, these result the led mucopolysaccharides.

II. STRUCTURE

sugar–amino of sugar]n repeating [acidic unbranched, a composed unit (Fig. long, are GAG chains heteropolysaccharide disaccharide 14.1). [Note: A exception which is keratan than rather an acidic sulfate, contains galactose single sugar.] The is is either eliminating which charge. positive D-glucosamine or sugar amino its thus D-galactosamine, in group acetylated, usually amino the sulfated be a nitrogen. or sugar nonacetylated on The on 4 may carbon 6 amino also or Liduronic acid acid epimer C-5 The acidic sugar either D-glucuronic is or (Fig. its 14.2). sugars nature. contain groups uronic give pH GAG and, physiologic that carboxyl are groups These with charged strongly sulfate their at negatively the together (−SO42−), negative

A. relationship Structure–function

tend extended of of to high heteropolysaccharide chains Because these solution. negative be the concentration in charges, each molecules. by of are surrounded They water repel shell and other a the other, to magnets past each When slide polarity brought slide seem together, same each past much they as two other. with This consistency the produces mucous secretions slippery and fluid. of synovial forced volume. compressed, the and GAG the water smaller of is out, solution GAG a squeezed is to When a are occupy their the back released, the compression of of is charges. repulsion the volume hydrated because original, GAG spring to their When negative resilience fluid synovial vitreous of to This the contributes eye humor (Fig. and of the the property 14.3).

B. Classification

of The according monomeric composition, GAG and divided type types major degree linkages, units. sulfate are and of six of to glycosidic location of and Figure the GAG structure their body illustrated distribution is in in The 14.4. the proteoglycan for protein, monomers. and GAG, All hyaluronic acid, found forming except attached are covalently to sulfated are

C. Proteoglycans

and of outer Proteoglycans on ECM found the surface in are cells. the

1.

cartilage a GAG of up chains covalently proteoglycan are structure: consists found linear to core protein 100 which to of monomer Monomer attached. A in units, which because chains, each remain of from composed to each of and charge may protein out be These core extend up repulsion. other separated the 200 disaccharide from structure resembles brush The bottle resulting a (Fig. 14.5). of proteoglycans, chondroitin cartilage the include and GAG sulfate keratan In sulfate. species that Proteoglycans common into encode with core grouped [Note: are gene families features. structural proteins aggrecan in The cartilage, is family neurocan, an (aggrecan, versican, abundant example.] and brevican), 2.

is protein. through a linkage: covalent a (galactose-galactose-xylose) trihexoside GAG–protein residue and most linkage This serine in the commonly An group the between is and (Fig. serine the (see bond formed O-glycosidic p. xylose of 86) the hydroxyl 14.6).

3.

monomers associate molecule hyaluronic aggregates. one to can proteoglycan Many form formation: Aggregate proteoglycan acid of with not the ionic primarily association core acid. and between the through is occurs and interactions covalent protein hyaluronic The proteins proteins small called is association The stabilized additional (Fig. by link 14.7).

III. SYNTHESIS

amino chains acidic donated the sequential and heteropolysaccharide primarily (UDP) their by The of are derivatives. uridine diphosphate elongated by sugars alternating addition reactions by of a family catalyzed glycosyltransferases. are The specific are the cell, in GAG and their produced not from cytosol. in export for Because occurs the Golgi the primarily synthesis

Amino A. sugar synthesis

glycolipids. proteoglycans, of components such essential sugars glycoproteins, and Amino glycoconjugates are as sugars 20% connective of as pathway glucose The this is flows (hexosamines) as synthetic where pathway. of active through much very amino in tissues,

1. monosaccharide the 6-phosphate precursor of is N-acetylglucosamine N-Acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc) and and N-acetylgalactosamine fructose The (GalNAc). N-acetylgalactosamine: the the UDP-GlcNAc gets a isomerized, amide and on 6phosphate A sugar (Fig. hydroxyl product acetylated, activated, glutamine, and fructose the the nucleotide by nitrogen is of group producing replaced glucosamine 14.8). the UDP-GlcNAc. UDP-GalNAc epimerization of by generated is these sugar that to used forms the chains. the sugars are elongate is of nucleotide It carbohydrate amino

pyrophosphate.

2. Fig. NANA, (see acid: nine-carbon, acidic a N-Acetylneuraminic monosaccharide a is sialic 17.15, a each the p. site. member different at acylated family of which of 209), of acids, is glycolipids, compounds terminal residues of usually carbohydrate of These frequently, as GAG. less of of oligosaccharide side glycoproteins, chains or, found are p. (see nitrogens synthesis sources glycolysis; of (derived 6-phosphate) and from fructose and are for see carbons intermediate (an the N-Acetylmannosamine Fig. immediate in phosphoenolpyruvate 6-phosphate 102) NANA the 14.8). can monophosphate reacting oligosaccharide, activated triphosphate NANA to (CTP). be a to it must cytidine (CMP)NANA growing be Before added cytidine by with reaction. catalyzes CMP-NANA the synthetase metabolism diphosphate.] a only a in in CMP-NANA is than the the monophosphate which nucleotide is human nucleotide sugar [Note: carrier rather

B. synthesis sugar Acidic

is D-Glucuronic are L-iduronic 6 (−CH2OH oxidized carbon glucose acid, an and of C-5 components with structure epimer, acid, its that of whose −COOH), essential → GAG. lipophilic compounds, and the acid 240), water is increases (see for (see statins detoxification steroids 282), required as bilirubin 224), (see solubility. p. such p. (glucuronidation) including because drugs, the conjugation also of Glucuronic p. with many glucuronate a and and acid mammals (other pigs plants including primates, glucuronic In is than ascorbic (vitamin humans), guinea precursor of acid

as in C) shown 14.9. Figure enter D-xylulose metabolic uronic by also pathway acid can pathways. mechanism the a This which provides dietary central

1. Glucuronic obtained of acid: from diet be can small Glucuronic lysosomal the and GAG. from acid degradation in the amounts in reacts synthesized glucose by It the can which uronic uridine with UDP-glucose. 1-phosphate acid is and triphosphate pathway, converted to (UTP) also be produces glucuronidation glucuronic the and for supplies synthesis Oxidation GAG acid, form that acid (Fig. UDP-glucuronic of UDP-glucose 14.10). pentose product enter (see the metabolism Dxylulose in pathway intermediates is produce which humans 6-phosphate fructose phosphate The end and the glyceraldehyde glycolytic acid 3-phosphate and 5-phosphate, of glucuronic can Fig. 14.9; also Fig. see 146). 13.2, p.

carbohydrate acid L-iduronic chain. acid Synthesis occurs acid: of after has incorporated the 2. l-Iduronic into been D-glucuronic 5epimerase D-to causes the epimerization L-sugar. of the Uronosyl

synthesis Core C. protein

membrane-bound it The the glycosylated then (RER), Golgi, endoplasmic RER is protein the to moves the ribosomes is enters and reticulum made core by glycosyltransferases. where rough lumen, on by

synthesis Carbohydrate D. chain

synthesis formation on will which chain is protein chain core short by synthesis on the a carbohydrate initiated of occur. linker Carbohydrate serine to transfer linker formed (or xylosyltransferase. of the catalyzed UDP-xylose from common threonine) a the group by trihexoside most xylose of The hydroxyl a by a is molecules galactose the are then Two added, trihexoside. completing (Fig. sequential of This alternating is amino addition acidic sugars and followed by D-glucuronyl some epimerization of Liduronyl 14.11) residues. and to

Sulfate E. addition group

be has a occurs to carbohydrate after been the of growing GAG sulfated into Sulfation incorporated monosaccharide the chain. ([PAPS] attached a the is with sulfate molecule see group Fig. sulfate a of adenosine to the of monophosphate The 5´-phosphate; 3´-phosphoadenosyl-5´-phosphosulfate source p. 210). 17.16, by reaction is sulfation catalyzed The sulfotransferases. in sulfate shown of Figure Synthesis 14.11. GAG is the chondroitin sulfated donor synthesis [Note: p. is PAPS the in also glycosphingolipid sulfur (see 210).]

chains maintenance in the skeletal several the disorders, which results development growing sulfation of defect the autosomal-recessive affect in one of the A of proper chondrodystrophies, the system. GAG and

IV. DEGRADATION

enzymes contain ~5. a degraded at GAG which that lysosomes, are are active pH of most hydrolytic in a group, acid are hydrolases. called as Therefore, these enzymes The neutral.] mechanism is into the the low cell from the prevents enzymes pH occur is optimum leakage where protective a destroying should [Note: that cytosol pH the to location GAG months minutes body. The and its by the half-lives GAG the influenced in and are from of type vary of

A. phagocytosis GAG

a compounds, of are extracellular which be first must by GAG be (phagocytosis), membrane engulfed Because forming are cell degraded. GAG the they the cell-surface or vesicle inside invagination to of efficiently which p. GAG vesicle a (see single with the degraded digestive are forming a 150 in fuses then for vesicle of a lysosome, This discussion phagocytosis).

B. degradation Lysosomal

digestion. GAG complete acid degradation large of number The of for hydrolases lysosomal requires a producing the polysaccharide First, endoglycosidases, cleaved oligosaccharides. by chains are nonreducing end last chain, of (sulfate (see removed degradation Further sugar) exoglycosidases). being from synthesis each of added the the (by first sequentially sulfatases 127) occurs group during or oligosaccharides p. or the the group these in some they enzymes the hydrolyze of 14.12. Figure shown are and Examples of bonds 170) (see in degradation are the of and p. also [Note: involved 210). lysosomal (see p. Endo-and exoglycosidases glycoproteins glycolipids in result carbohydrates, tissue the partially causing enzymes of degraded in these accumulation damage.] Deficiencies = glucosamine; S sulfate.

are is the sulfatase because which amino active the rare Multiple deficiency disease (Austin lysosomal an storage defect in formation site acid at a all enzymic activity in required disease) occur. of derivative formylglycine, a to for nonfunctional sulfatases of

V. MUCOPOLYSACCHARIDOSES

The of live and/or Fig. diseases caused degradation lysosomal (see deficiency mucopolysaccharidoses any involved heparan the normally are sulfate one dermatan by hydrolases (approximately the 1:25,000 births) sulfate hereditary of of a in 14.12). tissues, GAG of by as of causing They accumulation a in intellectual symptoms, and disorders skeletal disability. ECM are range various lysosomal such characterized and deformities, progressive autosomal-recessive All are which Hunter linked. except X is syndrome, disorders gradually one of deteriorate. birth are normal apparently diseases are Children these for homozygous then at and who any occurs death in severe In deficiencies, childhood. no currently There is cure. in in of the of urine. degradation the lysosomal presence Incomplete GAG results oligosaccharides These mucopolysaccharidosis the to have been be because on specific by would substrate nonreducing missing of end that residue present used can structure identifying the the fragments oligosaccharide, the the diagnose for enzyme. the patient’s Diagnosis of confirmed hydrolases. the by is cellular lysosomal level the measuring used macrophages degrade have produce and Hurler transplants, treat marrow cord Hunter that blood and in to limited syndromes, success. transplanted Bone which been with the enzymes GAG, Enzyme syndromes therapy replacement does is damage. not for neurologic but both available prevent

VI. GLYCOPROTEIN OVERVIEW

attached. Glycoproteins (glycans) are are proteins oligosaccharides covalently which to proteins.] [Note: posttranslational of Glycosylation common is modification most the important from ways. in They several proteoglycans differ the that contain proteoglycans. of variable Glycoproteins less typically carbohydrate amounts of but highly than its the example, G glycoprotein of (IgG) aggrecan contains >80%. For whereas immunoglobulin proteoglycan carbohydrate, contains mass the <4% as can instead charged. structurally units linear; although contain or to length, residues may short is consequently, is be diverse; and two and, glycoproteins, it negatively ten glycan often relatively (usually not is branched repeating may longer); of be disaccharide does the not In sugar in (by hormones, the viruses), of gastrointestinal other of Membrane-bound of tracts, range recognition cell-surface as biologic in components a and cellular urogenital and mucins lubricants. broad including group cells, they the cell-surface phenomena, (such and blood as and of where antigenicity participate the the ECM protective glycoproteins antigens), act as of almost addition, glycoproteins, in although albumin plasma an the present are is all human exception. globular In proteins 14.13 Figure functions. some summarizes glycoprotein

VII. STRUCTURE OLIGOSACCHARIDE

cases of components of acid (a with 6-deoxyhexose. composed neuraminic branched the are of of D-hexoses, L-fucose, some addition a generally (glycan) nonose) oligosaccharide primarily and The heteropolymers in glycoproteins

Carbohydrate–protein linkage A.

to glycan an protein through may an p. the attached be (see N-or The link 86). O-glycosidic sugar asparagine group group either hydroxyl latter the to chain threonine an amide attached the the serine is a of chain or the case, case, In chain. and, to former side the side of in hydroxyl case p. hydroxylysine glucose the the O-glycosidic linkage In an there of galactose of collagen, and between or is group [Note: (see 47).]

oligosaccharides B. O-Linked N-and

the may types both may linkage type (N one only same or or contain linked) glycoprotein glycosidic have of within O molecule. A

1.

or linear either or branched arranged glycans a variety have of O-Linked: more a in wide a sugars of may O-linked one pattern. The glycoprotein or extracellular Many membrane components. in found as are glycoproteins determinants. ABO red of the blood O-linked example, oligosaccharides the blood group surface cells For provide help on sugar is group on blood is the GalNAc, glycan the A. terminal the If If is blood is the it B. group galactose, is GalNAc present, blood is If galactose neither nor group O. the

2.

two N-Linked: oligosaccharides broad glycans The into high-mannose N-linked and oligosaccharides. fall complex classes: and high core for GlcNAc, mannose. Both contain diverse example, shown whereas Figure group L-fucose, the GalNAc, additional sugars, of mannose a the complex oligosaccharides oligosaccharides 14.14, but in contain contain NANA, pentasaccharide primarily the same

VIII. GLYCOPROTEIN SYNTHESIS

Proteins in the on are to free destined ribosomes. cytoplasm function synthesized cytosolic glycoproteins, the cellular exported membranes, are for to or attached proteins, including synthesized to that on cell, from be However, RER. destined ribosomes the lysosomes, are molecular These that destinations. proper to addresses, specific the proteins sequences contain as targeting act signal proteins their be the p. to N-terminal the allowing directs hydrophobic extruded (see An growing into sequence lumen proteins to these the polypeptide initially RER,

459). the to which (Fig. then sorting vesicles via are The secretory proteins as acts transported center Golgi, a 14.15). from the targeted (or into to Golgi, that those (or secreted packaged cell lysosomes) with fuse for be contents. release lysosomal) are and cell glycoproteins are the that their are the vesicles In membrane membrane, buds destined cell are which cell to components to into the become Golgi forming that integrated off, that are Those vesicles of glycoproteins add their membrane-bound the membrane membrane. the portion are membrane oriented the Fig. with outside (see [Note: carbohydrate the cell Therefore, on glycoproteins the the of 14.15).]

A.

and include carbohydrate are of the sugars, glycoproteins precursors of UDP-GalNAc. UDP-glucose, UDP-galactose, which The UDP-GlcNAc, nucleotide components and donate CMP-NANA the from (which sugars chain. addition, In guanosine (GDP)mannose, GDP-mannose), diphosphate is to synthesized GDP-L-fucose growing may present, has oligosaccharide a physiologic is NANA charge the pH.] negative When [Note: at the acidic specific in three-dimensional of amino covalently attached acid determines a the where the specific to glycosylated. whether of the structure the are protein, is or acids not oligosaccharides chains side protein amino The

B. synthesis O-Linked glycoprotein

very of p. 158). is glycoproteins (see the of Synthesis that similar O-linked GAG to the be synthesized on sugars extruded attached First, are which to is the lumen. to into its protein RER and the group threonine or specific Glycosylation a with (from the begins to of transfer of the hydroxyl residues. UDP-GalNAc) serine GalNAc glycosyltransferases stepwise the for are to sugars) the the responsible membranes The Golgi. bound of the (from individual synthesis of oligosaccharides protein a of actual ribonucleic synthesis a acid (RNA), growing order, as substrate. recognizing the in oligosaccharide DNA, They the and VII), appropriate for using by but the specific Unit template is without act (see instead required as structure

C. glycoprotein synthesis N-Linked

glycoproteins the membrane lumen of a N-linked of (Fig. the occurs participation of the requires Synthesis the phosphorylated dolichol pyrophosphate), RER in form the RER lipid of and of (dolichol 14.16). The the RER processed is initial Golgi. in and product

acid); group or = Nacetylneuraminic messenger Asn asparagine. = mRNA RNA; terminal (fucose =

1. O-linked As with synthesis: glycoproteins, oligosaccharide RER the Dolichol-linked and is the synthesized on lumen. its protein the enters with it not sugars. However, individual become glycosylated does first constructed. is Instead, a lipid-linked oligosaccharide an membrane and linkage containing oligosaccharide consists mannose, This dolichol synthesis; lipid from intermediate of through glucose. attached GlcNAc, an a p. cholesterol of (an made RER to 221) pyrophosphate see and first to glycosyltransferases dolichol (see to are membrane-bound by sequentially Fig. be by the The sugars GlcNAc, added mannose glucose followed 14.16). in of The entire dolichol be protein–oligosaccharide is transferase the the residue amide present transferred glycosylated then to by 14-sugar to nitrogen in oligosaccharide RER. asparagine a an protein from the glycosylation.] N-linked [Note: Tunicamycin inhibits

proteins, primarily glycosylation either are II). or defects processing of in disorders caused assembly by of (type (CDG) oligosaccharide the I) glycosylation (type syndromes Congenital N-linked

2.

processed addition N-linked protein, the processing: by specific moves oligosaccharide of the as mannosyl removal the glucosyl N-Linked through oligosaccharide and the residues RER. After glycoprotein is to the as Golgi in fucose and a or additional and completed (for GlcNAc, terminal addition complex produce then are a GalNAc, NANA mannoses Finally, of example, chains the sugars variety groups) by to oligosaccharide the glycoprotein. of not mannose-containing Fig. leaving further, high-mannose are in glycoprotein processed branched, they chains Alternatively, a (see 14.16). example, or (for can N-linked by is a of released that of they the the become the glycoproteins glycoproteins of same The membrane). as ultimate O-linked be part cell cell fate lysosomes. the targeted glycoproteins N-linked addition, to In be can glycation (see of Nonenzymatic as proteins is known p. glycosylation [Note: 33).] 3.

being in processed more on glycoproteins one can carbon 6 phosphorylated of Lysosomal mannosyl N-Linked residues. enzymes: the be Golgi or a UDP-GlcNAc phosphotransferase. phosphate a by in provides catalyzed the reaction which the these lysosomes (Fig. in packaged of membrane, sent the the 6-phosphate proteins, are mannose residues and to vesicles bind Receptors, Golgi into then located 14.17). deficient. I-Cell disease disease storage which phosphotransferase lysosomal is in the a rare is rather secreted, lysosomes. This targeted causes being than the to be to proteins acid matrix the the substrates the in for are an missing resulting lysosomal enzymes. these absent, found normally accumulation in of hydrolases Consequently, cells named [Note: seen I-Cell so of bodies disease patients disease.] of inclusion this because in is with the large of these enzymes deficient. of is lysosomal and pathway targeting found process than enzymes) In addition, urine, plasma synthetic high in amounts are (rather lysosomes indicating the the patient’s the that to by psychomotor (dysmorphic) severe skeletal abnormalities, and impairment. coarse movement, restricted I-Cell is facial features, characterized joint disease [Note:

(type Because common has and disease a mucolipidosis I-cell in mucopolysaccharidoses features 210), is termed (see sphingolipidoses II).] the it p. with childhood. early Currently, death there occurs no from and cardiopulmonary in is usually cure, complications

IX. DEGRADATION GLYCOPROTEIN LYSOSOMAL

similar of Degradation is (see p. that of to 163). glycoproteins GAG the the glycoprotein. removal of for lysosomal generally The one each component are hydrolases specific the of acid on, in order are first respective the reverse their their (last exoenzymes primarily groups of incorporation that off). remove They degradative cannot any one degradation continue. other the is exoenzymes If by missing, enzyme enzymes, A a in glycoprotein degraded very lysosomes. called diseases of caused the degradative accumulation autosomal-recessive storage diseases results by the (oligosaccharidoses), group rare deficiency one structures any in of partially of the of α-mannosidase. type fatal deficiency severe, α-mannosidosis progressive, of example, For the 3 enzyme a is to is Hurler similar syndrome, deficiency Presentation is immune seen. also but fragments oligosaccharide appear the in Mannose-rich urine. enzyme assay. is by Diagnosis

X. SUMMARY CHAPTER

chains long, repeating composed heteropolysaccharide generally [acidic negatively charged, sugar]n a (GAG) are unbranched, Glycosaminoglycans sugar–amino of unit disaccharide (Fig. 14.18). eliminating The charge. is is amino thus D-glucosamine its positive group D-galactosamine amino which usually the sugar either or acetylated, in or amino on nitrogen. on sugar 4 sulfated be nonacetylated or also may The 6 carbon a C-5 acidic The sugar L-iduronic epimer acid D-glucuronic or either acid. is its basis of that thereby body’s amounts gel-like the producing the ground GAG large the forms substance. of matrix bind water, as of also which original The properties of of naming these mucous lubricating to caused viscous, compounds the by the mucopolysaccharides. secretions are led GAG, presence keratan GAG, types of sulfate, sulfate, hyaluronic six including are major acid. heparan chondroitin 4-and There 6-sulfates, dermatan sulfate, and heparin, to except All covalently are GAG, attached monomers. forming acid, core a hyaluronic protein, proteoglycan found of aggregates. monomers hyaluronic proteoglycan molecule to with Many acid proteoglycan form a associate the in synthesized Golgi. are GAG The polysaccharide UDP alternating donated the by acidic chains amino elongated addition of are their by sequential derivatives. and sugars, epimerized to may L-iduronate. D-Glucuronate be sulfation in step is of synthesis sugars. last The of some amino the The the (PAPS). is source 3′-phosphoadenosyl-5′-phosphosulfate sulfate of completed the (ECM) matrix The secreted remain associated with or are surface extracellular of cells. the into outer proteoglycans are acid GAG lysosomal degraded hydrolases. by end first chain. are nonreducing from the broken oligosaccharides, which to down each They degraded sequentially are of of of results in deficiency mucopolysaccharidosis. one any a hydrolases the A deformities These and ECM which are as GAG accumulate in intellectual and symptoms hereditary disorders skeletal in tissues, causing such disability. and (X-linked) genetic Hurler diseases syndromes. these Hunter include Examples of are (glycans) are covalently attached. oligosaccharides which to Glycoproteins proteins the from disaccharide that (usually of does be long, carbohydrate two not length the to and short it in relatively ten is units. residues They longer), may the sugar contain differ be chain although proteoglycans branched, can glycoprotein’s serial broad lubricants. gastrointestinal the antigens), cellular cells, other of range and the phenomena, protective cell-surface mucins Membrane-bound and they including (by cell-surface hormones, and of urogenital antigenicity and (such components as viruses), biologic of participate where the in glycoproteins blood as recognition group as tracts, ECM act a of the addition, in present human proteins all of globular the In are almost glycoproteins. plasma in (RER) endoplasmic rough and the synthesized Glycoproteins Golgi. are the reticulum nucleotide the of of are components sugars. The glycoproteins carbohydrate precursors the hydroxyl in Golgi of the of in or residue from a O-Linked to synthesized are group carriers sequential serine protein. sugars nucleotide by the the transfer glycoproteins threonine their protein. an synthesized carrier, to N glycoproteins are RER of by a dolichol residue lipid membrane in asparagine its pyrophosphate, transfer N-Linked the the preformed the amide oligosaccharide of from mannose. They contain varying amounts of lysosomes deficiency for mannose I-cell N-linked A 6 the enzymes disease. the in phosphorylates in that in glycoprotein phosphotransferase results carbon at destined residues lysosomes in degraded are by Glycoproteins hydrolases. acid in A enzymes these in degraded storage glycoprotein the one of deficiency lysosomal resulting of (oligosaccharidosis), results a of partially accumulation disease structures lysosome. in any

ONE best answer. Choose the

4.1. lysosomal are Mucopolysaccharidoses hereditary diseases. storage They are by: caused

A. defects the in glycosaminoglycans. of degradation

enzymes B. lysosomes. of defects in the targeting to

increased an synthesis carbohydrate rate of of component C. of proteoglycans. the

synthesis enzymes. of insufficient of D. rate an proteolytic

E. small abnormally of synthesis proteins. of the amounts core

F. synthesis with altered of structure. heteropolysaccharides an the

Correct A. answer = the any by for mucopolysaccharidoses caused the lysosomal The proteins). deficiencies in are degradation of acid glycosaminoglycans responsible (not of hydrolases one enzyme increase, blood of to The levels lysosome, is correctly the it enzyme is so nonfunctional. targeted the not but do terms in and both In of proteoglycans amount. unaffected, protein these structure of and synthesis components of diseases, is the carbohydrate

4.2. presence enzymes the below? listed the of one a following compound which of urine in of suggests deficiency the a in patient The

Galactosidase A.

B. Glucuronidase

Iduronidase C.

Mannosidase D.

E. Sulfatase

glycoproteins Degradation last rule: answer Correct off. first the = follows on, of E. the in Because sequence, a the last is shown. this the of degradation compound step for next in of required sulfation step the sulfatase synthesis is the

4.3. delays histologic in both presentation biochemical 8-month-old and is skeletal An growth on diagnosed abnormalities, I-cell development with based coarse facial his and and disease with boy testing. and features, on by: disease is I-Cell characterized

decreased A. surface O-linked cell production glycoproteins. of

elevated B. hydrolases of the in levels acid blood.

inability N-glycosylate C. to proteins.

proteoglycans. increased D. synthesis of

urine. E. the oligosaccharides in

Correct = the synthesis targets answer deficiency for is signal matrix. the of that of hydrolases B. needed storage disease 6phosphate the a to lysosomal lysosomal mannose by phosphotransferase acid disease caused I-Cell enzymes in within accumulation and lysosome degradation. This because materials cell the impaired of from of of results the secretion these I-cell the to choices disease relates or function. None other of lysosomal of (a polysaccharidoses the not type characteristic II the I-cell disease urine but Oligosaccharides mucolipidosis). muco-and in are

4.4. heparan infant corneal his clouding sulfate sulfate An has with urine. in and dermatan activity of would confirm Decreased enzymes below Hurler of which the diagnosis listed the suspected of syndrome?

α-L-Iduronidase A.

α-Glucuronidase B.

C. Glycosyltransferase

sulfatase D. Iduronate

Hurler in corneal due αL-iduronidase. with is deficiency Correct degradation clouding, = A. answer (GAG) of glycosaminoglycans lysosomal the defect syndrome, in a a to and deficient syndrome. Hunter is β-Glucuronidase deficient is sulfatase in syndrome, Sly in iduronate GAG synthesis. enzymes Glycosyltransferases of are

4.5. Distinguish glycoproteins and proteoglycans. between

short, to are structurally branched, diverse (glycans) Glycoproteins are attached. which oligosaccharide chains proteins which core attached. to Proteoglycans protein chains (GAG) a long, consist are of glycosaminoglycan unbranched, sugar]n are of sugar-amino composed heteropolysaccharides of units. large complexes [acidic charged repeating GAG disaccharide negatively

visit this please thePoint. chapter, to materials related ancillary For additional

I. OVERVIEW

(hydrophobic) water-insoluble molecules (Fig. of are a organic heterogeneous Lipids group 15.1). membrane-associated association of p. lipoprotein in are in lipids or found compartmentalized, lipids 227) blood in of albumin. of transported the or solutions, body generally aqueous Because droplets as as or in in adipocytes, particles protein, triacylglycerol (see their insolubility in on with case provide energy major hydrophobic permits body, the and the contents of also aqueous of they of cells structures. a subcellular for the partitioning that barrier Lipids source are and regulatory fat-soluble some (for serve of steroid and in and additional major the homeostasis). prostaglandins the have the control body Lipids hormones functions vitamins example, functions, coenzyme play body’s the or roles in clinical lipid some problems encountered such Deficiencies or major physicians, the of of imbalances to as and by obesity. atherosclerosis, can diabetes, lead metabolism

II. UTILIZATION ABSORPTION, SECRETION, AND DIGESTION,

The called acids U.S. consists by of of ~78 of (see is triglyceride glycerol ([TAG], backbone adults to that which >90% three fatty Fig. g, [TG]), lipids daily is intake esterified formerly (FA) a triacylglycerol average 15.1). lipids cholesteryl remainder primarily consists the phospholipids, (FFA). of nonesterified The cholesterol, dietary of and (free) FA esters, digestion dietary in in completed of begins intestine. stomach lipids The is the and the small in summarized The Figure process 15.2. is

A. Digestion in stomach the

is in the digestion Lipid stomach limited. gastric gastric catalyzed is the by mucosa. originates secreted lipase the that the glands is and back lingual It tongue at lipase that of from by relatively stable, 6. acid enzymes Both values 4 optimal to are pH with of acid fat. are These particularly milk as in those carbons) found containing lipases (≤12 such FA medium-chainlength short-or from hydrolyze TAG molecules, FA whom primary is lipases a in lipid these Consequently, for play digestion in calories. important role fat the of source infants particularly milk (CF). pancreatic with important enzymes as with insufficiency They fibrosis also individuals digestive become cystic those in such a TAG FA) complete patients short-to near or pancreatic those lipase gastric and Section aid (especially in medium-chain lipases absence molecules with these Lingual of degrading despite D.1. (see below).

Cystic fibrosis B.

is European in ancestry ~1:3,300 of most of and genetic prevalence the States. the lethal common births has in disease United Northern CF a Caucasians on chloride CF mutations for disorder gene functions is (CFTR) channel conductance by an testes, the to regulator a glands. sweat protein lungs, pancreas, epithelium in caused the transmembrane that and as CF the autosomal-recessive of Defective and water. in and increased decreased of uptake secretion chloride results CFTR sodium preventing insufficiency. pancreatic clogs pancreatic surface mucus that leading the the to thereby in the thickened pancreas, intestine, the from pancreatic of enzymes reaching results In cell ducts, water the depletion on and replacement with supplementation these enzymes vitamins. Treatment of includes fat-soluble progressive disease lung infertility.] pulmonary [Note: chronic male and with causes infections also CF

intestine in C. the small Emulsification

duodenum. emulsification of in process lipid the critical occurs The dietary

the surface the digestive and interface can so surrounding enzymes, droplet of act the hydrophobic of the which work solution, the lipid increases droplets that area the effectively. at aqueous Emulsification peristalsis. salts namely, mechanical use the of is and Emulsification complementary to by due bile mechanisms, conjugated the of mixing accomplished two properties detergent salts, stored 224). cholesterol p. and are (see liver gallbladder, of Bile made in amphipathic derivatives in the the structure to a attached ring glycine which is consist or of Conjugated hydroxylated bile chain linkage a side amide a covalently an of (Fig. with by sterol salts molecule taurine 15.3). droplets from and preventing thereby they dietary aqueous from and lipid smaller become interact the These them contents, agents emulsifying stabilizing the droplets with coalescing. duodenal the peristalsis as p. [Note: of See discussion complete for salt more metabolism.] bile 225 a

by Degradation D. enzymes pancreatic

degraded (digested) whose The pancreatic by and enzymes, TAG, hormonally are cholesteryl intestine controlled. small in phospholipids is enzymatically the secretion esters, dietary

1.

mucosal the cells molecules intestinal taken the Triacylglycerol too of villi. degradation: are TAG (enterocytes) efficiently large to be by up hydrolyzed lipase, the which by and they preferentially removes at 1 3. FA esterase, are an Therefore, pancreatic carbons mixture Fig. thus, hydrolysis primary of of (see (2-MAG) products The are, a 2-monoacylglycerol and FFA 15.2). in the catalytically, lipase it of seen secretions significant in that found in fat.] pancreatic in protein of deficiency, severe malabsorption present), highly efficient thus [Note: pancreatic is that only (2%–3% concentrations and Pancreatic as is such results total insuring high CF, lipase second it the by of secreted at pancreas, anchors A the a and interface. 1:1 protein, at colipase, ratio lipid–aqueous the binds also bile like Colipase activity inhibitory to salts substances the bind in lipase that the presence restores micelles. of Colipase in the is intestine is procolipase, [Note: secreted activated zymogen, as the by trypsin.] which gastric drug, absorption, fat Orlistat, antiobesity loss. an thereby lipases, resulting pancreatic inhibits and in decreasing weight

2.

the (nonesterified) present Cholesteryl Most in with 10%–15% cholesterol in free is degradation: form, dietary ester the present esterified form. plus (cholesterol Cholesteryl pancreatic which by are hydrolyzed esters (see cholesteryl ester esterase), FFA produces cholesterol hydrolase Fig. 15.2). this increased enzyme Activity of is of salts. bile greatly in presence the

3.

rich Phospholipid the in A2 is activity. cholesteryl of phospholipase by bile hydrolase, ester is that, trypsin activated like like optimum degradation: Pancreatic salts and, procolipase, proenzyme requires juice for A2 a from removes a carbon leaving FA Phospholipase lysophospholipid. of phospholipid, 2 one phospholipid example, (the phosphatidylcholine becomes lysophosphatidylcholine. predominant For of digestion) remaining a (for example, leaving The carbon 1 see Fig. be by glycerylphosphoryl base lysophospholipase, FA removed can at glycerylphosphorylcholine, be that further degraded, 15.2) feces, or absorbed. the excreted in may

4. degrade the the dietary secretion that enzymes of is lipids small Pancreatic controlled intestine Control: in (Fig. hydrolytic hormonally 15.4). lipids in the Cells the (CCK), digested duodenum cholecystokinin presence partially the the and to and small in regions entering peptide of upper response the produce jejunum of intestine. mucosa hormone lower proteins of these it to salts, enzymes). and free cholesterol) release release a contract the and the bile, (causing on exocrine (causing digestive cells to acts and phospholipids, gallbladder CCK of of pancreas on bile mixture them the motility, also p. (see in slower contents small resulting a of gastric intestine decreases gastric into release It 353). the intestine from hormone, the the intestinal pH another in the low secretin, response chyme the cells of entering produce Other stomach. to peptide them to by solution the to in a activity the contents, intestinal helps bringing pancreatic causes Secretin enzymes. pH pH digestive of neutralize rich release bicarbonate the the for that appropriate pancreas

by E. Absorption enterocytes

of in 2-MAG jejunum. primary the digestion are free and FFA, cholesterol, products lipid the their bile of micelles E, inside their outside). mixed hydrophobic plus and fat-soluble on lipids vitamins on These, that clusters the coalesce of and mixture D, the groups amphipathic and disc-shaped (that form a K), (A, with hydrophilic groups is, salts (Fig. in mixed intestinal lumen micelles are environment the the soluble aqueous of Therefore, 15.5). the of of primary lipid brush the border enterocytes. site approach particles These the membrane absorption, layer contents from microvilli-rich of the intestinal is the bulk water This apical membrane that mixes lumen the an unstirred fluid. liquid by poorly separated with facilitates through of brush of the lipids transport they the absorbed. border the hydrophobic hydrophilic to are the The the micelles surface membrane unstirred water where layer salts ileum, in terminal being in are lost absorbed <5% the the feces. Bile with by absorbed to [Note: is dietary only lipids, poorly enterocytes. the cholesterol other Relative further example, (for reduce therapy intestine.] small absorption in ezetimibe) the cholesterol Drug can with intestinal the Because soluble, water the medium-chain for mucosa. are they do micelles not absorption short-and require mixed FA assistance by of

resynthesis ester and cholesteryl F. Triacylglycerol

absorbed endoplasmic reticulum the complex smooth where lipids mixture biosynthesis place. to The the lipids of by (SER) migrates of enterocytes takes Figure are FA synthetase activated form converted (CoA) their long-chain 15.6. shown into first as fatty A by (thiokinase), The coenzyme in acyl reacylations acyltransferase the acyl acyltransferases, by 2-MAG acyltransferase. TAG CoA:monoacylglycerol CoA:diacylglycerol by CoA acyl two absorbed enterocytes converted the sequential to through and the are acyl derivatives, Using fatty is acyl cholesterol (see acyltransferase form to reacylated CoA:cholesterol by Lysophospholipids by 232). of phospholipids p. acylated a are and primarily acyltransferases, family [Note: Virtually used in enterocytes to the TAG, long-chain all phospholipids, cholesteryl FA are entering fashion esters. this and form 2-MAG. FA medium-chain their are derivatives to reesterified are to converted not CoA and Short-and not circulation, they to by released Instead, are liver.] the where albumin serum they carried into are the portal

G. malabsorption Lipid

in fat-soluble in be lipid can see the increased a resulting FA, absorption known malabsorption, and condition 182) steatorrhea, in by the Lipid feces, as and/or caused lipid (including p. digestion disturbances vitamins (Fig. essential 15.7). disturbances can (causing and Such poor absorption). CF conditions, digestion) including decreased several result short from syndrome bowel (causing

FA aid ability The has nutrition medium-chain important them for made micelles the be malabsorption without medical enterocytes individuals with by to taken of of short-and therapy in mixed disorders. up

Secretion enterocytes H. from

in are newly esters resynthesized very TAG environment. cholesteryl hydrophobic The aqueous aggregate and an and apolipoprotein composed they a of droplets packaged protein nonesterified must (see by particles the (apo) layer molecule of surrounded cholesterol, and as thin of be B-48 lipid 228). a p. phospholipids, Therefore, particle its This the thereby stabilizes multiple and layer preventing increases from coalescing. solubility, particles essential the the particles B–containing all of assembly in transfer (see TAG-rich apo p. triglyceride protein [Note: Microsomal ER for is 228).] released are of the the into particles villi intestine). The vessels the (lymphatic in lacteals from small by enterocytes lipoprotein exocytosis presence the these in a gives a it The lipid-rich appearance. particles meal lymph milky after of stomach the partially chyle semifluid to is to named (as particles the given name lymph that and from opposed digested mass chylomicrons. to This the called are the of the chyme, food duodenum), passes enter left follow Chylomicrons then they conveyed blood. lymphatic to the and duct to subclavian the the the thoracic vein, where are system the The in 15.6. in production chylomicrons Figure summarized of steps are chylomicrons lipoproteins up the apolipoproteins into (immature) pick Once released from nascent mature. C-II E and high-density blood, and [Note: detailed a p. and (For chylomicron metabolism, see of structure more description 227.)]

I. tissues the by Use

of the Most chylomicrons of tissue. and contained broken is beds TAG the capillary skeletal cardiac muscle in down and adipose in and TAG lipase by degraded glycerol is to The FFA (LPL). lipoprotein adipocytes enzyme secreted muscle by and and is This primarily cells. synthesized of surface adipose cells is and capillaries anchored endothelial of the muscle luminal tissues. in LPL to the Secreted autosomal-recessive chylomicronemia or rare, coenzyme caused its deficiency of p. [Note: hyperlipoproteinemia) 228). a C-II I (type disorder (see apo Familial by LPL is a can severe fasting pancreatitis.] chylomicronemia and is which result hypertriacylglycerolemia, cause The 1.

up albumin are of FFA serum cells. free may association of The or hydrolysis be TAG taken adjacent the in until muscle Fate transported and derived fatty they enter in with cells either by adipocytes from the blood acids: directly large albumin protein by secreted is Human a serum the liver. [Note: It transports compounds and of number the a circulation, including hydrophobic in primarily some drugs.] FFA oxidize energy to produce p. can FA 190). (see Most cells needed to body molecules, 188). which are by the reesterify are produce p. (see can stored FA TAG Adipocytes FFA the also until

2.

oxidation or 3phosphate, glycerol (see be taken the from by TAG and Fate can produce p. hepatic by either glycolysis kinase glycerol of Glycerol 101) (see is enter up in used or to gluconeogenesis phosphate from which phosphorylated to synthesis released dihydroxyacetone glycerol: TAG 189). blood p.

3.

endocytosed. ligand; to and and been are vitamins, cholesteryl bind removed, the on apolipoproteins, receptors most liver amount fat-soluble the After chylomicron chylomicron Fate small the 229) remnants E (which a TAG) has esters, of is contain of (apo the TAG see remnants: p. phospholipids, of are intracellular their remnants component hydrolyzed to parts. The nitrogenous Cholesterol body. can by of bases be the the phospholipids example, recycled choline) (for and to receptor, If accumulate of plasma. in remnants the decreased liver [Note: removal of binding they impaired because the their is by III is hyperlipoproteinemia seen the see broad or dysbetalipoproteinemia rare familial This in called (also beta disease, type p. 231).]

III. SUMMARY CHAPTER

and the small lipid the Dietary continues begins stomach digestion in in (Fig. intestine 15.8). phospholipids, (TAG) pancreatic and Cholesteryl acids intestine long-chain-length degraded by triacylglycerols (FA) fatty in enzymes. small the containing are esters, important pancreatic lipase. enzymes A2, cholesterol are and of these The esterase, phospholipase most

the reaching intestine. enzymes In cystic prevents fibrosis, these thickened mucus in stomach by gastric and In the acid short-to contrast, are lipases FA milk lipase in (lingual contain lipase). fat medium-chainlength degraded TAG and emulsified dietary hydrophobic be for The lipids that lipids degradation. of efficient requires nature the occurs small bile Emulsification and in salts using (detergents). intestine peristaltic mixing) action (mechanical products nonesterified and 2monoacylglycerol, primary FA. degradation The cholesterol, (free) lipid free dietary of are (enterocytes). cells lipid absorption compounds, micelles These the facilitate form plus mixed dietary fat-soluble by mucosal intestinal vitamins, that (apolipoprotein TAG regenerate all of into called chylomicrons. which and esters FA protein with lipoprotein and activated are fat-soluble assembled use then the [apo] to vitamins cholesteryl synthesize also B-48), long-chain particles cells These blood medium-chain enter FA directly. Short-and and in lipid Chylomicrons lymph (with capillaries is released are lipoprotein as blood, apo coenzyme) the muscle their lipase adipose core into enter of the degraded C-II then by the and where the first tissues. lipids tissues. made are to the dietary available peripheral Thus, steatorrhea Fat malabsorption (lipid feces). in the or causes maldigestion TAG has ability blood. of to degraded, deficiency the A or remove after chylomicron in accumulation degrade been components, in chylomicron particles these results remnants in

answer. best Choose ONE the

5.1. the is Which one following lipid correct? digestion of about statements

A. the surface act through in the their droplets emulsified increased) lipid are of mouth (mastication). area (have Large chewing

B. bile pancreatic of the facilitates of activity mixed colipase lipase. enzyme The salts maximizing to the micelles, binding

to The and C. release peptide secretin bile. contract hormone gallbladder causes the

difficulties fibrosis reach intestine, with site lipid digestion their pancreatic cystic the small because to less Patients D. able are secretions digestion. have the of with primary

intestinal triacylglycerol-rich of independent E. is Formation of chylomicrons protein mucosa. the synthesis in

pancreatic functional disease with the the that D. into have mucus cystic = flow a Patients fibrosis, a transporter, chloride answer enzymes duodenum. Correct impedes resulting deficiency a of genetic of in thickened detergents. which salts bile mixing, as that function peristalsis, Emulsification occurs and through mechanical provides that to inhibitory presence bile activity bind restores lipase the pancreatic of salts the in micelles. Colipase that of gallbladder and causes Cholecystokinin and release release hormone causes the bile, secretin contraction stored bicarbonate. of of is the Chylomicron of B-48. apolipoprotein formation requires synthesis

5.2. about is the absorption statements intestine lipid from of one Which correct? following the

must triacylglycerol free hydrolyzed before glycerol to acids and A. fatty completely be Dietary absorption.

B. taken tissues up glycerol by is that that fatty The by by acids taken is carried chylomicrons muscle lipase, degraded lipoprotein the triacylglycerol and adipose by and producing liver. up are

the enter atoms Fatty primarily are acids the system. and lymphatic contain absorbed that carbon ≤12 circulation C. via

in in excessive D. the Deficiencies in amounts absorb blood. of chylomicrons ability the fat to result

answer Correct B. = for FA or adipose (FA) to are metabolism. providing endothelial chylomicrons muscle a providing triacylglycerols to glycerol by capillary hepatic for storage (TAG) lipoprotein of thus and surfaces tissues degradation and glycerol lipase tissue, and acids The these degraded in on fatty source in free are + to 2-monoacylglycerol that In two one FA TAG duodenum, degraded get the absorbed. and packaged chylomicrons. they require blood into directly into (not get enter nor neither micelles Medium-and FA lymph), short-chain Because production in absorption in result lipids would that chylomicrons chylomicrons. dietary of defect fat digested a decreased and contain were absorbed,

and 16 Acid, Ketone Body Fatty Triacylglycerol, Metabolism

visit additional this ancillary related For to thePoint. please materials chapter,

OVERVIEW I.

are in acids as Fatty exist molecules free body (that more the acyl triacylglycerols nonesterified) is, as (TAG). esters fatty they and complex in such acids during of sometimes the can fatty be (FFA) in plasma, in particularly occur free but Low all tissues, fasting. substantial found amounts levels of of site (TAG Plasma of point route are consumption FFA (transported adipose on circulating their or tissues). from their in albumin) serum origin tissue lipoproteins) to (most to provide provide muscle, liver, and liver energy in body oxidized the for FFA to substrate ketone many by synthesis. can the particularly and, tissues, be phospholipids lipids, components such membrane (see 201). structural Fatty and as p. acids also of glycolipids are to 206). to (see Fatty of ability proteins with those attached the p. certain associate membranes acids enhance proteins also precursors (see acids Fatty the of hormone-like 213). are p. prostaglandins acids, of Esterified fatty in reserve form in as body. tissue the (WAT), of energy TAG stored serve white major the adipose the and fatty Alterations diabetes. with metabolism in acid are associated obesity their Figure relationship pathways and illustrates carbohydrate degradation the acid 16.1 metabolic and to metabolism. synthesis fatty of

II. STRUCTURE FATTY ACID

a of carboxyl chain (see that pKa ~4.8 acid group fatty terminal consists 6) hydrophobic of a p. has with A a hydrocarbon (Fig. 16.2). ionizes, (–COOH) physiologic becoming At group carboxyl –COO−. terminal pH, the predominates the above deprotonated When the form (see pK, is pH [Note: the p. 7).] for amphipathic anionic region). fatty and has (having an its acid affinity both hydrophobic the group nature hydrophilic water, a a This giving for (LCFA), portion is fatty However, hydrophobic the predominant. acids longchain-length protein. in and highly be These with circulation must the in water molecules insoluble association are transported (primarily in the p. particles than the lipoprotein in acids fatty are form esters, fatty in acid cholesteryl and esters contained found plasma of phospholipids) 90% circulating 227). More (see TAG, of albumin, protein the in serum. in association most the in transported are with circulation abundant FFA

acid A. saturation Fatty

is, bonds acid saturated) Fatty or more bonds one be polyunsaturated). double no or be (that is, may chains double contain contain (that mono-or In saturated humans, monounsaturated. majority or the are the trans the double are rather always are When than in cis present, bonds they configuration. nearly in acid fatty The bond to the double of that a (Fig. cis position kink causes at bend introduction or 16.3). double the more has If they two three-carbon are fatty spaced always bonds, at acid or intervals. decreases the chain increasing the a melting of Tm. increases fatty temperature double (Tm) acid, the In length general, [Note: whereas addition of bonds the some lipids. acids maintain helps nature contain double Because of typically lipids of presence LCFA, the membrane bonds fatty fluid those in of and unsaturated See fatty p. 363 for dietary the trans a discussion cis acids.] occurrence of

bond and length Fatty B. double positions acid chain

in names importance physiologic 16.4. and listed are Figure of fatty The some structures of common acids predominate, In humans, an being of carbons) with fatty (16, number carbon found acids atoms the with (>22 brain. 18, fatty acids or even longer in 20) carbon numbered, carbon atoms are The as carbon the 1. carbonyl with beginning and carboxyl and the before positions to bonds. indicates chain, the double those colon in of the number colon after the The number carbons the of the end) (relative indicate numbers and 14–15). bonds For carbons 20:4(5,8,11,14), long in as has 8–9, carbons 5–6, arachidonic 11–12, denoted four (between Figure acid, and example, is 20 double 16.4, Carbon carbon the is the carbon the also 2, which group is and γ-carbon. βcarbon, 3 attached, carboxyl called the 4 is α-carbon, is carbon the [Note: to the group length.] is terminal of The called regardless chain ω-carbon the carbon of the methyl fatty also referenced (methyl) of can in the The a relative chain. end the ω bonds double acid be to fatty ω ω-6 six bonds end (Fig. acid the because Arachidonic terminal an to is the from bond acid double as referred is 16.5A). be The (Fig. designation n-6 equivalent also of [Note: used may 16.5B).] ω-6 the acid essential linoleic fatty 18:2(9,12). acid Another is acid. an fatty is In ω-3 α-linolenic 18:3(9,12,15), essential contrast, acid,

C. Essential acids fatty

substrate α-linolenic in lack the arachidonic and to that of needed enzymes precursor of the is acid ω-6 are for the development, that important are humans for 213), dietary prostaglandin synthesize fatty Linoleic growth essentials we because acids precursor the acid, ω-3 acid, synthesis them. p. (see and essential Plants fatty with acids. these provide us acid linoleic the diet. deficient acid if is Arachidonic essential [Note: in becomes a for the and of fatty discussion ω-3 acids.] of nutritional 362 significance ω-6 See p.

the provide (rare) barrier that molecules can skin water result synthesize of inability in scaly fatty to dermatitis a result a (see acid as 206). deficiency p. dry, in Essential an

III. NOVO SYNTHESIS DE ACID FATTY

proteins the converted fatty from excess the to obtained can nutrients be these Carbohydrates body’s in diet and of acids. needs for extent, glands a mammary primarily lactating acid adults, in fatty and to in the lesser tissue. novo synthesis liver occurs and, de adipose In endergonic is and cytosolic process p. 70) This (see reductive. ATP incorporates (NADPH). coenzyme adenine (CoA) from A phosphate the dinucleotide fatty acid chain, nicotinamide growing reduced carbons acetyl into using and It Dietary [Note: acids. also TAG fatty supply a 321 of of nutrients for metabolism well-fed the the See p. state.] in discussion dietary

A. Cytosolic production CoA acetyl

to acetate the mitochondrial The of units CoA synthesis fatty is from transfer the acetyl cytosol. in step acid first (see the pyruvate is acetyl by (see acids and p. of by the Mitochondrial amino certain oxidation of CoA p. 266). 109) produced catabolism of portion acetyl portion only CoA CoA cross the cannot acetyl cytosol. mitochondrial enters membrane, the However, the and inner the so citrate (OAA) condensation acetyl synthase CoA part does as with by citrate oxaloacetate of It (Fig. the of produced by 16.6). cytosol to citrate [Note: transport the citrate occurs when of high. concentration the The mitochondrial is isocitrate causing inhibited of isocitrate ATP, accumulate when cycle to of the and This large by (see presence acid tricarboxylic amounts dehydrogenase the (TCA) p. 112). citrate is of is observed be a viewed signal. as may Therefore, citrate high-energy cytosolic is of and both pathway.] synthesis, amount ATP this Because the fatty for needed acid increase enhances citrate ATP in a large and by In OAA cytosol, citrate cleaved acetyl ATP citrate CoA the to lyase. is

malonyl CoA B. Acetyl to carboxylation CoA

and in by acid for in decarboxylation acyl carboxylation of the fatty The groups energy the condensations the cytosol. then is synthesis supplied carbon-to-carbon carboxylation of CoA by CoA is malonyl acetyl (ACC carboxylase catalyzed CoA ) acetyl to The (Fig. 16.7). transfers ( ACC ) bicarbonate reaction. dioxide carbon (CO2) from ATP-requiring in an B7), to The (see biotin covalently (vitamin carboxylase of is coenzyme residue the lysyl Fig. a bound which is p. 28.16, 385). group transfers bound carboxyl the CoA. carboxylates to acetyl ACC biotin, which activated the

acetylCoAcarboxylase.

diphosphate.

1. step the regulated This rate-limiting carboxylation is regulation: Acetyl the synthesis CoA in Fig. short-term and fatty carboxylase both acid (see 16.7). ACC is polypeptides). ≥2 form a of The protomer of inactive (complex enzyme the which and causes activated allosterically allosterically The to depolymerization. CoA citrate, is pathway), which polymerize, by (the causes inactivated of by product end protomers palmitoyl A of is second regulation phosphorylation. mechanism short-term reversible by (AMPK) Adenosine protein monophosphate–activated kinase phosphorylates ACC. and inactivates by by phosphorylation activated AMP kinases. AMPK is several itself and allosterically via covalently A least (cAMP)–dependent AMPK activated kinases by protein kinase these one (PKA). At AMP of is cyclic epinephrine ACC phosphorylated glucagon, hormones, counterregulatory and of in inactive the and as Thus, (Fig. presence is such 16.8). of presence ACC the is dephosphorylated insulin, active. and In the analogous of is regulation glycogen synthase (see p. to This [Note: 131).] allosterically. regulated covalently itself and both is = CoA phosphate. A; coenzyme ADP

2. a of (particularly calories consumption synthesis, regulation: an thereby increase long-term Prolonged diets) synthesis. diet low-fat in CoA excess high-carbohydrate, Acetyl ACC causes carboxylase fatty containing acid increasing A or a effect. diet high-fat, low-carbohydrate has opposite low-calorie the the carbohydrate sterol via (SREBP-1c). element–binding the and [Note: factor protein-1c factor transcription glucose) is via by synthesis (specifically response (ChREBP) ACC regulatory upregulated insulin by carbohydrate element–binding protein transcription C. (see acid similarly is regulated. below) synthase Fatty function on regulation The of described are p. SREBP and 222.] through the decreasing and acid plasma used treatment and of lowers of 2 activity TAG (by ACC type activation expression inhibition Metformin, diabetes, SREBP-1c). of fatty inhibition (by phosphorylation) AMPK, synthase in in ACC resulting of lowers by glucose increasing by Metformin muscle. uptake blood AMPK-mediated glucose

synthase fatty C. acid Eukaryotic

by synthesis of synthase remaining (FAS). of homodimeric in acid catalyzed The enzyme fatty series is eukaryotes multifunctional, fatty the reactions acid two The the to carbons the CoA end malonyl carboxyl series of from acceptors. involves of of a process acyl addition domain. 4ʹphosphopantetheine-containing multicatalytic Each different protein FAS a (ACP) acyl polypeptide domains is with six carrier plus a enzymic monomer a (vitamin B5, derivative of see pantothenic p. acid 4ʹ-Phosphopantetheine,

during carries terminal its and to units catalytic fatty thiol of domains acyl (–SH) synthesis. them 385), the presents acid FAS on group component is of a CoA. also It a is FAS In [Note: prokaryotes, multienzyme complex.] Figure to brackets reaction numbers 16.9. in The refer below

dinucleotide phosphate. adenine

1.

is acetyl acetyl ACP. from CoA An group transferred the group the to –SH of transacylase. Domain: Malonyl/acetyl CoA–ACP

2.

a of condensing the on group a transferred below). cysteine fragment site, residue temporary the this (see to two-carbon enzyme domain holding [4] Next, –SH is

3.

CoA. a ACP accepts The from malonyl now-vacant three-carbon malonyl group CoA–ACP Domain: transacylase. Malonyl/acetyl

4.

released. malonyl the on the with residue acetyl ACC by is the cysteine group group condenses CO2 The ACP as on added originally unit attached is the domain. result ACP The a to four-carbon from free the The energy of drives decarboxylation reaction. the loss known enzyme. also synthase, Domain: 3Ketoacyl–ACP as condensing

of next reductions group three and the The the NADPH-requiring corresponding by convert dehydration a a group reactions acyl saturated step. 3-ketoacyl to pair

1.

to alcohol. keto reduced group an The is reductase. 3-Ketoacyl–ACP Domain:

2.

of is creating and double water A bond between 3 molecule removed, trans α-and (the carbons 2 a β-carbons). Domain: 3-Hydroxyacyl–ACP dehydratase.

3.

is double reduced. bond The Domain: Enoyl–ACP reductase.

saturated results remains in domain. which This whose production steps four-carbon fully of are a group the the three to and sequence attached (butyryl) carbons ACP terminal of the repeated by to [3*], attachment malonyl liberating of from a the the are cysteine asterisk), condensation an the with two unit CO2 ACP group transfer residue (indicated to of The groups the [4*]. the the steps and beginning the ACP butyryl [2*], of reduced the and β-carbon reduced at [5*], then [7*], is from group hexanoyl-ACP. 3, carbonyl (carbon the generating The the dehydrated carbon [6*], sulfur) third repeated a the cycle into CoA) malonyl reactions is each the from time unit fatty times, incorporating carboxyl five two-carbon end. growing of at more chain This acid (derived the acid fatty synthetic is the process a palmitoyl-S-ACP. length carbons, of When 16 terminated reaches with lactating [Note: acids produced mammary the fatty in are Shorter-length gland.] palmitate releasing fully (16:0). bond, thioesterase, thioester of FAS, the a Palmitoyl the activity final cleaves of saturated molecule catalytic passed at acetyl acid. fatty acid acceptor), (the All (ω) have CoA the methyl malonyl two except the the first [Note: CoA donated end the by original found the in acyl palmitic which are carbons of through rate-limiting nature reaction.] of the the underscores This ACC

sources D. Reductant

of a (reducing The requires reductant NADPH, 14 palmitate agent). synthesis one the of (see The pathway 145) supplier pentose major phosphate a NADPH. is p. each Two molecule produced of pathway. enters 6phosphate NADPH are for this glucose that pyruvate, malate 16.10. and malic to malate The enzyme Figure dehydrogenase), (NADP+-dependent also by cytosolic conversion CO2), NADPH decarboxylated produces (and in in is shown cytosolic oxidized as which cytosolic malate of Fig. cytosolic OAA by reduction [Note: Malate the from arise (see NADH-dependent dehydrogenase of can malate 16.10). NADH of glycolysis for this reaction the (see One required is source cytosolic 101). p. cleavage OAA, from can lyase.] citrate turn, by citrate ATP in arise palmitate Figure 16.11. glucose summary shown of and A the interrelationship in synthesis between is metabolism

PDH dehydrogenase. tricarboxylic pyruvate acid; carboxylase; = = PC pyruvate

E. elongation Further

primarily is reticulum end addition smooth (16:0), Although endoplasmic of by (SER). end product palmitate, the primary it two-carbon can the the further of in elongated the LCFA saturated be FAS carboxylate a activity, fully 16-carbon, units to Elongation of requires enzyme. rather than a separate enzymes system multifunctional a and Malonyl the electrons. donor, the is CoA two-carbon supplies NADPH has very-long-chain capabilities, synthesis required are elongation for brain brain it carbons) to 22 over acids fatty additional that ([VLCFA] lipids. the The of allowing produce

Chain F. desaturation

cis present (fatty LCFA desaturating acyl responsible adding bonds). desaturases) SER is, also double Enzymes (that CoA for are in the and require NADH, oxygen b5, adenine reactions flavin dinucleotide its desaturation (FAD)-linked reductase. The cytochrome (O2), and the fatty The acid

H2O. get oxidized to as NADH the gets O2 reduced carbons acid, double oleic amounts is small first inserted and 18:1(9), acid, and 9 primarily 10, palmitoleic typically 16:1(9). between of bond producing The can with variety additional of be combined made fatty through polyunsaturated acids A elongation. desaturation

10 5, desaturases to ability carbon the the lack from bonds to double 9, introduce Humans the 4 6, but ω end and have carbon chain. of is acid. and linoleic essentiality linolenic of acid ω-3 the polyunsaturated the ω-6 nutritional the This basis for

triacylglycerol Storage as G. components

to of molecules molecule of acid fatty consist a three di-, Mono-, two, esterified one, glycerol. or and triacylglycerols of and of their of acids resulting formation in Fatty neutral esterified are negative through fat. carboxyl a charge groups, loss is is acylglycerol [Note: room called An at fat. that a solid temperature If an it oil.] is liquid, 1. type. three the esterified to fatty TAG Arrangement: not acids form to are glycerol a of same The molecule usually a unsaturated, The on 3 either. on carbon carbon 1 carbon is on saturated, that 2 typically acid be fatty that is and typically can the acid(s) the presence Tm decrease(s) of Recall of lipid. fatty the the that unsaturated shown Figure of in a An example molecule 16.12. TAG is

2.

stable adipocytes cannot coalesce form anhydrous. storage white and soluble slightly in TAG to Because function: large by are and that nearly they Triacylglycerol oily form themselves, water are within only micelles droplets body. lipid the major are cytosolic droplets of energy reserve These the brown through in as TAG p. of stored source heat (see thermogenesis nonshivering a serve adipocytes [Note: 79).] 3.

during fatty 3-phosphate Glycerol acceptor 3-phosphate the is TAG initial synthesis. synthesis: acids Glycerol of its pathways (Fig. two for major are There production 16.13). on described third p. process (glyceroneogenesis) A is [Note: 190.] reactions of both see from 101). using to In p. glucose, synthesis) produce liver of pathway phosphate the can first the dihydroxyacetone TAG ([DHAP], tissue, produced primary and glycolytic site 3-phosphate be (the adipose glycerol 3-phosphate dehydrogenase by DHAP reduced glycerol to 3phosphate. is glycerol adipose the to (see kinase tissue, to 3phosphate A not second glycerol in liver, glycerol free in convert glycerol Fig. but pathway found uses 16.13). is (GLUT-4) in adipocytes The transporter 312). (see glucose [Note: dependent insulin p. glucose plasma are adipocytes levels de to low, when a only ability TAG limited synthesize glycerol Thus, phosphate and cannot produce have novo.] 4.

as fatty Fatty through processes can must participate A to be metabolic its activation: (bound a TAG CoA activated before free acid it link) thioester synthesis. form such acid to in converted fatty a on catalyzed by This Figure illustrated CoA acyl synthetases reaction, is of p. 177, in (thiokinases). 15.6 family

5.

synthesis: 3-phosphate pathway four glycerol 16.14. from Triacylglycerol involves This reactions, shown in Figure addition two and of third the fatty acid. the These the include of CoA, acids acyl removal fatty of addition the from phosphate, sequential fatty

H. fate liver in tissue and Triacylglycerol adipose

form of droplets a the anhydrous In is nearly the WAT, cytosol in stored in cells. as TAG fat requires for as when fat,” mobilization serves the fuel. It “depot body for ready it TAG stored liver. in Little healthy is lipids particles lipoprotein Instead, other form (VLDL). most lipoproteins packaged called apolipoproteins very-low-density and with is exported, to where the Nascent to directly derived and VLDL deliver tissues. they blood to mature peripheral endogenously into lipids secreted are the the function derived) Recall [Note: 15 from that carry lipids. Chapter chylomicrons (exogenously dietary Plasma Chapter are 18.] discussed in lipoproteins

IV. FATTY OXIDATION AND MOBILIZATION FAT ACID

as body’s form TAG, stored storage of reserve. fuel neutral WAT, acids in the Fatty major the serve in because reduced they are stores of largely metabolic and highly energy concentrated TAG provide anhydrous. of compared from or kcal/g to Fig. fatty and yield oxidation the H2O (as The fat 4 protein to acids carbohydrate, is CO2 kcal/g complete 9 see on 359). 27.5 p.

fat A. release acid Fatty from

their from hydrolytic FFA release of form. and fat glycerol The of requires mobilization TAG stored the is lipolysis achieved of process This by lipases. lipase preferred triglyceride is initiated hormone-sensitive generates diacylglycerol which the adipose by (HSL). for a It substrate (ATGL), is that lipase lipase. by (MAG) The product MAG of acted HSL upon is monoacylglycerol

1. Hormone-sensitive regulation: phosphorylated kinase. HSL cAMP-dependent when a is active by PKA, lipase protein cell adenylyl as epinephrine) bind (such membrane the β-adrenergic cyclase receptors cAMP and adipocyte produced catecholamines (Fig. to is activate in when 16.15). The the phosphorylase of that (see of process Fig. is activation similar to glycogen 131). 11.9, p. ACC is inhibited hormone-directed [Note: cAMP-mediated by (see activated Because when is Fig. cascade the phosphorylation, off TAG and fatty 16.8), turned degradation synthesis on.] acid turned is is insulin, In presence the of and HSL levels inactivated. of is plasma dephosphorylated high ATGL. suppresses expression also of Insulin Fat access limits are of that protein (perilipin) droplets [Note: HSL. by coated a droplet.] to HSL phosphorylated by allows the and of PKA binding of translocation Phosphorylation perilipin = diphosphate; adenosine ADP phosphate. pyrophosphate; =

2.

kinase. The by glycerol: lack Fate degradation metabolized glycerol because glycerol during TAG cannot adipocytes of they released be glycerol liver, has to transported is kinase. through the Rather, the which blood the be reaction liver 3phosphate resulting glycerol can the used converted 16.13. glycerol 3-phosphate Figure TAG illustrated of in in The the by or reversal to can dehydrogenase to be form DHAP DHAP participate glycolysis can or in gluconeogenesis.

3.

serum through membrane to fatty of acids: Fate cell albumin. the move the adipocyte FFA and The bind of as are in muscle, for enter and to energy cells, mitochondria. their They transported tissues are get such oxidized to activated derivatives, CoA Regardless red fuel levels, no be their by plasma blood FFA cells used mitochondria. have for of cannot (RBC), which to but appreciable are energy not acids for use the clear. less any reasons extent, The fatty does brain acids from released [Note: to fatty the reesterified adipose 3phosphate. glycerol 50% are TAG of Over express pyruvate produced (PEP) WAT to an the and 3phosphate phosphoenolpyruvate by to incomplete carboxykinase. glycerol version gluconeogenesis: via carboxylase of OAA not via kinase, glyceroneogenesis, phosphoenolpyruvate and does glycerol is OAA pyruvate reduced (by is The glycerol to to converted gluconeogenesis) reactions which common 3-phosphate. PEP is to and DHAP, glycolysis in FFA, decreases diabetes The and type with (see plasma molecules p. insulin 2 resistance process obesity associated 343).]

B. Fatty β-oxidation acid

acyl pathway CoA, fatty CoA, is from NADH, mitochondrial end fatty of carboxyl acetyl in are which β-oxidation, producing a two-carbon called the of removed FADH2. major successively catabolism pathway and fragments the The acids for

1. outer (thiokinase), an transport fatty cytosol After fatty converted of by mitochondria: mitochondrial it membrane. cell, the acyl CoA acid Long-chain LCFA in its CoA is long-chain enzyme enters to a the into derivative synthetase a the mitochondrial transported Because that acid matrix, inner in fatty must mitochondrial be the occurs membrane CoA. impermeable is to the β-oxidation across a the mitochondrial acyl the into group Therefore, matrix. the carrier specialized from cytosol transports long-chain This process this is is (Fig. shuttle carnitine called transport the carnitine, and rate-limiting carrier 16.16).

a.

CoA First, of enzyme the (CPT-I), outer membrane. steps: by from an I Translocation mitochondrial carnitine is palmitoyltransferase the to carnitine transferred acyl group known CAT-I also is acyltransferase CPT-I for carnitine [Note: I.] as an forms reaction regenerates free acylcarnitine This CoA. and matrix acylcarnitine transported mitochondrial the exchange for Second, translocase. carnitine by into is free the in carnitine–acylcarnitine mitochondrial carnitine carnitine. acyl membrane, the catalyzes mitochondrial of the palmitoyltransferase to in enzyme an group free Carnitine transfer thus inner regenerating matrix, or of the CAT-II), the (CPT-II, CoA from 2

b.

groups mitochondrial CoA into shuttle thus long-chain CPT-I, inhibitor: the preventing matrix. acyl Malonyl entry inhibits of Carnitine the mitochondria cytosol transferred indicated when synthesis acid and degraded. in made the be into CoA), by cannot newly occurring Therefore, fatty the of the (as presence malonyl palmitate is [Note:

(ACC2), Muscle of regulation acids, it synthesize fatty although of ACC does allowing the not mitochondrial contains isozyme βoxidation. tissue, The contains liver both isozymes.] Fatty thiolase reaction oxidation the the is the CoA/CoA acid by As ratio: regulated (Fig. acetyl also decreases ratio increases, CoA-requiring 16.17).

dinucleotide. adenine nicotinamide

c.

obtained the it products. can Carnitine from where found in Carnitine diet, is sources: be meat primarily kidneys It lysine an liver but the methionine pathway or skeletal found also can be from amino the synthesized not acids by and muscle. in in enzymatic cardiac and distributed by are carnitine these of uptake Therefore, the and or synthesis by tissues latter endogenous provided the diet on totally blood. dependent of in carnitine all ~97% body.] the Skeletal muscle contains [Note: d.

deficiencies: LCFA Such ability tissues use deficiencies as decreased fuel. Carnitine result of a to in that is be by carnitine the carnitine and causing in excreted. a cardiac and membrane defects to caused muscle kidneys, of uptake by carnitine transporter skeletal Primary deficiency prevent Treatment carnitine includes supplementation. defects the acid oxidation excreted of Secondary in leading are decreasing carnitine availability. urine, that as of deficiency the in occurs primarily accumulation acylcarnitines a to result fatty carnitine renal secondary disease or acid those antiseizure Acquired carnitine be (decreased valproic for with deficiency in seen, drug example, synthesis) (decreased the can liver carnitine reabsorption). patients taking in be by and deficiencies CPT-I Defects CPT-II. caused mitochondrial can oxidation [Note: in also the impairs fuel liver, during for a LCFA process) deficiency fast. affects endergonic ability greatly (an that inability where to use glucose to tissue’s synthesize an CPT-I coma, severe and hypoglycemia, to lead death. can This deficiency liver the and affect CPT-II muscle. skeletal and cardiac can affects skeletal muscle. severe) form The most least common (and as presents weakness exercise. with muscle prolonged It myoglobinemia following of low in avoidance and in but medium-chain supplemented and a adopting fasting carbohydrates fat with includes high TAG.] diet Treatment 2.

mitochondrial the or carnitine entry of the CPT inner without Shorter-chain can aid ≤12 membrane acids fatty Fatty the mitochondria: acid carbons into cross system. activated oxidized. are enzymes by Once mitochondria, matrix their are CoA inside derivatives and the they to milk. human are in acids [Note: Medium-chain plentiful fatty dependent CPT-I, not inhibitory.] CoA not on is oxidation their Because malonyl is 3.

β-oxidation reactions: The of first Figure shown β-Oxidation in 16.17. cycle is It fatty the β-carbon sequence the 3) involving reactions shortening acid in the results at carboxylate two (carbon end. by a carbons of that consists four of releases oxidation produces thiolytic produces CoAdependent NADH, oxidation acetyl and a a FADH2, CoA. second The hydration, an a steps a that cleavage molecule that of that include is specificity. step enzymes chain-length with catalyzed Each by by the a are catalyzed protein.] steps last three For trifunctional LCFA, [Note: fatty for plus FADH2. of even-numbered producing repeated one CoA one one cycle and steps are number (where acetyl carbon acids − is saturated (n/2) chains These times n of NADH carbons), four each the 1 two acetyl CoA. The final cycle produces be in The V. acetyl CoA used hepatic can oxidized ketogenesis (see or below). by coenzyme I, by NADH coenzymes Complex Q electron reduced the The are oxidized FADH2 (see and by 75). p. chain, transport allosteric gluconeogenesis.] thus 119), is oxidation positive (see carboxylase effector acid CoA of p. pyruvate and a fatty Acetyl [Note: linking energy β-oxidation acid fatty yield 4. The high. energy from β-Oxidation is yield: and and molecule which ATP to acetyl of FADH2, H2O CoA example, generated. produces the For CO2 NADH, palmitoyl from can be CoA, 131 of 7 8 7 oxidation a requires ATP. two activation However, acid fatty of the palmitate is (Fig. yield 129 from ATP net Therefore, the 16.18). of synthesis comparison provided atoms even long-chain degradation of fatty number an and A 16.19. acids of saturated with of carbon the in is processes Figure

adenine adenine tricarboxylic dioxide. TCA CoQ acid; dinucleotide; = dinucleotide; CO2 Q; coenzyme = carbon = = nicotinamide NADH

5.

very-long-chain long-, fatty overlapping CoA species, there are mitochondria, In Medium-chain CoA or but for deficiency: distinct medium-, acyl dehydrogenase short-, dehydrogenase specificity acyl four acids. fatty fatty either with each β-oxidation, most European in fatty (MCAD) common Caucasians descent. higher dehydrogenase births acyl deficiency, of Medium-chain CoA is with a an incidence Northern error worldwide, 1:14,000 being disorder, in autosomal-recessive of found inborn the CoA; hypoketonemia increase in results to six urine), ten severe acids carbons (because fatty It and to and p. their production oxidize be (which see hypoglycemia must decreased measured decreased reliance of accumulate (because acetyl the with tissues ability on glucose), of in 195). can Treatment of includes fasting. avoidance

6.

carbons odd three as the of fatty carbons, are process until an reaction number This final same proceeds even of steps of the fatty with reached. with acids that an carbons: Oxidation of acids by number is a metabolized three-step CoA, propionyl This (Fig. by pathway product,

16.20). of produced is amino metabolism Propionyl [Note: (see during also acids the CoA certain Fig. p. 20.11, 266).] a.

carboxylated, synthesis: d-Methylmalonyl First, CoA forming propionyl CoA CoA. is D-methylmalonyl carboxylases. for other an CoA and the has ATP, ACC absolute and do requirement coenzymes propionyl carboxylase biotin enzyme most as The

b.

to formation: CoA enzyme L-form racemase. CoA methylmalonyl the l-Methylmalonyl is D-isomer the by converted Next, the

c.

rearranged, enter are TCA the (see cycle carbons the 113). Succinyl which L-methylmalonyl CoA, can forming Finally, of succinyl CoA synthesis: CoA p. acid the only This is generated of from glucogenic precursor a fatty oxidation.] [Note: example vitamin requires mutase of (deoxyadenosylcobalamin). a CoA enzyme coenzyme form methylmalonyl The B12 two require (see body is reaction p. one that B12 vitamin in reactions of the The 379). only mutase vitamin and patients [Note: propionate deficiency, B12 excreted are In methylmalonate both the with urine. in one the and affinity is heritable unable described: form. Two mutase one patient in and which its which types in vitamin reduced methylmalonic for coenzyme or B12 coenzyme) (or has of the acidemia deficient is convert to missing been have the aciduria into results acidosis metabolic Either manifestations.] and type in neurologic 7.

acids fatty 2,3-enoyl Fig. that β-oxidation: as serve oxidation of CoA acid substrates for (see cannot fatty The generates Unsaturated hydratase intermediates unsaturated 16.17). additional enzymes are Consequently, required. derivative acid), the of 3,2-enoyl bond 2-trans Oxidation additional by which isomerase, one derivative as hydratase. at β-oxidation 3-cis double converts the a three carbon, rounds such an 18:1(9) the after of (oleic odd-numbered to requires required CoA enzyme, obtained at isomerase. 18:2(9,12) of to even-numbered carbon, (linoleic an Oxidation requires a the double in an reductase CoA as 2,4-dienoyl such addition NADPH-dependent bond acid), produced by equivalents acids, fatty are saturated acids are their than oxidation.] unsaturated Because reduced fewer [Note: reducing fatty less 8.

fatty in β-oxidation: of carbons synthetase the length preliminary peroxisomes, undergo the β-oxidation Peroxisomal VLCFA because acids activates site this peroxisomes in ≥22 length. mitochondria not are and that of a primary to shortened mitochondrion for a to oxidation. carnitine) (linked diffuses further acid fatty The is In catalyzed dehydrogenation FAD-containing mitochondrial CoA the acyl a by oxidase. in peroxisomes initial to contrast βoxidation, The reduced produced is which O2, FADH2 is hydrogen to by (H2O2). peroxide oxidized this generated from ATP no is step. Therefore, catalase H2O is to H2O2 reduced The (see 148). p. by in and peroxisomes or VLCFA a the (resulting Zellweger matrix to tissues.] to (resulting accumulation blood to either peroxisomal peroxisomal in target to defects VLCFA proteins lead the the across syndrome, in adrenoleukodystrophy) of X-linked transport Genetic disorder) [Note: biogenesis membrane in ability

Peroxisomal α-oxidation C.

acid, a product βcarbon methyl metabolism, Branched-chain of (Fig. of acyl not on CoA the its for phytanic substrate because a group chlorophyll is dehydrogenase 16.21). its and product, and undergoes it pristanic as Instead, is activated is hydroxylated is 1 carbon derivative pristanal, at CO2; by β-oxidation. α-carbon is α-hydroxylase to phytanoyl which to 15-carbon-long CoA the CoA the oxidized released acid, (PhyH); deficiency PhyH. of caused a by disorder rare, a peroxisomal autosomal-recessive disease is Refsum accumulation in phytanic the results and the in This tissues. plasma of acid to halt the involves disease dietary neurologic, are symptoms treatment progression. and The primarily restriction methyl acids. (at the terminus) known and ω-Oxidation is generates also [Note: dicarboxylic that SER, Normally limit conditions of its with β-oxidation.] fatty minor MCAD is acid deficiency a seen pathway the as such upregulation

BODIES: KETONE FUEL CELLS ALTERNATIVE FOR V.

the oxidation CoA acid from derived mitochondria fatty ketone into have bodies. to capacity Liver acetyl convert nonmetabolized are acetone called Fig. (also and as The β-hydroxybutyrate), product, acetoacetate, ketone side compounds categorized 3-hydroxybutyrate (a bodies 16.22). are functional organic [Note: two bodies ketone acids.] The 3-hydroxybutyrate the and are to peripheral in transported tissues. Acetoacetate blood the cycle. CoA, be the oxidized by TCA be There can can which acetyl reconverted they to mucosa, sources in solution in not carried are blood do are used of are soluble of amount and extrahepatic Ketone muscle, of the into the peripheral 2) albumin the liver and, oxidative liver; cortex. and incorporated their the intestinal in the to acetyl renal produced CoA be 1) during capacity do concentration periods cardiac present skeletal are by other lipoproteins as or they energy such aqueous need when tissues, the proportion 3) by exceeds as to bodies for important the because the therefore, and lipids; tissues the in use sufficiently. the levels if blood Even bodies can help ketone rise meet the needs brain to its energy of Thus, p. particularly 332). which important (see is fasting bodies periods during ketone spare prolonged glucose, acid hypoketosis and fatty glucose the [Note: with hypoglycemia for increased oxidation (because of availability Disorders general picture acetyl (because CoA) of decreased of energy).] of reliance present on of carbon dioxide.

the by A. liver: synthesis body Ketogenesis Ketone

mobilized from flooded the fast, During adipose with tissue. a fatty acids liver is resulting acetyl 111) fatty 119). dehydrogenase inhibits hepatic oxidation The activates ([PC] carboxylase (see pyruvate produced acid and p. by p. pyruvate elevated see CoA produced PC OAA the gluconeogenesis by liver The than rather for the used cycle. TCA for by is Additionally, OAA in and decreases rise 113). acid the p. fatty (see ratio, to NAD+/NADH shifts oxidation the malate NADH acetyl with condensation body for decreased results of increased for synthesis. The OAA availability of CoA the acetyl ketone in CoA use amino CoA [Note: is p. catabolism acids ketogenesis (see of Acetyl by the also ketogenic generated for 262).] 1.

first by (see step, of final occurs CoA of reaction reversal Fig. CoA, of oxidation formation acetoacetyl the fatty acid thiolase synthesis: The 3-Hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl 16.17). with CoA. third CoA CoA a to acetoacetyl synthase acetyl 3-hydroxy-3methylglutaryl CoA (HMG) of Mitochondrial HMG combines molecule produce present is quantities the synthesis only rate-limiting liver. in of ketone CoA the in HMG bodies in step and is the significant synthase is intermediate p. synthesis cholesterol in (see [Note: also HMG cytosolic CoA an 220). the location pathways and The separated two by cell.] in, conditions are of, 2.

by body CoA Figure HMG is and as acetyl CoA to acetoacetate synthesis: CoA, lyase shown in Ketone cleaved 16.22. HMG produce can electron as donor. NADH 3-hydroxybutyrate reduced to with Acetoacetate form be the membrane.] mitochondrial can CoA, are ketone to they linked not cross inner the Because [Note: bodies in a nonmetabolized the form compound to the that can be can breath. blood biologically volatile, spontaneously in acetone, also Acetoacetate detected decarboxylate acetoacetate determined and 3-hydroxybutyrate between is by NAD+/NADH ratio. The the equilibrium synthesis oxidation, acid low fatty is is 3-hydroxybutyrate this favored. ratio Because during

the by use peripheral Ketone tissues: B. Ketolysis body

during peripheral the when their production bodies, fasting increases energy liver constantly tissues. provide low levels ketone synthesizes bodies Although to are ketone of the to needed dehydrogenase, NADH is 3-hydroxybutyrate (Fig. 3-Hydroxybutyrate by to acetoacetate producing oxidized 16.23). then succinyl CoA:acetoacetate transferase molecule taken (thiophorase). from by a provided succinyl is with CoA CoA Acetoacetate CoA is This its cleavage by reaction to CoA is but removed the actively by acetyl two acetoacetyl reversible, thiolase. CoA, product, This reaction pulls the forward. 3-hydroxybutyrate lacking cells including acetoacetate oxidize excluding RBC), and (for in example, Extrahepatic tissues, mitochondria brain this the manner. but efficiently produces actively to bodies, thiophorase and, ketone lacks contrast, In use ketone liver is although unable bodies fuel. the therefore, as it

diabetes in ketone Excessive body production C. mellitus

their (ketonemia) to and, When the levels in begin of their formation urine rate rise greater of the blood the bodies ketone than of the (ketonuria). is rate use, in eventually, bodies high blood 90 5,000 (T1D), in most diabetes normal ketone as urinary mg/dl (versus bodies individuals), type of mellitus of cases seen as may mg/24 hour. may concentration reach mg/dl This 1 often of where the and excretion be uncontrolled is <3 ketone in ketone The blood the the in in elevation concentration result of can acidemia. body [Note: body group ketone a ~4. The of of a has carboxyl pKa

the in it circulates the a loses as (H+) each blood, Therefore, which proton ketone body lowers pH.] in dehydration. loss ketone of glucose urinary results Also, in T1D, bodies uncontrolled and cause decreased a number plasma a volume Fig. Therefore, of acidosis circulating in of H+ (ketoacidosis, severe can the increased (DKA).] 16.24) known diabetic as ketoacidosis is fruity the symptom odor a A on of production of which increased results breath, DKA from acetone. frequent and 330) excessive ethanol fasting p. (see 318). be cases also prolonged in p. of (see seen Ketoacidosis may consumption

VI. SUMMARY CHAPTER

group, fatty carboxyl chain generally terminal acid, unsaturated. a be linear with can a or A saturated hydrocarbon fatty unsaturated acids. dietary α-linolenic are Two acids linoleic essentials: and cytosol meal the are acids Fatty containing excess carbohydrate in protein. following a and liver synthesized phosphate and used dinucleotide by provided fatty by synthesize (CoA), are to reducing A ([NADPH], equivalents Carbons acids coenzyme Fig. energy by acetyl nicotinamide ATP, adenine pathway enzyme. 16.25) by the pentose and malic provided phosphate matrix units from cytosol. the two-carbon the Citrate carries acetyl mitochondrial to by (ACC). carboxylation of ATP-requiring is CoA acid synthesis The biotin-and CoA step regulated the in acetyl malonyl carboxylase acetyl fatty CoA to palmitoyl activates inhibits ACC, Citrate and CoA it. allosterically or and also can to response (AMPK) by ACC rise epinephrine, inactivated insulin in kinase by adenosine AMP. activated protein a in glucagon, be monophosphate–activated fatty The from acyl catalyzed the of enzyme, by CoA series synthesis in fatty steps to units palmitoyl acid acceptors. remaining produces multifunctional two-carbon acid adding which a malonyl synthase, are by CoA in (SER). endoplasmic smooth desaturated elongated and Fatty reticulum acids can the be are lipases, hormone-sensitive stored (activated along lipase in by energy, and for adipocytes. triacylglycerol by degrades When inhibited with required insulin), acids (TAG) fatty epinephrine, other The provides albumin fatty carried to the by acid products are tissues, liver serum and their oxidation energy. peripheral where TAG liver, of the backbone gluconeogenic blood is where degraded serves glycerol The by precursor. as a the it the carried to degradation in Fatty (β-oxidation) acid occurs mitochondria. the from to the matrix. required transport The cytosol fatty long-chain acids to is shuttle carnitine mitochondrial and palmitoyltransferases translocase required. I enzymes II and (CPT) carnitine are A the fatty of by simultaneous preventing thereby acids. CoA, inhibited degradation malonyl synthesis and is CPT-I adenine acid dinucleotide nicotinamide β-oxidation (FADH2). adenine produces dinucleotide CoA, flavin (NADH), and acetyl Mitochondrial fatty by first of β-oxidation each with one step acyl in is four catalyzed dehydrogenases, chain-length specificity. CoA The acyl once oxidation (MCAD) stops hypoketonemia causes medium-chain decrease deficiency and fatty CoA Medium-chain hypoglycemia. dehydrogenase acid resulting in severe in is fatty fatty produced), a acid a (process CoA) number at acids odd two proceeds propionyl a (producing acetyl CoA remains. of of an with carbons carbons Oxidation fatty time three-carbon until (a biotin-and vitamin precursor) is then to B12-requiring mutase. by succinyl which ATP-requiring carboxylated This CoA (by methylmalonyl to carboxylase), methylmalonyl gluconeogenic CoA CoA CoA propionyl converted compound is in B12 or deficiency A mutase aciduria. genetic error the vitamin and methylmalonic acidemia causes enzymes. additional β-Oxidation unsaturated requires fatty of acids β-Oxidation acids fatty α-oxidation the and acids peroxisome. occur of verylong-chain fatty branched-chain of in disease, result in Refsum Deficiencies and respectively. adrenoleukodystrophy X-linked a the occurs in SER. pathway, normally minor ω-Oxidation, and acetyl CoA can fatty acid 3-hydroxybutyrate (ketone from oxidation mitochondria convert acetoacetate Liver derived bodies). into for Peripheral oxidize can which two can cell. possessing CoA, to tissues thereby cleaved mitochondria the producing be acetyl energy to 3hydroxybutyrate acetoacetate, fuels during utilized therefore, and, brain are fatty ketone by a the important fast. are bodies Unlike acids, the synthesizes thiophorase degrade bodies, for specifically required liver the peripheral to it lacks tissues. ketone them Because 1 when mellitus. as in of Ketoacidosis formation than rate occurs seen is ketone the uncontrolled of is greater type the body use, cases of diabetes rate

lipoprotein. very-low-density VLDL acid; = tricarboxylic

best answer. ONE the Choose

6.1. When oleic 6 of the representation at elongated, 18:1(9), the is product? then what acid, is carbon desaturated and correct A. B. 19:2(7,9) (ω-6) 20:2

20:2(8,11) 20:2(6,9) D. C.

1) of D. Correct the elongated are smooth = a carbons acids answer two reticulum adding carboxylate time the by endoplasmic at the molecule. end Fatty to in (carbon 1. pushes carbon farther and This 6 bonds 9 the carbon at carbon from double away The ω-9 product (n-9) is an fatty acid. 20:2(8,11)

6.2. being for A hypoglycemia. child 4-month-old is evaluated fasting tests levels blood. and at Laboratory free reveal of carnitine, in long-chain admission ketone low acylcarnitines (hypoketonemia), the bodies the fatty Free blood elevated. were acid levels in best would Deficiency explain the of of findings? following these which

triglyceride A. lipase Adipose

B. transporter Carnitine

C. palmitoyltransferase-I Carnitine

acid D. Long-chain dehydrogenase fatty

B. Correct = answer loss) result a in deficiency) in carnitine of defect levels low of (as the levels A urinary and the increased carnitine the transporter blood tissues. low (primary would carnitine result in in ketogenesis. In and fatty acid this the oxidation liver, decreases fatty of rise. free Consequently, levels acids blood would adipose fatty Deficiencies acid triglyceride decrease availability. of lipase carnitine. Deficiency would carnitine in of elevated palmitoyltransferase result I blood rise of carnitine secondary Defects deficiency, result would of in in enzymes with β-oxidation any acylcarnitines. a the in

6.3. about a of fat-free several a period A to weeks. weight, attempts teenager, for diet concerned maintain his most lipids in found be to examined, were ability to deficient synthesize be synthesize: he would If to ability his his various

cholesterol. A.

B. glycolipids.

phospholipids. C.

D. prostaglandins.

E. triacylglycerol.

are D. synthesized = Correct answer Prostaglandins acid. arachidonic from by synthesized lipids. acid dietary from humans acid essential Arachidonic an from fatty obtained is linoleic acid, but, amounts. somewhat The other teenager all in to decreased presumably, would be synthesize able compounds

6.4. seizure. following hospitalized was boy 6-month-old A a revealed was prior, appetite History for days a to that several virus. his decreased stomach owing is his (age-referenced glucose mg/dl At 60–100). normal 24 was admission, blood was of His acids. a variety positive and negative dicarboxylic for for urine bodies ketone and acyl levels Blood bound) normal. were carnitine (free A of acyl fatty is deficiency made. (MCAD) coenzyme dehydrogenase diagnosis A tentative medium-chain hypoglycemia MCAD deficiency, with is fasting consequence In patients the of: a

production. coenzyme decreased acetyl A. A

to convert A decreased coenzyme glucose. acetyl ability B. to

A coenzyme acetyl increased of acetoacetate. C. conversion to

dinucleotide. production nicotinamide adenine of increased ATP D. and

= Correct answer A. carboxylase, acetyl-coenzyme the allosteric of fall. A a gluconeogenic thus, acids levels in production results activator length oxidation in of pyruvate glucose decreased enzyme, carbons and, fatty <12 of Impaired (CoA), used never be of the glucose. synthesis Acetyl net CoA can for result is dehydrogenase acyl of deficiency, ketogenesis CoA as decreased Acetoacetate decreased a fatty acetyl and CoA. of substrate, the ketone production is medium-chain body, with a acid and needed that gluconeogenesis. both nicotinamide means Impaired for are dinucleotide and less made, ATP adenine oxidation are fatty

6.5. Zellweger accumulate, accumulate. acid only very-long-chain fatty with long-chain VLCFA whereas with (VLCFA) phytanic why acids Explain X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy, syndrome both and

proteins Zellweger to the inability to target by peroxisome. caused an matrix is syndrome to are Therefore, peroxisomal formed. activities affected functional be all because are peroxisomes unable VLCFA inability the an are but functions, peroxisome, is into to adrenoleukodystrophy, normal. as the other X-linked defect In such transport peroxisomal α-oxidation,

Phospholipid, Metabolism Glycosphingolipid, 17 and Eicosanoid

related thePoint. to visit please For additional materials chapter, ancillary this

PHOSPHOLIPID OVERVIEW I.

diacylglycerol ionic phosphodiester bond to compounds is sphingosine. that polar, by an composed attached Phospholipids of or are alcohol either a (DAG) amphipathic nature. phospholipids in Like fatty acids (FA), are attached to in head, (for it hydrophilic in serine, is phosphate has ethanolamine, plus a example, highlighted each whatever blue which group is choline; That and Fig. is, alcohol the Fig. a in hydrophobic tail long, 17.1A), FA FA-derived hydrocarbons and containing orange (shown or in 17.1A). are predominant lipids the Phospholipids of membranes. cell constituents, hydrophobic associated nonpolar with the and phospholipid cholesterol. portion membranes, of membrane a glycolipids, In of is the as portions molecule such proteins, other (see with intracellular The of phospholipid interacting aqueous hydrophilic extends Fig. environment or the head the extracellular outward, (polar) 17.1A). some proteins, for as as serve intracellular function membranes. Membrane and, messengers, to phospholipids cell phospholipids anchors reservoir also for a functions properties as for cholesterol components surfactant example, lung aid detergent solubilization. in components phospholipids serve additional and essential body, of of where bile, their Nonmembrane the

II. PHOSPHOLIPID STRUCTURE

glucose) and phospholipids: serine are have have sphingosine and backbone (from two glycerol that of (from a those as classes that palmitate). There those the role as a components are found play classes molecules. both generation of Both in lipid membranes, and of signaling structural

A. Glycerophospholipids

that contain phosphoglycerides). glycerol (or Phospholipids are called glycerophospholipids the lipids class of predominant membranes. in and constitute phospholipids Glycerophospholipids the are major of) 3 (Fig. derivatives phosphatidic All group (PA), phosphate is on contain acid a are with DAG (or which carbon 17.1B). and group. phosphoglyceride members is the of the the other is simplest PA of precursor this

1.

and esterified From The be to on an a group alcohol can an phosphate phosphatidic acid group Fig. alcohol: PA containing compound (see 17.1). 2. example: For

glycerol form their Two (Fig. molecules groups through an cardiolipin, PA esterified additional or of Cardiolipin: molecule of to diphosphatidylglycerol phosphate 17.2). membranes in found and is bacteria in eukaryotes. Cardiolipin of is and where of virtually structure respiratory the certain it electron function complexes In membrane, the inner cardiolipin eukaryotes, chain. maintains transport exclusive mitochondrial to the antigenic and Cardiolipin [Note: 3. antibodies is recognized by is

known ester) a by When glycerol by as an by produced. molecule, replaced an is linkage group the core FA alkyl is the 1 than (rather Plasmalogens: attached at phosphoglyceride glycerophospholipid a of unsaturated to carbon an ether ether an plasmalogen phosphatidalethanolamine, (Fig. is example, in which tissue For abundant nerve similar plasmalogen the 17.3A), is (Ab) pallidum, that structure bacterium that raised in against causes is Treponema the syphilis. to these for Wasserman test detects The syphilis Ab.] phosphatidylethanolamine. heart mammals. quantitatively muscle) in ether is significant lipid in (abundant the Phosphatidalcholine other “yl” than “al” [Note: their have names.] rather Plasmalogens in plasmalogen phosphatidalethanolamine. B. factor. Platelet-activating is hydrophobic a hydrocarbon chain.) ( long, 4. glycerol carbon platelet-activating acetyl ether of at saturated (Fig. A residue factor: FA) backbone 2 ether an which of than a a and to group 1 link an second alkyl glycerophospholipid example an (rather (PAF), is the carbon in has Platelet-activating factor 17.3B). by synthesized cell released PAF variety types. is of and a to acute binds It events. and receptors, potent surface inflammatory triggering thrombotic cells hypersensitivity, reactions. PAF mediates activates inflammatory, and and inflammatory anaphylactic For example, acute neutrophils kill It radicals to and activate causes and to generate platelets p. and to superoxide bacteria (see 150). macrophages aggregate alveolar blood also pressure. lowers It at low PAF effects most potent as [Note: mol/l.] of is causing one known, bioactive 10−11 molecules as the concentrations

Sphingomyelin Sphingophospholipids: B.

rather glycerol backbone amino is of alcohol the sphingomyelin sphingosine, The (Fig. than 17.4). long-chain-length precursor 209). group can which linkage, sphingosine (see amino of to also ceramide, glycolipids FA a p. A an as is amide serve through attached producing of the (LCFA) a humans. 1 sphingophospholipid of producing alcohol sphingosine significant phosphorylcholine, sphingomyelin, only group is at in esterified carbon the The to the Sphingomyelin an nerve is of sheath fibers. important constituent of myelin protects sheath the The that a myelin membranous neuronal central [Note: layered, axons and of structure insulates is system (CNS).] nervous

III. SYNTHESIS PHOSPHOLIPID

(Fig. from an donation the to alcohol of either or the phosphomonoester the to CDP-alcohol alcohol diphosphate PA cytidine (CDP)-DAG the Glycerophospholipid synthesis of of from involves donation DAG 17.5). (CMP) considered structure released cases, activated is is side product. CDP-bound an intermediate, the a as both cytidine and monophosphate In alcohol in concept key by of or CDP. a linkage to Therefore, the synthesis either activation, added, with is be DAG glycerophospholipid is uridine in p. of by diphosphate attachment [Note: the to principle This to (see their similar sugars activation (UDP) 126).] unsaturated glycerol the compounds, of vary esterified at with the found at groups carbon this The of widely, alcohol FA and carbon 1 heterogeneity saturated group can typically contributing ones to to 2. FA synthesized endoplasmic smooth are the phospholipids (SER). Most in reticulum they exocytosis. of organelles there, or and are from to Golgi the the plasma transported secreted the From to membrane cell are by or membranes then synthesis dihydroxyacetone Ether begins from lipid peroxisomes.] [Note: in phosphate pyrophosphate. ( hydrocarbon acid chain.) is a fatty

Phosphatidic A. acid

is the PA glycerophospholipids. of other precursor as glycerol a The in which A synthesis coenzyme is were 3-phosphate Figure in from in shown steps of (TAG). p. two fatty 16.14, its acyl triacylglycerol molecules 189, illustrated precursor and PA (CoA)

intestinal tissue, phospholipids, cells. mature mucosal in and lactating the can TAG mammary cells whereas essentially synthesize only erythrocytes adipose occurs all except liver, synthesis Essentially glands,

phosphatidylethanolamine and Phosphatidylcholine B.

the PE phospholipids are most in eukaryotic and phospholipids most neutral The abundant cells. PC diet route the and or from synthesis obtained either primary turnover from the the of uses The phospholipids. choline their ethanolamine of body’s In also liver, can PE [Note: from be the 2. and (see PC synthesized PS below).] 1. by kinases, choline CDP-ethanolamine. the These from pathways ethanolamine preexisting choline Synthesis synthetic of followed form, or by to or involve activated ethanolamine: conversion phosphorylation and the CDP-choline DAG CMP) molecule or the transferred choline from a phosphate phosphate of Fig. ethanolamine Finally, to is (see nucleotide (leaving 17.5).

a.

of because, The amount made although humans novo, choline for of synthesize Significance reutilization: choline is is insufficient the reutilization important can choline de our needs. 425 p. Thus, for mg with is men for 358) (see adequate dietary 550 an of nutrient intake women. essential mg and choline an acetylcholine, synthesis is for neurotransmitter.] Choline the of also a [Note: used b.

dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine in the lecithin). is pathway described pathway surfactant: the principal above The or, Phosphatidylcholine of synthesis dipalmitoyl for (DPPC lung a occupied glycerol the and DPPC, LCFA. In on 1 positions palmitate, by saturated are 2 II by which the fluid made and the secreted DPPC, is a major pneumocytes, extracellular lining is surfactant, layer component of type lipid alveoli. lung tension the reducing surface reinflate thereby this (atelectasis). Surfactant layer, the needed alveoli, to preventing collapse decrease of pressure fluid alveolar to serves reducing proteins mixture complex the with tension.] major surface being and a (10%), DPPC (90%) of [Note: Surfactant lipids is component for

ratio, as gauged by usually lecithin)/S, L lung Fetal fluid. determining can DPPC/sphingomyelin (for amniotic maturity the be in written gestation. weeks’ pneumocytes A the of value shift reflects DPPC because sphingomyelin maturity, ~32 occurs is to it at ≥2 in that synthesis from evidence

is production syndrome deaths preterm and/or (RDS) in distress associated all Western surfactant infants Lung countries. with is insufficient cause c. and maturity: Respiratory secretion a neonatal of significant in be genes. delivery by accelerated expression giving glucocorticoids induce before to shortly can of the mother maturation Lung specific natural also surfactant administration of (by used. Postnatal instillation) synthetic intratracheal or is groups, Acute fluid (CO2).] carbon dioxide RDS, (O2) alveoli, and to that of result the to the impeding (due oxygen causes exchange [Note: damage accumulate alveolar all in infection, aspiration) is of the age seen or injury, in 2. and Phosphatidylcholine bile lipoproteins. of significant The producing exports from in a the when a PC, are requires levels as for synthesis it because mechanism low, phosphatidylserine: component PC plasma even choline of free liver amounts PS to needed the by decarboxylase. To is PC, decarboxylated PE provide PS PE as in Figure steps then to illustrated 17.6. methylation undergoes three produce PC, donor methyl (see p. group is the 264). Sadenosylmethionine

C. Phosphatidylserine

synthesis is serine is by base PE provided reaction, the of tissues for (see in the Fig. exchanged free which in ethanolamine mammalian PS exchange 17.6). reversible, membrane required produce to for reaction, is used although PS This synthesis. primarily the PS has net a charge. negative role for (See clotting.) Chapter 35 PS the in online of

D. Phosphatidylinositol

shown from is as synthesized Figure and inositol 17.5. PI CDP-DAG, in free carbon phospholipid unusual 1 glycerol. on that frequently of it PI an on most carbon 2 the arachidonic stearic and contains acid is in acid thus, synthesis of and, when for a as membranes the 213) acid required. PI in Therefore, (see arachidonic prostaglandin p. reservoir substrate provides serves a charge. has PS, PI net negative Like membrane. of in [Note: composition is the the phospholipid cell asymmetry There inner example, on PS found leaflet. primarily and are PI, the for achieved 1. enzymes and “flippases” ATP-dependent by as Asymmetry “floppases.”] is known transduction across such signal of polyphosphoinositides produces The 4,5-bisphosphate Fig. as PI phosphorylation ([PIP2]; phosphatidylinositol in Role membranes: membrane-bound 17.7). membrane neurotransmitters, by the binding G to PIP2 in receptor, phospholipase the growth adrenergic and receptors activation Gq as of various hormones, factors response protein–coupled cell α1 The the α-subunit of (GPCR), C such occurs of to (Fig. on and cleavage the 17.8). cleavage, mobilization (IP3) 1,4,5-trisphosphate protein kinase of this and products intracellular inositol The and DAG, mediate the calcium the of of activation

evoke synergistically C, responses. cellular specific to act which across thus, is, Signal the accomplished. transduction membrane

2. membrane be attached in Role through a proteins covalently anchoring: membrane-bound (Fig. carbohydrate PI Specific bridge protein can to 17.9). particles by to is example, an cells that (see a 228), in For enzyme glycosyl endothelial degrades attached phosphatidylinositol capillary triacylglycerol lipoprotein anchor. lipase, lipoprotein p. (GPI) leishmania.] parasitic are [Note: proteins in also protozoans, trypanosomes and of such variety found a GPI-linked as plasma mobility integral lateral membrane membrane. a allows membrane) of increased of proteins being attached GPI-anchored an lipid extracellular part to on surface the Being (rather the than the can Fig. of cleaved action phospholipase from be (see protein the The its by anchor C 17.9). cells synthesis cells the A GPI-anchored in paroxysmal in nocturnal GPI deficiency because in complement-mediated disease protect results lysis.] of [Note: hemoglobinuria, proteins blood hematopoietic from the hemolytic

E. Phosphatidylglycerol cardiolipin and

precursor of mitochondrial large amounts a in membranes Phosphatidylglycerol is and in (diphosphatidyglycerol). occurs cardiolipin relatively It 3-phosphate. and synthesized CDP-DAG glycerol from is Fig. Cardiolipin (see to CDPDAG is of pre-existing phosphatidylglycerol. 3-phosphate 17.2) transfer of the a DAG by molecule synthesized from

Sphingomyelin F.

cell and Sphingomyelin, sphingosine-based membranes in sheath. the myelin is in a phospholipid, found in synthesis is 17.10. sphingomyelin Figure of The shown and condenses with serine, the lost. (as as CO2) group are CoA carboxyl CoA serine of palmitoyl Briefly, PE reactions pyridoxal and phosphate see reaction, (a amino the the synthesis vitamin [Note: as from like from coenzyme.] This a catecholamines the B6) regulators 286), (for acids of example, of of PS derivative tyrosine; in p. from requires involved decarboxylation product in a phosphate The adenine nicotinamide (NADPH)-requiring reduced dinucleotide reaction (dihydrosphingosine). sphinganine to is p. LCFA of precursor a sphinganine of at on one sphingolipids, desaturated of described the is to 208). a the and amino as other (and group The then with immediate produce ceramide, variety sphingomyelin acylated

play the in maintaining role water-permeability Ceramides a key skin’s barrier. levels diseases. number with a ceramide associated of are skin Decreased

PC to sphingomyelin Phosphorylcholine is and producing the transferred from DAG. ceramide, the nervonic sphingomyelin Sphingomyelin predominantly that [Note: myelin such and as whereas contains has longer-chain sheath of FA brain acid, of the matter stearic acid.] lignoceric primarily contains acid gray

IV. PHOSPHOLIPID DEGRADATION

performed juice. The pancreatic found in by and phosphoglycerides of degradation phospholipases all is tissues [Note: discussion of a see phospholipid For digestion, p. 175.] and that toxins A number the phospholipase cell allow infection. produce and of activity, membranes bacteria several spread dissolve have and pathogenic of phospholipases venoms (see sphingomyelinase degraded phospholipase, is B. lysosomal the Sphingomyelin below). by

A. Phosphoglycerides

site. hydrolyze specific cleaving of with at enzyme a bonds phosphodiester the each the phosphoglycerides, Phospholipases phospholipid 17.11. The are major Figure in phospholipases shown or the 2 lysophosphoglyceride, the which [Note: 1 for carbon of a phosphoglyceride substrate lysophospholipases.] from is FA produces a of Removal synthesis the or serve can example, that are (for messengers of (for messengers and acid). IP3) substrates that for as Phospholipases second molecules arachidonic DAG release example, them. responsible not but remodeling are degrading phospholipids for for only Phospholipases also with be transferase. phospholipases remove different A1 specific acyl example, FA using membrane-bound CoA phospholipids, A2 and from For FA fatty replaced which can carbon create sometimes This as of unique used to (see the lung that PI surfactant insure is acid. p. of mechanism bound 2 DPCC and (and way arachidonic is one PC) to to 204) syndrome, characterized and cardiolipin of rare result is in Barth cardiomyopathy, defects X-linked [Note: disorder by weakness, neutropenia, the remodeling.] a muscle 4,5-bisphosphate; R2 alcohol. and = acids; = phosphatidylinositol X an fatty R1

B. Sphingomyelin

lysosomal leaving phosphorylcholine, a degraded enzyme a is Sphingomyelin removes by ceramide. that sphingomyelinase, a cleaved (Fig. and into by sphingosine ceramidase The is, ceramide in FA free turn, 17.12). in by of ceramide [Note: phosphorylation The sphingosine protein transduction regulate of substrates. C its and, and pathways, released signal part activity the the kinase protein thus, influencing also promote They apoptosis.] Niemann-Pick and type to autosomal-recessive of are, are (types disorder sites the phospholipase of sphingomyelinase, <1% due sphingomyelin infantile shows therefore, activity), deficiency spleen liver caused enlarged. a to severe and deposits a inability B) an which A, C. of degrade and In the the is of normal (type greatly lipid the form primary by disease enzymic A (Fig. be degraded the lipid cannot consists that sphingomyelin primarily of The 17.13). early disease CNS, a this storage in die experience deposition in result with and as neurodegeneration Infants the of and of rapid lysosomal childhood. they progressive sphingomyelin and marrow which liver, the resulting B, age variant but A a 10% no time of spleen, affected, tissue, disease. and damage causes less a to shows chronic activity) up form normal onset to with neural bone are little severe a survival in of later (type lungs, longer to of in Jewish ethnic disease A Although Niemann-Pick the with all population. greater groups, frequency in occurs occurs Ashkenazi type

A.] type

GLYCOLIPID V. OVERVIEW

both components. Glycolipids lipid carbohydrate and that molecules are contain is glycolipids alcohol amino in the attached phospholipid ceramides a which Like LCFA derivatives sphingosine. the of are sphingomyelin, to called more are glycosphingolipids. they precisely Therefore, Thus, are [Note: glycosylated the sphingolipids.] precursors phosphorylated of ceramides both and they nerve all Like the membranes in of amounts body, essential the in phospholipids, found in are tissue. glycosphingolipids are but components greatest the interact plasma They with located environment. where in outer leaflet they the extracellular of are membrane, the (for role they play cellular and a and such, in adhesion the example, interactions of development. growth, recognition), As regulation

Membrane form rafts, and laterally and glycosphingolipids that membrane plasma functions. associate cholesterol to signaling lipid trafficking membrane regulate proteins GPI-anchored with of organize mobile function microdomains and to the

and development, antigens. group 165), antigens particular Glycosphingolipids antigens fetal specific embryonic some tumor p. and for blood are of stages (see the ABO antigenic of source are various portion antigenic determinant.] [Note: the carbohydrate of a The is glycolipid tetanus well and toxins for and as have certain for surface as as cell for cholera coopted microbes. viruses They been receptors use lysosomal with result compounds. disorders the of accumulation in degrade these an properly inability Genetic to glycosphingolipids associated portion dysregulated are Changes characteristic (cells growth).] in carbohydrate [Note: with of glycosphingolipids transformed of cells (and the glycoproteins)

VI. GLYCOSPHINGOLIPID STRUCTURE

ceramide a sphingomyelin or an polar that attached differ provided glycosphingolipids they directly not from head The the phosphate, contain by oligosaccharide do function O-glycosidic monosaccharide the bond by and is in (Fig. to 17.14). type present type glycosphingolipid. moieties carbohydrate of determine and of number the The

A. Neutral glycosphingolipids

neutral glycosphingolipids the The cerebrosides. simplest are that myelin, the shown galactocerebroside, common monosaccharides ceramide-galactose as contain in most of or These found either cerebroside ceramide molecule in Fig. galactose (forming a are in or more complex (forming glucocerebroside, degradation of glycosphingolipids). the 17.14) glucose intermediate an and or ceramide-glucose synthesis the galacto-or to type sphingosine.] of Members may a group in also of the the from differ attached [Note: FA each of other glucocerebrosides brain predominantly high found myelin the cerebrosides implies, concentrations As name their sheath. in peripheral the and with in nerves, are (also for oligosaccharides attaching Ceramide to additional (or are a known produced lactosylceramide). monosaccharides glucocerebroside, ceramide-glucose-galactose by globosides) as example, as include N-acetylgalactosamine. can such The sugars substituted monosaccharides additional

B. glycosphingolipids Acidic

physiologic Acidic are glycosphingolipids negatively at pH. charged charge ([NANA], is The N-acetylneuraminic in shown sialic negative acid, as acid provided a Fig. by by 17.15) sulfatides. in gangliosides sulfate or groups in

1.

at primarily glycosphingolipids are Gangliosides: the most found and are particularly endings. nerve complex ganglion the the in cells CNS, the of These contain CMP-NANA). and more one (from ceramide molecules of NANA derivatives They of oligosaccharides or are ganglioside, indicate (quatro) a of (mono), D, two plus four notation subscript molecules is to in respectively. (for The or three ganglioside) or M, these one NANA G compounds is whether there the Q T, for (di), (tri), Additional subscript designate attached the the numbers of letters in and sequence to the carbohydrate the monomeric ceramide. (See Fig. GM2.) 17.15 for structure the of storage are several Fig. (see the Gangliosides lipid of accumulation because NANA-containing of disorders interest glycosphingolipids involve in cells medical 17.20, 212). p.

2.

are Sulfatides: negatively galactocerebrosides sulfoglycosphingolipids physiologic that pH. at charged These sulfated are found are kidneys. and predominantly the Sulfatides brain in

VII. AND SYNTHESIS GLYCOSPHINGOLIPID DEGRADATION

donors sequential glycosyl of transferred of glycosphingolipids Golgi the by from the occurs primarily acceptor addition UDP-sugar monomers Synthesis in to molecule. similar that glycoprotein 166). p. used to mechanism is in synthesis (see The

A. in synthesis Enzymes involved

formed. type bond specific enzymes involved in of and are the of are for synthesis glycosyltransferases glycosphingolipids the that glycosidic location the The glycoproteins These as and [Note: recognize can enzymes substrates.] glycosphingolipids both

Sulfate addition B. group

3ʹ-phosphoadenosine-5ʹphosphosulfate ([PAPS], sulfate group the A carrier Fig. sulfate from group the to forming the a a galactocerebroside added is 17.16) sulfatide 3-sulfate the galactocerebroside, by in sulfotransferase of galactose 3ʹ-hydroxyl (Fig. 17.17). p. 162) (see PAPS (see in is also synthesis and donor p. sulfur [Note: hormone glycosaminoglycan the catabolism steroid 240).] of shown the sphingolipids Figure 17.18. An of in is overview synthesis

Glycosphingolipid degradation C.

Glycosphingolipids described by 163). as p. the for (see phagocytosis are glycosaminoglycans internalized which of are with phagosomes. present enzymes the in process the for the required lysosomes, All fuse degradative enzymes The irreversibly specific bonds in glycosphingolipid. the and hydrolytically cleave lysosomal seen process first the As in rule is is removed and p. on, the off,” in degradation. the first with sequential 170), which “last glycoproteins the group added during degradation glycosaminoglycans group (see following a last synthesis lysosomal diseases. in chains defects in polysaccharide three result these the degradation glycoconjugates storage the in of Therefore,

D. Sphingolipidoses

compounds degradation In a individual, the these balanced, that normal synthesis glycosphingolipids constant. and membranes present of of is are in so amount for is specific If partially acid a required degradation a accumulates. totally sphingolipid missing, lysosomal hydrolase or called storage by these Lysosomal deficiencies are diseases caused lipid sphingolipidoses. neurologic a acid of early in nerve to tissue, death. where may The be seen deficiency hydrolase lead dramatically specific result can deterioration Figure an the of degradation descriptions of outline 17.20 some sphingolipid and of pathway sphingolipidoses. provides defects from sphingolipidoses that [Note: example, result hydrolases Some in lysosomal the facilitate as also proceeds.] can (for short activator of proteins degradation saposins) the carbohydrate to access chains 1.

hydrolytic Common of form A each disorder. classic enzyme in properties: the deficient is lysosomal specific in a organs single for the accumulates involved Therefore, deficient enzyme) substrate the only usually, in sphingolipid each disease. (the is The biosynthesis of lipid the normal.] accumulating [Note: of rate designation many extensive although disorders different B such phenotypic The variability in in and, clinical to fatal progressive are of A childhood, is as are leading seen types, Niemann-Pick types disease. and the gene. Genetic of be variability one caused within by because single any mutations of variety disorder seen a a also a is can given for are except Fabry linked. which The disease, X is autosomal-recessive sphingolipidoses disorders, the for which, of incidence population. sphingolipidoses The low high diseases, Jewish except is a in Gaucher the most Niemann-Pick show frequency disease, in Tay-Sachs and like populations, Ashkenazi Irish has frequency [Note: high Cajun Louisiana populations.] in Tay-Sachs a French also and American, Canadian, 2.

or enzyme activity diagnosed cultured DNA in (see specific be fibroblasts by A and 34). Diagnosis treatment: Chapter can peripheral by analyzing measuring or sphingolipidosis leukocytes the also tissue Histologic examination of is useful. affected crumpled (Fig. cytosol [Note: in and disease a tissue inclusion in bodies seen Gaucher of are is seen Tay-Sachs, appearance paper Shell-like the 17.19).] available. or Prenatal villi, diagnosis, chorionic amniocytes using is cultured and macrophages the accumulate high. brain, endothelial which monetary in are is skin, globosides the therapy, Gaucher of but which extremely glucocerebroside, in and human cost in become vascular disease, Fabry treated enzyme heart, engorged replacement disease, kidneys, with the lysosomes by recombinant cells) transplantation treated reduction (because been glucosylceramide, also has and derived through are substrate substrate marrow reduction of hematopoietic Gaucher by from by deficient stem the pharmacologic the macrophages therapy for enzyme. bone

VIII. AND PROSTAGLANDINS, EICOSANOIDS: THROMBOXANES, LEUKOTRIENES

ω-3 (LT) known leukotrienes ω-6 with collectively = eicosanoids as thromboxanes (eicosa FA their origin are Prostaglandins and polyunsaturated 20). from 20 carbons (PG), (TX), and to reflect and elicit compounds that both of extremely response) a range pathologic wide responses, potent (inflammatory They are (hypersensitivity). physiologic homeostasis. and and contraction gastric (the are smooth function, vessel integrity uterus regulate diameter, platelet key intestine maintain and blood muscle sites) They renal insure and in terms sites. glands to are Although all in locally been of and differ compared they than in in distant in than act in endocrine small produced hormones blood hormones rather tissues rather to their specialized almost very actions, eicosanoids amounts transport they have the from after that rapidly they metabolized an being products. half-life, short inactive extremely not to and are have Eicosanoids stored, mediated Their biologic in monophosphate changes different which membrane systems actions result plasma are and different (see 94), are in cyclic adenosine by production. p. organ GPCR typically in 17.21. shown of are eicosanoid Examples Figure structures in

life. GalNAc Gal = CNS system. N-acetylneuraminic central nervous glucose; = Cer = NANA ceramide; = Glc Nacetylgalactosamine; galactose; acid; = = therapy. = sulfate; enzyme ERT replacement =

known prostacyclin. as and leukotrienes LT.] are Thromboxanes by designated TX by

Prostaglandin thromboxane synthesis and A.

double or (series Arachidonic FA), precursor acid, the bonds, of type those two double immediate bonds four Fig. eicosatetraenoic shown of 20 predominant is in PG (an carbons and as human FA containing the 2 with ω-6 an 17.22). an derived the the essential desaturation FA. is also linoleic It and of acid, elongation ω-6 FA by released A2 phospholipids acid at is membrane (Fig. by Arachidonic carbon PI) phospholipase (typically is from which into incorporated it 2, a 17.23) of such variety calcium. signals, a in in as rise response to are from eicosatrienoic ω-3 one (EPA), series double from contain 3 double contain PG acid are an derived bonds derived eicosapentaenoic acid, and three Series ω-6 an and PG whereas [Note: FA, dihomo-γ-linolenic 1 FA. bond See p. 363.] (cyclooxygenase endoperoxide (prostaglandin peroxidase) of synthase and synthase). activities PGH2 oxidized = glutathione; prostaglandin. G-SH G-S-S-G = = glutathione; reduced PG

1.

the endoperoxide cyclization Prostaglandin synthase). is free oxidative arachidonic first TX prostaglandin (or, The acid step of synthase synthesis synthase: H2 PGH2 yield PG and to in by PGH2 This O2, is which fatty (COX), cyclooxygenase requires two molecules acid p. peroxidase, catalytic an reduced and two has of ER requires activities: which protein membrane-bound enzyme 148). (see glutathione that is 17.23, PGH2 a synthases. TX, in PG as and by cell-specific shown of converted variety to Figure (see five-carbon contain ring, six-membered contain a oxane a PG whereas heterocyclic TX ring [Note: Fig. 17.21).] usually are isozymes and as COX-1 known. denoted COX-2, PGH2 of synthase, Two made most aggregation. gastric tissue, homeostasis, is in constitutively COX-1 for platelet tissues renal and required healthy and is of maintenance to limited response number COX-2 activated of in in inflammatory is cells. of a products tissues immune inducible and of heat, subsequent the mediates and induction in [Note: the of and increase synthesis inflammation the of infection.] COX-2 The PG pain, redness, to swelling fever 2.

of PG unrelated inhibited and by TX be can inhibition: Synthesis compounds. synthesis The example, (see Fig. agent) anti-inflammatory inhibits phospholipase activity For cortisol steroidal (a A2 membrane synthesis, for 17.23) from arachidonic the therefore, TX is acid, substrate and not and, PG released phospholipids. and both the of thus, Aspirin, indomethacin, phenylbutazone prevent the parent (all and molecule, synthesis anti-inflammatory inhibit [NSAID]) and, drugs PGH2. COX-1 COX-2 nonsteroidal Systemic clotting with subsequent and blood, toxicity.] [Note: impaired the of of and to is basis aspirin’s COX-1, inhibition stomach of the the kidneys damage synthesis NSAID) induces arachidonic made (anti-inflammatory acid) EPA). protectins not also made (inflammationresolving lipoxins Aspirin (but of mediators and from resolvins and mediators from other COX-2 for of by while specific reduce to Inhibitors processes inflammatory for functions designed mediated example, were COX-2 COX-1. pathologic celecoxib) physiologic the maintaining (the coxibs, some decreased (see been has risk use market. However, been synthesis their PGI2 a and attacks, below), the associated of increased result likely with withdrawn B. have as of from heart

homeostasis in platelet Thromboxanes and B. prostaglandins

produced A2 activated in (TXA2) COX-1 by platelets. Thromboxane is and blood adhesion and smooth formation muscle, of thereby of (thrombi). promotes It vascular promoting clots platelet aggregation contraction online Chapter 35.) (See thrombogenesis. aggregation endothelial by Prostacyclin and, and cells, platelet stimulates inhibits COX-2 vasodilation in impedes (PGI2), produced vascular so, PGI2 sites formation vascular and TXA2 effects to injury. of The limit opposing of thrombi [Note: an Aspirin antithrombogenic effect. has COX-2 PGI2 irreversible platelets inhibits through by in endothelial cells in by (Fig. TXA2 these of It COX-1 synthesis synthesis and isozymes acetylation 17.24). overcome platelets, be in cannot which nuclei. inhibition lack COX-1 therefore, the more and, nucleus cells enzyme. generate However, overcome because COX-2 of have endothelial can be in a inhibition they can aspirin therapy low-dose and risk thrombi.] This the of attacks is by heart of decreasing of basis formation difference lower to stroke used the

synthesis C. Leukotriene

a a of converted Arachidonic lipoxygenases separate of variety acids involving family pathway (LOX). linear acid a is by hydroperoxy (–OOH) to Fig. acid to example, eicosatetraenoic 5-hydroperoxy-6,8,11,14 acid see For arachidonic ([5-HPETE]; 5-LOX converts 17.23). converted containing the nature double to of tissue. a bonds, of the four according final products is the LT varying series to 5-HPETE mediators response allergic are inflammation. LT of and 5-LOX antagonists are and LT-receptor of asthma. of Inhibitors used the treatment in is cortisol not LT inhibited and synthesis NSAID. [Note: by by response Aspirin-exacerbated use respiratory in ~10% with is asthma.] disease NSAID of overproduction to LT individuals with a

IX. SUMMARY CHAPTER

or (Fig. alcohol ethanolamine) composed phosphatidylethanolamine, choline to or of example, either producing are attached amino to by or a ionic phosphatidylcholine bond diacylglycerol phosphodiester sphingosine the compounds alcohol (for polar, (DAG), Phospholipids an 17.25). fatty acid ceramide. of a produces long-chain sphingosine Addition to a phosphorylcholine phospholipid produces the sphingomyelin. of Addition lipids the are of cell Phospholipids predominant membranes. phospholipids lung Nonmembrane components serve bile. of as and surfactant component dipalmitoyl the of is also surfactant. lipid lecithin, called Dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine, major lung Insufficient causes syndrome. surfactant production distress respiratory reservoir serves for as (PI) a Phosphatidylinositol arachidonic acid membranes. in phosphatidylinositol membrane-bound PI phosphorylation The (PIP2). produces of 4,5-bisphosphate to is in to of C various compound factors neurotransmitters, growth and G protein– degraded membrane by hormones, phospholipase the coupled This binding response receptors. and cellular of The of of C, degradation, and 1,4,5trisphosphate mediate this products evoke kinase intracellular act synergistically the to calcium DAG, protein which inositol (IP3) mobilization the responses. activation anchor. (GPI) forming Specific membrane-bound phosphatidylinositol carbohydrate glycosyl bridge attached to can a be a via PI, covalently proteins hemolytic cells synthesis results nocturnal in in GPI in disease the deficiency hemoglobinuria. paroxysmal hematopoietic A all degradation tissues phosphoglycerides The performed of in by juice. pancreatic found is phospholipases and a (A B) plus lysosomal to ceramide Sphingomyelin and degraded enzyme is by deficiency phosphorylcholine of Niemann-Pick which a sphingomyelinase, causes disease. the have carbohydrates which attached. ceramides to of are been Glycosphingolipids derivatives an to molecule and acid one molecule a an acidic sugar produces N-acetylneuraminic produces ceramide ganglioside. oligosaccharide globoside, Adding adding cerebroside, a the produces a adding in nervous membranes found tissue, with sheath. in cell predominantly are and the of Glycosphingolipids concentrations peripheral brain the high myelin antigenic. are They hydrolases. degraded by are acid the Glycolipids in lysosomes any one in causes characteristic these enzymes sphingolipid which a A accumulates. of of sphingolipidosis, deficiency a in all the and tissues, (PG), Prostaglandins eicosanoids, in short thromboxanes locally, (LT), almost (TX), amounts are and have an half-life. extremely small act very produced leukotrienes mediators as They serve response. the inflammatory of predominant human (those with is double acid class the precursor Arachidonic two of immediate PG of bonds). the is acid the a stored It as elongation phospholipid, the a and derived in acid by component PI. of is membrane of desaturation fatty and linoleic generally the essential (inhibited acid by the released from cortisol). phospholipid A2 phospholipase is Arachidonic by begins yield fatty (or, Synthesis to (COX) TX oxidative endoplasmic PG by PGH2 has free endoperoxide two catalytic and the cyclization of acid PGH2 and reticular cyclooxygenase an protein activities: of peroxidase. arachidonic the synthase), acid synthase membrane with that prostaglandin PGH2 (constitutive) COX-1 two isozymes of are and (inducible). COX-2 There synthase: irreversibly both. Aspirin inhibits

Opposing TXA2 clot and PGI2 of limit formation. effects linear from by (5-LOX) produced arachidonic the are 5-lipoxygenase molecules pathway. LT acid They mediate response. allergic not by Their aspirin. cortisol inhibited is synthesis by and

glycosphingolipids, and eicosanoids. anti-inflammatory = ion; = nonsteroidal PLA2 phospholipase = A2; NSAID drugs. sulfate

the Choose best ONE answer.

7.1. by bronchoconstriction severe respiratory characterized drugs anti-inflammatory after nonsteroidal to to reaction a minutes Aspirin-exacerbated is 30 disease ingestion. (NSAID) (AERD) hours several statements best with explains patients in of the AERD? symptoms seen Which following the NSAID:

the activity in cystic thickened of conductance the regulator transmembrane fibrosis airways. block inhibit A. resulting that protein, mucus

inhibit the B. in flow of arachidonic resulting leukotriene not but cyclooxygenase synthesis. to acid lipoxygenase,

H2 resulting vasodilation. prostaglandin activate the cyclooxygenase C. of synthase, increased in activity synthesis of promote prostaglandins that

(atelectasis). phospholipases, amounts collapse activate of dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine resulting in D. decreased alveolar and

not B. arachidonic answer is acid of the any Correct = lipoxygenase, but bronchoconstricting available so synthesis for cyclooxygenase used NSAID leukotrienes. inhibit on conductance which effect the have no are cause fibrosis NSAID of in defects (CF) protein, cystic CF. transmembrane the regulator inhibit A2. NSAID, phospholipase not Steroids, by inhibited Cyclooxygenase NSAID, activated. is not NSAID phospholipases. no effect have on

7.2. gestation, respiratory 28 An at of gave rapidly infant, evidence born distress. weeks’ infant distress laboratory respiratory imaging of results supported syndrome. and diagnosis the Clinical following true? of statements syndrome this Which about is the

A. baby’s unrelated is premature birth. to the It

B. a pneumocytes. of consequence II too It is type few

lecithin/sphingomyelin is to in the C. (>2). fluid The be amniotic high likely ratio

expected The be in a full-term to D. amniotic of concentration that baby. the fluid of than lower be dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine would

easily disorder an treated E. with mortality. low is It

administering by surfactant mother gives she It treated the is before F. birth. just to

D. dipalmitoyl in Correct Dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine lung found mature, answer = surfactant the lecithin) or, healthy (DPPC is lungs. distress compound. of make (RDS) Respiratory lungs occur that little too can syndrome in this to considered would in be lungs lungs amniotic is newborn’s ≥2, (L/S) mature lecithin/sphingomyelin <2). (premature have a the If a ratio be expected to ratio are fluid sufficiently rather would gestation. too not sphingomyelin to DPPC be secreting II than RDS few simply at 28 The due be type weeks’ pneumocytes, which would (antenatally). given not glucocorticoid, mother is a The surfactant, birth to prior giving postnatally be to administered would the Surfactant surface to tension. reduce baby

7.3. was for in his of spots on 10-year-old evaluated skin. boy small, and A his feet sensations red-purple burning clusters protein revealed Laboratory studies urine. his in and revealed deficiency enzyme a recommended. analysis of αgalactosidase, therapy replacement was Enzymatic most likely is: diagnosis The

A. Fabry disease.

Farber disease. B.

C. Gaucher disease.

D. disease. Krabbe

disease. Niemann-Pick E.

sphingolipidosis. of the α-galactosidase, answer X-linked a A. Correct only disease, is = Fabry deficiency angiokeratomas), is extremities, (generalized by cardiac in characterized a It complications. kidney rash and pain and the red-purple skin his in kidney damage. urine indicates Protein available. Enzyme is therapy replacement

7.4. experiencing to Current chew individuals strength, regular services pain medical advice and noncoated is call for medical emergency a aspirin. chest recommending basis the aspirin? for What is

that prevents blood clots formation It of an could effect: has vessels. antithrombogenic heart Aspirin occlude acetylation, thromboxane A2 through inhibits platelet by in vasoconstriction. and Aspirin inhibiting cyclooxygenase-1 irreversible synthesis activation thereby platelets increases absorption. aspirin of the its rate Chewing noncoated a

18 and Steroid Lipoprotein, Metabolism Cholesterol,

related please materials For additional visit to this chapter, ancillary thePoint.

I. OVERVIEW

the steroid alcohol the performs body. tissues, number characteristic essential functions Cholesterol, animal of a in of fluidity, cholesterol bile important all is and it vitamin that tissues, hormones, structural critically cholesterol For and, appropriate of the precursor example, cells is in specialized cholesterol. body membranes, of assured acids, is an D. Therefore, steroid a a be their the component cell of of modulating supply need, a complex mechanisms evolved. series meet To has transport, and this regulatory biosynthetic, of cholesterol a liver body’s the The plays of in the homeostasis. regulation role central dietary as including sources For liver itself. well the that novo tissues example, hepatic of cholesterol extrahepatic cholesterol and synthesized as pool by cholesterol by a the from enters number de the lumen. or intestinal secreted the into the unmodified bile, Cholesterol as bile salts from liver is can converted in are cholesterol be it that eliminated to plasma serve of as lipoproteins lipids to a It peripheral carry that the component can also tissues. humans, vessels. of deposition cholesterol gradual tissues, between particularly a precise, efflux in is the balance resulting linings of and not endothelial the influx cholesterol the In in blood in disease. deposition increased narrowing and of lipid peripheral a cardio-, blood life-threatening and to This leads of the (atherosclerosis) vessels occurrence when vascular plaque potentially is cerebro-, causing risk formation, the summarizes the leaves cholesterol the the sources and which routes of Figure liver by liver. major cholesterol 18.1

II. CHOLESTEROL STRUCTURE

Cholesterol very is compound. hydrophobic a hydrocarbon it chain fused (A–D) nucleus, and consists hydrocarbon branched to four ring. D attached called steroid the of an the of carbon It eight-carbon, rings 17 has 3, Ring ring B hydroxyl and double has 6 carbon between a (Fig. carbon 5 carbon bond has group and at A a 18.2).

Sterols A.

in and the 17 with side chain group as to at carbon Steroids carbon hydroxyl are sterols. 10 atoms 8 3 classified a at carbon in animal Cholesterol is the major sterol tissues. de of novo absorption cholesterol. dietary It from synthesis arises and the (see 1 Niemann-Pick protein, that reduces of of dietary the by Intestinal uptake drug ezetimibe is p. target absorption cholesterol the mediated C1-like of 176). cholesterol sterols compared to for (phytosterols), Plant as by absorbed cholesterol). humans such β-sitosterol, [Note: (5% absorbed as poorly 40% are enterocytes, are actively they back into the the lumen. After intestinal transported entering transporter in efflux rare of the condition Defects result (ABCG5/8) in sitosterolemia. the cholesterol cholesterol. of absorption some sterols dietary as Because back is transported well, reduce the plant ingestion dietary spreads, is to of esters for of of a cholesterol strategies number (see reduce supplied, plasma p. in sterol example, Daily one levels plant 363).]

B. Cholesteryl esters

[FA] (with plasma in as in carbon a at attached acid an 3, shown Most is fatty Fig. form esterified cholesterol free than structure which the more 18.2), makes even hydrophobic (nonesterified) cholesterol. low Cholesteryl not are in and only present in normally are most cells. found in esters membranes levels protein 226). association its or salts be must particle bile the in (see of Because 227) cholesterol be as a with phospholipids solubilized their by and esters a hydrophobicity, p. bile p. lipoprotein transported and of (see in component

III. SYNTHESIS CHOLESTEROL

placenta, and to tissues liver, cholesterol humans, synthesized adrenal although virtually and the all cortex, reproductive ovaries, in testes, contributions largest make Cholesterol by intestine, the including tissues, pool. is the FA, provided by (NADPH) A coenzyme atoms carbon and cholesterol with reducing adenine are nicotinamide equivalents. in provides all (CoA), dinucleotide acetyl phosphate the As is of pathway endergonic, high-energy by and terminal bond CoA acetyl of The being bond the hydrolysis of ATP. phosphate the thioester driven the the the the cytosol, peroxisome. reticulum and enzymes membrane of endoplasmic (SER), requires in Synthesis smooth to in mechanisms rate rate excretion. of is against The cholesterol the regulatory exist changes and of responsive concentration, to cholesterol the pathway balance cholesterol synthesis circulating potential vascular regulation in plasma elevation this imbalance in the levels cholesterol, for to An disease. an with can lead of

A. coenzyme 3-Hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl A synthesis

pathway that similar The biosynthetic cholesterol in those to reactions in (see two the produces ketone first are the bodies Fig. pathway 16.22, p. 196). Fig. production result CoA], the CoA in 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl of They ([HMG 18.3). form acetoacetyl to acetyl two CoA. molecules condense First, CoA compound. acetyl CoA, of added synthase, producing molecule HMG a CoA is HMG Next, a CoA six-carbon third by of the Liver contain synthase. cells isoenzymes two [Note: parenchymal ketone synthesis, enzyme in participates synthesis.] cytosolic mitochondrial cholesterol enzyme in pathway the body the whereas for functions The

B. synthesis Mevalonate

CoA HMG is by mevalonate CoA reduced to HMG reductase. rate-limiting in the synthesis. This cholesterol regulated is and step key (Fig. reaction of making two as in CoA, releases It NADPH reducing agent, uses cytosol, the molecules and the irreversible occurs the 18.4). the is the HMG integral reductase protein catalytic domain of membrane cytosol. projecting into CoA [Note: an with its SER, discussed is D. reductase Regulation of activity in below.]

mevalonate synthesis Cholesterol C. from

cholesterol Figure from enzymes of illustrated The in 18.5. are and the mevalonate reactions in synthesis involved The below shown brackets in to correspond in reactions [Note: numbers shown this figure.] numbered phosphate Mevalonate converted ATP. in 5-pyrophosphomevalonate group [1] steps, is which a transfers to two each of from

(IPP), the isoprene unit, five-carbon pyrophosphate decarboxylation 5-pyrophosphomevalonate. formed by is isopentenyl A [2] of requires ATP. reaction The of with of a diverse IPP [Note: family the precursor molecules is isoprenoids. functions, the is a sterol Cholesterol isoprenoid. p. Nonsterol isoprenoids ubiquinone 167) Q; (or, see coenzyme and p. (see include dolichol 75).] pyrophosphate IPP [3] to is 3,3-dimethylallyl isomerized (DPP).

geranyl pyrophosphate 10-carbon condense (GPP). to IPP form [4] DPP and

of GPP to pyrophosphate farnesyl (FPP). 15-carbon with [5] IPP molecule A condenses second then form a process for one inner example, face mechanism to the ras) proteins prenylation, attachment is to Covalent membranes.] as known of of plasma anchoring proteins, (for [Note: farnesyl reduced, of FPP combine, squalene. molecules releasing are [6] pyrophosphate, 30-carbon forming the compound and Two formed six from [Note: is Squalene units. isoprenoid to make total residue converted IPP, hydrolyzed mevalonate a per Because to ATP 18 polyisoprenoid are squalene.] ATP the required 3 are of Squalene the that reactions sterol of oxygen lanosterol catalyzed sequence by SER-associated use a converted molecular NADPH. enzymes [7] is (O2) and two by to The linear the of the to lanosterol. of squalene triggers structure hydroxylation cyclization

process methyl groups, a cholesterol the migration multistep The of involving is double double oxidative side of to of of of lanosterol bond. chain, shortening removal conversion bonds, reduction a and double cholesterol deficiency is in autosomal-recessive disorder partial converting the in of biosynthesis, an it the bond thereby (SLOS), a that reduces 7-dehydrocholesterol-7reductase, 7dehydrocholesterol Smith-Lemli-Opitz by caused to (7-DHC), cholesterol. enzyme syndrome impaired is synthesis. embryonic cholesterol syndromes malformation associated of one SLOS multisystem, several with p. D3 the [Note: vitamin skin converted to in (see is 7-DHC 390).]

D.

the control. is HMG of for point cholesterol metabolic kinds different biosynthesis reductase and control is CoA subject major to

1.

reductase at factor, (SREBP-2), of DNA sterol (SRE) controlled gene gene. cis-acting Sterol-dependent protein-2 Expression regulation by the gene HMG of the for element expression: reductase CoA regulatory trans-acting is the of element–binding regulatory the upstream which binds sterol of associates protein second SREBP-2 is SER with membrane (SCAP). integral SREBP activating an SER protein, Inactive protein membrane cleavage– the and a ER the the When SER levels are moves complex sterol to in Golgi. SREBP-2–SCAP low, the the from SREBP-2 as soluble and In Golgi by fragment a upon which proteases, two that the nucleus, transcription the SRE, membrane, a factor. binds the generate sequentially enters functions acted is increased and, (Fig. This synthesis therefore, increased cholesterol in synthesis reductase results HMG CoA of 18.6). SCAP other and domain sterols the binding they of are at gene yet However, ER sterolsensing the to abundant, SCAP membrane induce its (INSIG). bind insulin-induced proteins proteins, if to SER, the downregulation preventing the of in in This SCAP–SREBP of synthesis. results of the cholesterol activation retention leading SREBP-2 and the complex thereby SREBP-1c in of synthesis insulin enzymes to response expression involved upregulates [Note: in FA p. (see 184).] 2.

a of is enzyme degradation: itself reductase protein the SER integral The membrane. Sterol-accelerated sterolsensing in proteins. sterol high, are enzyme levels INSIG When SER binds the to the Binding transfer, degradation and leads (see proteasomal 247). p. cytosolic ubiquitination, reductase the to of

3.

([AMPK] see 183) Sterol-independent through and phosphatase controlled monophosphate a HMG phosphoprotein adenosine Fig. p. reductase of is (see phosphorylation/dephosphorylation: covalently CoA (AMP)–activated the protein actions kinase activity 18.6). phosphorylated enzyme active. is form whereas The the inactive, dephosphorylated the form of is cholesterol FA AMPK by [Note: AMP, ATP is activated is decreased is Because when synthesis, like synthesis, availability decreased.] 4.

reductase hormonally. The controlled regulation: Hormonal CoA activity is HMG of an insulin the dephosphorylation has whereas in in epinephrine reductase, (activation) of the and favors increase increase glucagon effect. An opposite

5.

CoA competitive CoA are metabolized of and reductase of lovastatin, statin rosuvastatin, and drugs inhibition: Drug simvastatin) reversible, inhibitors analogs pravastatin, are HMG to) structural HMG are (Fig. (or (atorvastatin, fluvastatin, The 18.7). to levels plasma hypercholesterolemia. patients cholesterol decrease are in They with used

IV. DEGRADATION CHOLESTEROL

to metabolize dioxide water. ring Humans cannot and cholesterol the structure carbon from body for the to of the and nucleus into by percentage and small Rather, in bile salts, is the acids by to which bile, the steroid eliminated secretion intact excreted a which intestine bile conversion elimination. feces, of it the cholesterol transports is excretion. cholesterol the bacteria of Some is by intestine before in modified the [Note: and cholestanol, of the derivatives reduced which made isomers are cholesterol. are coprostanol compounds The primary bulk these sterols.] of neutral compounds up with Together the fecal make cholesterol,

BILE AND V. ACIDS SALTS BILE

organic watery consists mixture and Bile compounds. of inorganic a of the and bile quantitatively are 202), conjugated components of lecithin most organic Phosphatidylcholine p. or (PC), (see salts important bile. stored for gallbladder through either duct, the the needed duodenum be or when liver, where into directly bile common synthesized, the can not immediately the in digestion. Bile is it pass from

A. Structure

chain that hydroxyl a a three carboxyl acids groups carbons, contain 24 bile and terminates in or The side two group. with pKa a (see group of 6) The p. carboxyl has ~6. half salts). bile molecules will acids) and ~6), deprotonated (the this group the be the (the In the rest duodenum in (pH in bile of protonated frequently bile acid bile terms are however. The used interchangeably, and salt the below lie are α above (they β that rings) have plane the forms in orientation plane and groups the of the hydroxyl are lie groups of rings). (they that methyl Both (triacylglycerol intestine, a fat emulsifying polar enzymes. a have and molecules other and dietary prepare agents nonpolar helping surface [TAG]) for digestive as the by and in act both pancreatic lipids Therefore, the can degradation complex

B. Synthesis

at the acids three carbons, of by specific hydrocarbon carboxyl the the inserted a the the B on ring are positions double multiorganelle which chain. steroid bond a groups end synthesized and of shortened Bile group in by cholesterol is at pathway the chain are structure; reduced; is liver hydroxyl in the multistep, introducing in chenodeoxycholic common triol) and called bile (a The cholic Figure as primary resulting shown acids. acid acid 18.8, most diol), compounds, (a are only in step introduction found 7-α-hydroxylase, a bile monooxygenase the carbon in the of cytochrome P450 steroid synthesis hydroxyl at group The 7 is of acid rate-limiting nucleus by SER-associated a liver. [Note: is by Expression acids the (Fig. of downregulated bile enzyme 18.9)].

Conjugation C.

they metabolism) between amino group or cysteine of (an group molecule to Before and bond the bile of amide by liver, leave an a end of conjugated either bile of the the compound. the added acid the glycine acids taurine the carboxyl are product (Fig. new glycocholic taurochenodeoxycholic taurocholic include and structures glycochenodeoxycholic and These acids and acids 18.10). taurine The the to is glycine forms ~3/1. of ratio bile in ionized of glycine are a at Addition group of of of in the charged) a or taurine), fully alkaline with pH or bile. carboxyl glycine) taurine results (from pKa both (negatively lower group a the sulfonate (from presence which of their salts The because are effective detergents more conjugated, bile ionized ones nature. enhanced the unconjugated than amphipathic conjugated Therefore, only the are found bile. forms in the deficiencies supplied to are in of acid. acids the with chenodeoxycholic conversion exogenously with treated genetic cholesterol Individuals bile

solubilizer for provide Bile a mechanism a in cholesterol only bile. the product of excretion, metabolic as as both and cholesterol salts significant of cholesterol

action salts D. on Bacterial bile

(see Bacteria (remove and glycine p. intestinal can bile microbiota deconjugate 372) of salts. taurine) the can also cholic secondary lithocholic from from salts deoxycholic acid and carbon acid 7, as producing They such acid chenodeoxycholic acid. dehydroxylate bile

Enterohepatic E. circulation

efficiently into reused. salts intestine Bile secreted (>95%) reabsorbed the are and export secretes pump. via bile liver The salts actively bile salt the a salt in returned are reabsorbed transport the (Na+)–bile via ileum the they via blood to system. intestine, terminal sodium and separate In the the cotransporter apical [Note: only acid Lithocholic absorbed.] is poorly cotransporter of via blood the by and isoform taken an the efficiently They reused. are from up hepatocytes blood was Albumin transports as through FA binds p. with and (see seen them the [Note: salts bile 181).] their a the is of and return their salts, then secondary as the forms the to are primary of duodenum (Fig. of to process ileum, enterohepatic through their secretion where the termed circulation uptake some and in the liver dehydroxylated passage continuous into subsequent bile, salts bile deconjugated The bile mixture secondary 18.11). in day, daily yet Between duodenum salts is each only feces. bile and 30 (<3%) lost into g the g 15 secreted of the the from ~0.5 liver are Approximately the is g/day cholesterol from to synthesized replace the 0.5 amount liver lost. in reabsorption, gut Bile the their as acid prevent bile such and bind excretion. cholestyramine, salts promoting in their thereby sequestrants, on bile hypercholesterolemia that removal liver, treatment the are diverting bile the They pathway. used thereby the additional inhibition of salts in the synthesis because acid into cholesterol in relieves of p. increases Dietary salts excretion binds also and [Note: bile (see their fiber 365).]

F. salt Cholelithiasis deficiency: Bile

and must be The accompanied the the bile phospholipid liver simultaneous bile cholesterol secretion movement salts. by of into of from the (Fig. by If leading PC can salts is to present solubilized than disease the gallbladder, and may precipitate cholesterol process cholesterol this the present, the cholesterol or gallstone cholelithiasis and in bile be more dual disrupted is 18.12). disorder in bile a is the of bile. This caused decrease typically acids by gemfibrozil) fibrates of from in Cholelithiasis reduce with increased result (for may blood. TAG) cholesterol secretion the the of (and also to into as bile, example, seen cholesterol use Laparoscopic of through treatment incision) small cholecystectomy removal is a the (surgical of currently choice. the gallbladder chenodeoxycholic to However, oral results gradual unable for patients years) undergo surgery, a of (months the bile acids body’s who are dissolution gallstones. to administration of in of supply supplement the acid to with bilirubin and for Cholesterol >85% stones mixed cases rest]. cholelithiasis, stones accounting [Note: account of for the of

VI. PLASMA LIPOPROTEINS

The of and spherical proteins macromolecular complexes lipids are plasma lipoproteins (apolipoproteins). low-density lipoproteins lipoproteins lipoprotein lipoproteins high-density The (VLDL), verylow-density include particles and chylomicrons, (HDL). (LDL), in density and size, (Fig. They protein composition, differ lipid origin. of site and 18.13), [Note: interchange each particles actual variable.] lipoprotein Because is and content constantly lipid apolipoproteins, particles and class lipids the somewhat apolipoprotein of of and both contents as transporting them soluble for function keep their in to provide they component from) tissues. efficient to transport an plasma their lipids the Lipoproteins the (and to lipid mechanism system less In deposition lipid as transport than the perfect gradual and, humans in result, of tissues. a animals experience other a in is cholesterol) (especially humans,

A. Composition

lipid neutral Lipoproteins apolipoproteins, core of cholesterol shell of cholesteryl surrounded and a composed (containing (Fig. phospholipid, are by amphipathic (free) esters) nonesterified a TAG and 18.14). thereby solution. are polar surface such soluble exposed in the amphipathic of are oriented These the aqueous rendering compounds their lipoprotein, that portions the on particle or lipoproteins either (endogenous from source) source). novo by are carried from TAG the cholesterol de obtained diet The the synthesis and (exogenous [Note: in cholesterol routinely of is fasting The now plasma lipoproteins measured blood. content (C) by because VLDL-C, VLDL. + TAG/cholesterol in 5/1 Total is HDL-C TAG where + by dividing calculated 5 VLDL-C the = LDL-C is ratio C mg/dl.] total <200 is for goal value cholesterol The 1.

lowest are and in and (as of TAG) size lowest Size that percentage density: of the lipid the highest and protein. lipoprotein the and density Chylomicrons contain percentage in largest particles protein denser, ratios LDL to having successively VLDL are lipid. higher of and are densest. the particles smallest and HDL in lipoproteins by basis as mobility, the can ultracentrifugation. of their separated be of the density shown or electrophoretic Figure on their basis 18.15, on Plasma

2.

and recognition lipoprotein particles apolipoproteins as involved enzymes of with number metabolism. lipoprotein such in cell-surface as functions, or for Apolipoproteins: The a serving for activators sites providing have associated coenzymes receptors diverse between structural freely and particles the apolipoproteins others cannot particles of are of be (in the components produced the as required them), whereas are transferred essential removed lipoproteins. be without Some cannot fact, C-II, Apolipoproteins (for with by and structure subclasses C-I, [apo] class apo into function divided are several apo denoted major by apolipoprotein each having and letters, CIII). classes, example, not [Note: are all of yet apolipoproteins the functions The known.]

B. metabolism Chylomicron

to fat-soluble the dietary tissues peripheral cholesterol, TAG, (Fig. and esters (exogenous) assembled vitamins, cholesteryl mucosal Chylomicrons cells and intestinal in are carry 18.16). for a close of chylomicron.] account 90% the lipids to [Note: TAG in 1.

is chylomicrons. synthesis: to B-48 Apo Apolipoprotein unique (RER), synthesis is begins and Golgi. the the ER rough through moves it as RER Its glycosylated on and it because by encoded Apo is which B-48 [Note: protein and the the gene constitutes this so encoded is protein the it synthesized Apo found gene. apo the 48% of and for named VLDL in LDL, entire B-100, by B. N-terminal liver the by represents a 48% cytosine Posttranscriptional 474) in codon intestinal (see apo a B-100 messenger p. of allowing uracil translation (mRNA) of RNA editing a nonsense only (stop) creates the (see of mRNA.] p. 449), to 2.

Chylomicron phospholipid enzymes located involved are Many synthesis in assembly: the TAG, cholesterol, in and SER. lipid. loads see and triglyceride apo protein transfer with p. microsomal lipid apolipoprotein into ([MTP] chylomicrons B-48 which 177), of Assembly the requires Golgi, This packaged the secretory the to transition where ER before occurs vesicles. the particles in are from system with which the lymphatic enter the lipoproteins, These and, the ultimately, blood. fuse membrane then plasma the releasing vein.] leave Chylomicrons subclavian into that via system thoracic the the left duct lymphatic empties the [Note: 3.

nascent released chylomicron Nascent functionally intestinal chylomicron cell by modification: particle mucosal it a the called is is because incomplete. The of apo the (LPL), in contained The receptors) latter lipoprotein the necessary includes reaches and plasma, it C-II, chylomicron. the enzyme lipase the apo C. hepatic degrades particle by apo modified, recognized for is E When receiving that which (which rapidly the the activation is TAG is circulating of source these The Fig. is apolipoproteins (see HDL 18.16). [Note: on inhibits C-III TAG-rich lipoproteins LPL.] Apo 4.

capillary and tissue those lipoprotein tissues LPL is but an degradation the and skeletal extracellular anchored to of Triacylglycerol muscle. adipose enzyme predominantly most is of by cardiac that lipase: walls

does enzyme. this liver adult not express The lipase of liver. on the found hepatic is [Note: endothelial the A cells of surface It a is chylomicrons p. (see degradation VLDL and metabolism TAG plays in in and in role important HDL 234).] glycerol. in on by hydrolyzes activated and apo these TAG to chylomicrons, particles the FA circulating LPL, C-II FA used or (in for stored muscle). energy adipose) are The (in glycolysis), taken the of and synthesis glycerol up The liver, is by lipid intermediate (an used dihydroxyacetone phosphate gluconeogenesis. to in or converted [Note: I even apo (type deficiency state. a (≥1,000 the of a accumulation Patients (hypertriacylglycerolemia) chylomicronemia) in familial mg/dl) hyperlipoproteinemia or or with LPL chylomicron-TAG in of fasted dramatic C-II show plasma the risk increased They acute are pancreatitis. for at fat.] dietary is Treatment of the reduction 5.

is Lipoprotein synthesized by by cardiac adipose tissue LPL muscle. and skeletal and lipase expression: level. hormonal the state regulated by Expression nutritional tissue-specific is isozymes and of LPL but in decreased example, fed the insulin tissue. state For is in increased (elevated synthesis in levels), adipose muscle muscle. synthesis Fasting (decreased in insulin) LPL favors highest provide the energy The needed reflecting is concentration of for function.] muscle, LPL cardiac the [Note: in cardiac FA of of much use to 6.

the LPL, TAG particle circulates, and its core formation: the size decreases is increases by degraded Chylomicron in and in the remnant >90% As density. chylomicron of in apo HDL. C or addition, B E) not returned apolipoproteins to (but are In the liver, contain rapidly from by whose apo E removed called lipoprotein circulation The remaining remnant, Fig. membranes recognize particle, cell the a the is that receptors (see 18.16). bind Chylomicron remnants by to receptors into these the are taken and hepatocytes endocytosis. degraded, apolipoproteins, other lysosome, fuses and the endocytosed the components remnant cholesterol, The then free a hydrolytically vesicle esters, and cholesteryl are with amino acids, and of releasing FA. recycled. is The receptor Fig. [Note: LDL of illustrated in mechanism is receptor-mediated for endocytosis The 18.20.]

lipoprotein Very-low-density C. metabolism

(Fig. are VLDL in liver the produced 18.17). composed is the TAG predominantly of liver carry this are from and peripheral of the to to synthesis) (~60%), They function lipid endogenous (site their tissues. as discussed 228). the chylomicrons TAG p. LPL, (see for is by There, degraded between synthesis liver fatty in there which hepatic imbalance in and TAG is [Note: the occurs an Nonalcoholic conditions steatosis) secretion of VLDL. (hepatic (see diabetes conditions and mellitus 2 include Such obesity p. type 343).] 1.

particles nascent apo as the Release directly liver: B-100. from by containing the liver secreted VLDL into are the blood HDL (see CII obtain They and from E apo circulating must apo Fig. 18.17). As required activation C-II of with LPL. for is chylomicrons, apo leading is a a with Abetalipoproteinemia in [Note: lipid. caused hypolipoproteinemia B to to an apo load inability defect MTP, by rare are intestine. and accumulates VLDL in chylomicrons and or few formed, Consequently, TAG the liver Absorption fat-soluble vitamins is decreased. of low.] are LDL 2.

VLDL VLDL degraded causing the decrease circulation, in TAG As circulation: the the to is denser. in become size Modification by pass and LPL, through apo retain including are but the particles to apolipoproteins, returned C the Surface E HDL, and B-100. components, concomitantly from transferred transfers cholesteryl are in exchange some to HDL VLDL. from TAG esters HDL reaction that Additionally, VLDL to an (CETP), cholesteryl This exchange Figure shown protein accomplished as in transfer 18.18. ester is by

3. modifications, Conversion these the converted plasma in With is VLDL lipoproteins: to low-density the LDL. to formed (IDL) of varying during transition. Intermediate-density sizes this lipoproteins are be also ligand. as IDL the cells endocytosis liver receptor-mediated taken E by can that up apo uses through isoforms, (the common), is in E-4. three E Apo present and most E-3 normally least E-2 common), (the and clearance are to poorly E-2 Apo for E-2 who chylomicron apo the receptors, and deficient homozygotic are binds IDL of patients in remnants. dysbetalipoproteinemia beta with type broad premature hyperlipoproteinemia familial These and atherosclerosis. have (familial hypercholesterolemia or individuals disease), III susceptibility of late-onset apo an to disease. the [Note: form age The Alzheimer of onset of confers E-4 earlier isoform increased at effect dependent, The is dose greatest with risk. being homozygotes the vary.] Estimates of risk

metabolism D. lipoprotein Low-density

LDL much concentration high VLDL a have particles contain cholesterol their predecessors of and cholesteryl than and less TAG esters (Fig. 18.19). plasma LDL. cholesterol in 70% About is of

1. to tissues primary endocytosis: function of particles liver). (or Receptor-mediated LDL peripheral the is to cholesterol return provide the to it The B-48). do plasma that B-100 apo to recognize apo (but receptors LDL not binding membrane so by They as are apo E, receptors. Because known LDL B-100/apo can these bind apo they E receptors also degradation 18.20. particles A is presented uptake Figure and of summary in LDL of the [Note: that The figure.] numbers corresponding numbers brackets below in to refer on similar and is for the liver. used receptor-mediated A remnants chylomicron the uptake IDL of of and by mechanism degradation endocytosis

are that receptors LDL clustered glycoproteins on membranes. are [1] cell charged in pits negatively with The stabilizes of side the protein the cytosolic pit. which the is clathrin, coated pit

endocytosed. [2] LDL–receptor complex After binding, the is Defects the plasma [Note: LDL causes of functional synthesis receptors significant in LDL-C. in elevation a [FH]) IIa deficiencies with (familial and Patients hyperlipidemia have type such premature atherosclerosis. hypercholesterolemia of Autosomal dominant caused increased convertase receptor protease, reduce proprotein type the also in internalization binding 9 which promotes the B-100 by hypercholesterolemia apo that degradation be and a receptor. by activity lysosomal subtilisin/kexin its can of and defects (PCSK9), to PCSK9 for inhibitors hypercholesterolemia.] are treatment available the of now vesicle vesicles, LDL and other coat loses larger fuses endosomes. The with clathrin called containing forming similar its vesicles [3]

which receptor. of The the the (due falls [4] proton-pumping its of separation endosomal of the allows activity ATPase), endosome from LDL pH to endosome, the stay the the whereas migrate free the The of then within lumen LDL receptors to one side vesicle. of

lysosomes receptors [5] and to hydrolases, the releasing by the lysosomal FA, in are cholesterol, and remnants degraded amino free recycled, vesicle lipoprotein transferred The be acids, whereas can acid phospholipids. be reutilized cell. can compounds These the by the in disease, cholesteryl the to esters disease) lysosomal rare (Wolman transport (Niemann-Pick hydrolyze cholesterol type of to from Lysosomal autosomal-recessive lysosome or [Note: result diseases storage C).] deficiencies free ability out 2. cholesterol Fig. (see affects cholesterol content cholesterol cholesterol The IDL-, cellular remnant–, and homeostasis: several LDL-derived and in chylomicron Endocytosed ways 18.20). CoA inhibited expression novo de synthesis the by First, decreases cholesterol and reductase result. gene as for a HMG high cholesterol, is of accelerated. is the of Additionally, reductase degradation LDL expression of new entry reduced decreasing gene, LDL limiting the LDL-C thus the by protein synthesis into receptor of is receptor of cells. further Second, gene LDL [Note: reductase an of involves (see regulation 222), and SREBP-2. p. As was with gene seen SRE the receptor transcriptional the regulation allows proteins.] coordinate This expression these of the of required cholesterol esterified or some by not acyl the structural immediately for CoA:cholesterol synthetic is is acyltransferase (ACAT). purpose, Third, it if fatty a the cholesterol, from stored ACAT to CoA acyl cell be FA in transfers (Fig. cholesteryl that a ester a producing can 18.21). activity cholesterol. of increased The ACAT is presence enhanced in intracellular of the

3. described scavenger macrophage the highly high for macrophages activity. levels to receptor-mediated pathway receptors: addition LDL uptake Uptake possess by specific In regulated scavenger above, receptor and of modified can range known endocytosis These LDL oxidized. and apo has of receptors, receptor the as (SR-A), lipid in broad component or of class which A the scavenger bind B ligands mediate chemically been a cholesterol. increased to LDL receptor response not in intracellular Unlike the receptor, scavenger downregulated the is “foam” Cholesteryl into esters in participate macrophages (Fig. formation and their plaque in of atherosclerotic cause transformation which accumulate cells, the 18.22). LDL-C cause atherosclerosis. the is of primary

E. lipoprotein High-density metabolism

lipoproteins heterogeneous that a understood. not completely complex metabolism with yet of family HDL comprise is a in apo addition and an apolipoprotein and the A-1, the secreted by intestine. particles the are to HDL made blood lipid formed liver by of ~70% A-1 the apolipoproteins for accounts HDL. in Apo of including important following. perform functions, HDL the number a of

1.

is chylomicron of and IDL an (the required (the to apo that supply: and receptor-mediated HDL LPL) as chylomicrons is remnants). circulating and apo a particles of transferred VLDL reservoir C-II serve endocytosis for and of activator Apolipoprotein E the apolipoprotein apolipoprotein

2.

HDL esters C, to They (Fig. (peripheral) and E. containing and and particles cholesterol uptake: A, as Nascent take liver up Nonesterified apo nonhepatic from are cholesterol tissues the phospholipid (largely cholesteryl it disc-shaped return PC) primarily 18.23). particles of high important of phospholipids, which a cholesterol concentration of [Note: are HDL cholesterol.] result excellent solubilizers are nonesterified acceptors their as of 3.

in by is HDL FA). also esterification: as plasma esterified stands up acyltransferase cholesterol (LCAT, PCAT, source for the lecithin:cholesterol P taken which The enzyme by immediately known of Cholesterol the phosphatidylcholine, the by liver. enzyme and is This secreted synthesized the is by A-I. and activated nascent to binds HDL LCAT apo PC carbon 2 LCAT to from of transfers the cholesterol. FA of and is lysophosphatidylcholine, HDL, This to cholesteryl in sequestered which albumin. the which produces binds a ester, the hydrophobic core [Note: allowing gradient, of efflux concentration continued cholesterol maintains the Esterification HDL.] to cholesterol the spherical, becomes and, eventually, first it a carries HDL3 HDL ester–poor these that particle esters a accumulates liver. to ester–rich As relatively HDL2 cholesteryl cholesteryl the discoidal nascent esters, cholesteryl (see conversion degrades HDL2 TAG HDL3 lipase, participates Hepatic the of Fig. which to in phospholipids, and 18.23). esters cholesteryl of relieving VLDL TAG, from CETP in to p. inhibition of (see some transfers 231) the exchange HDL LCAT. product for are VLDL catabolized up by Because p. by cholesteryl are (see the ultimately CETP transferred to the LDL, esters 231). taken liver

4.

cells liver transport: or and bile disposal to HDL HDL cholesterol cholesterol from is The transfer for via bile the cholesterol to the key Reverse from of of component acid homeostasis. selective a synthesis peripheral between in as reverse process transport and cholesterol the cholesterol for inverse seen plasma (RCT) the for relationship carrier. the “good” concentration atherosclerosis is, designation This part, of the of HDL HDL basis and Exercise levels.] HDL raise estrogen [Note: and to LCAT, perhaps, steroidogenic cells, and efflux these of from HDL release cholesteryl cells), HDL, lipid-depleted into to of the liver of cholesteryl (HDL3). the peripheral involves RCT binding (and, the (HDL2) esterification of ester–rich cholesterol HDL selective by esters cells cholesterol transfer of cells the is The from cholesterol mediated protein of transport efflux primarily ABCA1. peripheral by ABCA1 due absence a by very rare degradation of A-1.] HDL virtual is apo particles characterized deficiency Tangier [Note: of lipid-poor of to the is and disease 232 receptor the by binds liver (see SR-A by uptake the type 1) p. (scavenger ester mediated HDL cell-surface that is receptor for receptors). SR-B1 Cholesteryl class B itself is not taken The particle HDL up. is cholesteryl HDL from the particle. ester uptake of there Instead, selective the a factor risk HDL-C is for [Note: Low atherosclerosis.]

protein. is cassette ATP-binding ABCA1 an (ABC) across cells compartments. to transport intracellular including and proteins ATP of materials, hydrolysis in from energy and out use ABC lipids, bile ABC specific secretion, In X-linked decreased addition sitosterolemia, in cystic defects to syndrome fibrosis, proteins due Tangier respiratory and disease, secretion. salt result liver due disease in surfactant decreased distress to adrenoleukodystrophy, to

F. heart Lipoprotein (a) disease and

Lp(a), identical structure particle. an (a), nearly is LDL in or to Lipoprotein presence B-100. Its at covalently is the a molecule, which of is apolipoprotein additional feature an single apo(a), to site distinguishing apo linked Circulating levels genetics. of Lp(a) by are primarily determined as have some as it. role, trans However, factors to increase such reported play been may diet FA Lp(a) The function of unknown. physiologic is the risk associated in an is plasma, large coronary Lp(a) increased of in present with quantities heart disease. When blood component Apo(a) clots whose the is (see target is precursor the [Note: structurally blood to of 35 protease homologous of Chapter protein plasminogen, fibrin, online). a main blood with breakdown trigger for plasminogen is it to the competes elevated hypothesized heart clots attacks Lp(a) fibrin.] of slows that It binding that because Lp(a), LDL-C Niacin as TAG, reduces as raises and and well HDLC.

VII. STEROID HORMONES

(for (for 18.24. androgens, of cortisol), sex the example, steroid mineralocorticoids estrogens, hormones: in glucocorticoids and all progestins), and Cholesterol aldosterone), Figure precursor (that hormones as example, is, is classes of shown the mineralocorticoids called collectively corticosteroids.] and Glucocorticoids are [Note: secretion cortex (estrogens aldosterone, progestins), in (cortisol, androgens), Synthesis and placenta ovaries occur (testosterone). adrenal and and and testes and the blood are hormones the of transported target Steroid to by their their synthesis from organs. sites with hydrophobicity, must Because of a they protein. be complexed plasma their as carry Albumin nonspecific act carrier a and does can aldosterone. steroid-carrier for corticosteroid-binding does bind However, transporting responsible albumin example, more specific (for is cortisol). hormones the globulin, plasma transcortin, than steroid or tightly proteins steps hormones. deficiencies genetic of number steroid in biosynthesis are A in by the diseases specific of caused Some representative are in diseases described 18.25. Figure

A. Synthesis

the the hydroxylating shortening of involves cholesterol nucleus. steroid Synthesis and hydrocarbon chain cholesterol 21-carbon reaction and pregnenolone. The the rate-limiting initial to converts enzyme, P450scc desmolase. catalyzed cholesterol (see the function also It a side-chain (CYP) P450 mixed that of oxidase is inner 149) known the as cleavage p. is membrane and by cytochrome mitochondrial for the are reaction. O2 NADPH required and an newly esters from by tissues. the esterase steroidogenic up from or cholesterol released of taken cholesteryl substrate can in lipoproteins, be cytosol The stored synthesized, moves to the cholesterol outer mitochondrial The membrane. from inner is point movement the control the subsequent important the mitochondrial membrane. outer An to protein. process This acute mediated (steroidogenic regulatory) StAR is by hormones the for all (see is parent Fig. steroid compound Pregnenolone 18.25). in CYP is isomerized and modified the progesterone, mitochondria. SER protein–catalyzed is steroid to reactions It which hydroxylation further other the by to hormones oxidized and then an beyond of step lead in enzyme or and the synthesis the amount metabolites excess that or to in an before A hormones this the affected defect can a in of hormones step. the in activity pathway deficiency to Because enzyme the members occur (see serious activity, biologic metabolic have Fig. deficiencies imbalances pathway of all potent with 18.25). in they adrenals. Collectively, because enlarged these congenital the disorders adrenal (CAH), hyperplasias known result are as to is adrenocortical destruction autoimmune adrenal cortex, [Note: insufficiency.] Addison the disease, by of characterized due

hormones Adrenal B. cortical steroid

are signals. hormones in to secreted synthesized hormonal and Steroid response corticosteroids The cortex in and adrenal secreted and androgens are different in into regions blood are signals. of response to made the different medulla The catecholamines (see makes [Note: adrenal p. 285).] 1. controlled in hypothalamus, layer (Fig. attached is cortex the Its gland Cortisol: the fasciculata) production is pituitary of to which the middle (zona by adrenal the 18.26). of the stress production secretion In hypothalamus, severe hormone the through of to (ACTH), travels induces capillaries infection), the produced to where peptide. it hormone and (CRH), adrenocorticotropic by pituitary, response anterior a corticotropin-releasing (for lobe the example, adrenal and the secrete stimulates cortex cortisol, to ACTH the glucocorticoid stress the synthesize hormone. see A and kinase receptor, binds of resulting cyclic 94). AMP ([PKA] a (cAMP) membrane activation ACTH to protein–coupled p. in protein G production [Note: PKA esterase converts and activates cholesteryl to ester and protein.] that free the cholesterol both phosphorylates StAR to immune respond effects Cortisol and and metabolism (for gluconeogenesis) increased (which allows responses the body intermediary its on example, the to inflammatory decreased). through are stress inhibited. release of and CRH levels rise, cortisol is ACTH the As hyperplasia.] adrenal of reduction The results [Note: in that ACTH a rise in CAH in cortisol causes 2. plasma angiotensin Na+/potassium outer decrease adrenal in by the Aldosterone: Its in is hormone production the glomerulosa) the and (K+) the II (zona ratio layer by of cortex (Ang-II). induced a but produced in is (an from widely lungs body. a the predominantly Ang-II angiotensin an also distributed enzyme enzyme octapeptide) the decapeptide) found (ACE), in ([Ang-I] angiotensinconverting by I produced secreted by angiotensinogen, liver. Ang-I an the the by [Note: blood inactive is in precursor, of cleavage made by is and kidneys.] catalyzed renin, by the Cleavage secreted to cell Ang-II receptors. surface binds in effects p. not the ACTH, (see mediated to However, by pathway contrast 4,5bisphosphate and 205) cAMP. through are its phosphatidylinositol on K+ Na+ (Fig. the it primary and excretion water where is uptake effect and stimulates tubules, kidney Aldosterone’s 18.27). aldosterone pressure. effect an [Note: in blood increase is An of are Competitive renin-dependent to of inhibitors treat ACE hypertension.] used 3. primarily adrenal layers and cortex of reticularis) dehydroepiandrosterone middle Both the inner (zona androgens, the androstenedione. and Androgens: produce the are women. (primarily) aromatase adrenal themselves testes androgens premenopausal converted estrogens of ovaries androgen, stronger Although the in by they are a testosterone, and weak, (CYP19) to to in at sites [Note: estrogen produce breast. as Postmenopausal such extragonadal the women inhibitors the cancer in estrogen-responsive in treatment women.] breast used these are Aromatase of

hormones Gonadal steroid C.

differentiation testes hormones and for sexual (gonads) necessary ovaries The synthesize and reproduction. the (FSH). stimulates follicle-stimulating hormone the gonadotropin-releasing glycoproteins A (LH) to pituitary anterior release and single hormone, factor, hormone luteinizing hypothalamic-releasing ACTH, to Like surface FSH bind receptors and LH and an cAMP. increase cause in the progesterone estrogens stimulates produce and LH and testes to Fig. the to ovaries (see testosterone produce 18.27). testicular regulates and of ovarian follicles the growth stimulates spermatogenesis. FSH

Mechanism D.

hormone across steroid cell binds to diffuses a plasma its nuclear of or target and specific membrane receptor. Each the cytosolic (hormone elements and These increased association regulatory complexes with to DNA accumulate coactivator response in nucleus, dimerize, bind of proteins, receptor–ligand (Fig. causing sequences the specific targeted thereby [HRE]) in transcription genes 18.28). 440) for HRE found an An a to genes. thus in respond p. insuring specific (see steroid of that regulation coordinated these or element hormone, is enhancer promoter the genes complexes association corepressors. with transcription in inhibit also Hormone–receptor can receptor sequence. allowing DNA-binding a its interact DNA of a domain, the causes through to its complex that to in conformational motif change the a the receptor appropriate hormone with finger uncovers [Note: zinc binding The function (see related acid 1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol in regulators of 390), similar members structurally p. thyroid and p. superfamily for for are Receptors the of a way.] a 386), (vitamin steroid that plus see gene retinoic D; those hormone, hormones,

E. Further metabolism

are converted hormones liver. metabolic into products Steroid inactive excretion in the generally of unsaturated Reactions introduction additional groups. and reduction of bonds hydroxyl include the acid resulting soluble are structures The see p. conjugation glucuronic made sulfate more or 3′phosphoadenosyl-5′-phosphosulfate; (from 162). with by conjugated are carriers. metabolites soluble water fairly These not protein need do and in feces urine. are They eliminated and

VIII. CHAPTER SUMMARY

attached, ester. located with a fatty be compound, acid producing hydroxyl can hydrophobic is a cholesteryl group of (FA) which more a ring, single carbon to 3 hydrophobic the A an at even Cholesterol all tissues, virtually cortex, adrenal primarily by by is although and the tissues intestine, reproductive Cholesterol synthesized liver, human (Fig. 18.29). the adenine acetyl equivalents. coenzyme All atoms phosphate nicotinamide carbon the reducing provided are provides A and dinucleotide (CoA), by high-energy hydrolysis bond The driven the terminal phosphate pathway CoA the of of thioester by acetyl and is ATP. bond of (SER), requires cytosol, and endoplasmic peroxisomes. the smooth Synthesis of reticulum enzymes catalyzed mevalonate produces regulated coenzyme cholesterol in by is reductase, HMG The A hydroxymethylglutaryl step which CoA. and from the (HMG rate-limiting SER-membrane synthesis CoA) protein 3) activity) high; increased low, 1) accelerated sterol (SREBP-2), by kinase are number and (activation) are of the therefore, enzyme via bound and, dephosphorylation levels hormonal regulated regulation monophosphate–activated protein-2 by to insulin cholesterol protein phosphatase; (causing element adenosine phosphoprotein enzyme [AMPK] 2) mechanisms: increased and is reductase by the cholesterol when the sterol a of and The reductase in (SRE), factor, of a inactivation regulatory of resulting levels expression element–binding reductase protein 4) glucagon. regulatory cholesterol, when phosphorylation transcription by synthesis; degradation a gene of HMG Statins inhibitors CoA reductase. competitive are in are decrease patients drugs hypercholesterolemia. used plasma These to cholesterol with structure in be ring cholesterol humans. The of degraded cannot

by or the the bile. either body is Cholesterol by conversion from salts bile eliminated secretion to into quantitatively and Bile (PC) most important phosphatidylcholine components are of organic bile. the salts acid catalyzed is step bile by inhibited cholesterol-7-αhydroxylase, bile by rate-limiting synthesis which acids. The in is either they glycocholic Before bile the acid the glycine or salts taurocholic liver, the are conjugated a to bile acid. glycochenodeoxycholic acids of or and producing taurochenodeoxycholic taurine, leave molecule or conjugated are (protonated) Bile more effective and, emulsifiers of acids fat. amphipathic than bile dietary (deprotonated) are more salts therefore, salts, glycine well can and hydroxyl secondary producing deoxycholic Intestinal from acids. taurine the a as group remove and nucleus, bile bacteria as steroid the the lithocholic by sodium–bile to a back taken by circulation, reabsorbed salts reused and are sequestrants and efficiently the blood, reduce). the (enterohepatic of the carried liver up by isoform which they intestinal ileum cotransporter bile (>95%) cotransporter, where salt the are to acid the Bile in returned hepatic albumin can disease bile bile available the cholesterol the occur. PC, by than and (cholelithiasis) more can solubilized enters cholesterol If be gallstone salts

lipoproteins plasma (see The Fig. lipoproteins chylomicrons, (IDL), lipoproteins verylow-density include (LDL), (VLDL), high-density lipoproteins lipoproteins 18.29) intermediate-density (HDL). low-density and they as and [TAG] esters) soluble (primarily cholesteryl transport keep to triacylglycerol They tissues. them between function lipids are a neutral cholesterol. both) a nonesterified cholesteryl composed lipid (TAG, or phospholipid, apolipoproteins, of Lipoproteins shell surrounded and amphipathic core by of esters, mucosal TAG). cells are intestinal in dietary assembled Chylomicrons (primarily from lipids (apo) Each apolipoprotein one of B-48. nascent has molecule chylomicron particle system the the cells receive where HDL. blood, They and to apo C-II from travel are the from and lymphatic released into apo E they chylomicrons Apo TAG degrades which lipase endothelial FA (LPL), C-II and to in glycerol. the lipoprotein activates (in that muscle). for are are or released stored energy adipose tissue) (in The used FA liver. the is glycerol by The metabolized if LPL or of C-II Patients accumulation (type a familial with I chylomicronemia) hyperlipoproteinemia of deficiency the a apo even chylomicrons plasma dramatic show fasted. in or removed, the After The C-II carrying lysosomal dietary degraded most apo contents the of the chylomicron recognizes of by remnant, receptor a apo cholesterol, is and binds liver that E. its HDL, endocytosed, most TAG enzymes. to particle is returned to is and dysbetalipoproteinemia. IDL) uptake hyperlipoproteinemia or these causes remnants (and type of III Defective are VLDL the are of predominantly Nascent composed in and liver TAG. produced a molecule single They apo of contain B-100. E plasma. the apo Like from receive HDL apo VLDL chylomicrons, and in C-II VLDL the tissues degrades lipid. hepatic carry TAG peripheral the where to LPL TAG. esters HDL the VLDL in for cholesteryl receives from Additionally, particle exchange cholesteryl transfer protein This process accomplished by (CETP). ester is plasma VLDL LDL, first much the to converted in then and to smaller, denser IDL a particle. is to tissues by are but and retains B-100, receptors which apo C-II peripheral recognized LDL returned liver. apo E Apo is the on the HDL, and undergo lysosomes. and contents the degraded their LDL in are endocytosis, receptor-mediated type (PCSK9) protease The subtilisin/kexin proprotein recycling. convertase prevents 9 receptor causes hypercholesterolemia in receptors IIa the Defects synthesis LDL (familial [FH]). type functional hyperlipoproteinemia of to expression CoA SRE. binding through of (and SREBP-2 endocytosed HMG reductase cholesterol prevention receptors) decreases LDL of the The Some be by esterified can it CoA:cholesterol of acyl and (ACAT) acyltransferase stored. the apo liver and lipidation in by synthesized HDL A-1 are created of intestine. and these that by (LCAT), circulating apo cholesteryl functions, for tissues 2) via a apo via A-1; a of 1) it acyl transferase liver-synthesized lecithin:cholesterol VLDL; including as esterifying (reverse chylomicrons and serving receptor-B1 esters using apo enzyme peripheral uptake of for activated ABCA1 They cholesterol delivering liver from to and and removing (SR-B1). transport) scavenger cholesterol a C-II plasma is number E have the reservoir 3)

steroid classes which glucocorticoids, is (androgens, of Cholesterol the mineralocorticoids, estrogens, all and include hormones, and precursor the of hormones progestins). sex the (testosterone). in (estrogens androgens in the cytochrome progestins), aldosterone the and oxidases, and in mixed zona glomerulosa, occurs P450 placenta and adrenal in (cortisol Synthesis, cortex zona the fasciculata, testes and function ovaries reticularis), primarily using zona side-chain is to enzyme initial pregnenolone cleavage and step rate-limiting P450scc. by the the of conversion The cholesterol synthesis to Deficiencies hyperplasia adrenal in lead congenital (CAH). Each steroid binds cell plasma the a its target across hormone specific of to intracellular membrane receptor. and diffuses and targeted in receptor–hormone dimerize, in causing elements) These proteins, complexes increased sequences regulatory genes. response the of thereby transcription accumulate association bind coactivator to with (hormone DNA specific nucleus, transcription corepressors, is with In decreased. association

TAG = lipoproteins; C carbon. triacylglycerol; phosphate; nicotinamide dinucleotide = adenine = NADPH

ONE best Choose the answer.

8.1. a serine contain engineered 871, replaced phosphorylation reductase A was were to coenzyme site, by which genetically hydroxymethylglutaryl Mice alanine. in be of the the enzyme the is of concerning correct? Which most following to statements modified form likely

A. depletion. The enzyme to is nonresponsive ATP

B. to nonresponsive enzyme statin The drugs. is

nonresponsive element–sterol response system. response to element–binding enzyme protein C. sterol The is the

degraded D. system. is to ubiquitin–proteasome The the be unable enzyme by

answer A. Correct = reductase by phosphorylation regulated dephosphorylation. is and covalent The (AMP), in adenosine AMP rise kinase monophosphate thereby (AMPK), which the Depletion in ATP activates results and phosphorylating of reductase. inactivating a a cannot enzyme phosphorylation common In absence AMPK. phosphorylated the the site, serine, of by be the on phosphorylation. enzyme depends and (competitive of is these physiologically inhibitors), pharmacologically in changes drugs none serine and also but The degradation through transcription by statin regulated

8.2. of mg/dl, in low-density lipid-panel 300 cholesterol cholesterol lipoprotein Calculate test fasting lipoproteins blood triglycerides = 150 high-density the = the mg/dl. individual amount gave = total mg/dl, whose following 25 an the cholesterol results: in

A. B. 55 mg/dl C. 95 mg/dl mg/dl mg/dl D. 245 125

individual cholesterol lipoproteins of is cholesterol sum the of equal lipoproteins the plus D. cholesterol plus (VLDL). a blood in in in to very-lowdensity high-density lipoproteins the Correct total = The fasted low-density the cholesterol the answer in last about value of dividing This VLDL because triacylglycerol in 5 term is accounts the by cholesterol calculated volume for blood. the 1/5 by of fasted

following scenario. and 18.3 For 18.4, Questions the use

of at was in A hospital history 5 severe severe to distress. young taken pain a.m. local with abdominal a her girl drawn, mg/dl mg/dl). level Blood was appeared milky, the the and 4–150 triacylglycerol plasma (normal = with >2,000 The diet in was extremely fat patient with supplemented triglycerides. placed medium-chain but limited on a

8.3. Which responsible following most the for patient’s likely particles the of lipoprotein the are appearance plasma? of

A. Chylomicrons

B. lipoproteins High-density

C. Intermediate-density lipoproteins

D. Low-density lipoproteins

Very-low-density E. lipoproteins

A. = answer Correct plasma The chylomicrons. of appearance her a triacylglycerol-rich was milky of result have after particles. lipoprotein hours her presumably meal, must difficulty evening Because a.m. patient is these degrading the several 5 contain hypercholesterolemia. more these would cholesteryl and, elevated, of low-, Intermediate-, lipoproteins one was if primarily cause high-density particles or and esters, it cause of not do plasma. milky described appearance Very-low-density the lipoproteins

8.4. of this to in proteins Which following likely the most patient? be one deficient is

B-48 Apolipoprotein A-I Apolipoprotein A. B.

Apolipoprotein C. C-II

transfer D. ester protein Cholesteryl

E. transfer Microsomal triglyceride protein

is lipoprotein C-II a endothelial Correct which chylomicrons apolipoprotein The C. coenzyme. (apo) triacylglycerol (TAG) lipase requires in as = degraded answer (LPL), by which Deficiency of decreased their by E) in LPL to receptors. remnants, results or to degrade (via apo cleared ability C-II chylomicrons apo liver get apo Apo of transfer lipoproteins degradation, and microsomal (VLDL); protein ester–TAG (and is chylomicrons; high-density ester formation, acyltransferase; catalyzes A-I the not between lecithin:cholesterol exchange the B-48 cholesteryl in for transfer structural involved and triglyceride VLDL). protein protein coenzyme very-low-density of characteristic the cholesteryl is the chylomicrons is

8.5. classic to the individual. below normal 21-α-hydroxylase Complete deficiency a relative individual with for table an

than this were rather deficient results might changed if How in the 17-αhydroxylase, individual be 21-α-hydroxylase?

(cortisol) glucocorticoids causes absent. deficiency Classic and be 21-α-hydroxylase (aldosterone) to virtually mineralocorticoids blood in respectively. their blood Because increases in aldosterone pressure, blood cortisol deficiencies and increases blood glucose, glucose, pressure and decrease result a the to elevation release in inhibit and, hormone adrenocorticotropic in results back absence ACTH. an its pituitary, (ACTH) by normally feeds Cortisol so, 21-α-hydroxylase progesterone of loss and pregnenolonetoandrogensynthesisand,therefore,causesandrostenedionelevelstorise.With17-α-hydroxylasedeficiency,sexhormonesynthesiswouldbedecreased.Mineralocorticoidproductionwouldbeincreased,leadingtohypertension. The pushes

IV Metabolism Nitrogen Nitrogen Amino 19 Disposal Acids: UNIT

thePoint. to visit this additional materials ancillary please For related chapter,

OVERVIEW I.

fats the stored by amino Unlike acids and are body. carbohydrates, not for whose amino protein maintain is, That of a is exists to acids future no use. sole supply function acids body or degradation be from Therefore, de amino protein. novo, the of from diet, produced synthesized must the obtained of the amino Any acids degraded. the cell needs biosynthetic are of rapidly excess in the catabolism subsequent the transamination acids, acids. and the ammonia the by α-keto phase of of of The deamination), involves first and forming oxidative amino carbon (usually corresponding groups skeletons α-amino removal of portion in is of the excreted free urine, used A ammonia (Fig. the most the synthesis is urea in but the the of is 19.1), route from disposing important which most quantitatively for nitrogen body. acid energy-producing amino described Chapter to skeletons metabolic carbon the are pathways. phase acids of intermediates the the converted of common α-keto 20, catabolism, in of second In to the Chapters glucose, metabolized dioxide 16. described These fatty ketone bodies water and (H2O), by metabolism compounds or carbon in acids, central pathways and (CO2) 8–13 of be can

II. NITROGEN METABOLISM OVERALL

of larger the metabolism is Amino of molecules. process the of acid catabolism nitrogen-containing part protein. acids most variety the in dietary in of compounds contained Nitrogen important food, body in the amino present enters a being as the body leaves Nitrogen derived metabolism from p. other and amino 287). creatinine, products (such urea, acid see ammonia, as amino role The and in these the body pool involves transformations two proteins concepts: important acid protein turnover. of

A. acid Amino pool

in body, fluids. are the Free acids present throughout such extracellular the blood, amino cells, and as envision entity, For called the acid a amino these the of belonged if to this single amino they as all acids purpose of discussion, pool. amino supplied which 1) acids synthesized protein; by simple the of amino amino from are by degradation provided of nonessential This most three metabolism intermediates from 2) endogenous (Fig. exogenous (dietary) is pool proteins, reutilized; acids sources: acids derived and (body) of 3) 19.2). and conversion fatty acids synthesis + 2) (see Conversely, bodies amino 3) of pool protein, small acid is molecules, acids, ketone oxidation glycogen, amino H2O nitrogen-containing the to acids and three Fig. consumption amino by glucose, CO2 to of of precursors 1) as of body depleted essential routes: or 19.2). is Although in is 70-kg a ~90–100 in (~12 man), the nitrogen of it the comparison in kg with pool acid conceptually small of g protein amino body acids) metabolism. the amount at of center (comprising amino whole-body the

the balanced input amino output. individuals, by well-fed acid the healthy, is to In pool the of constant. contained amount the is the acids amino pool is, in That steady is nitrogen in said balance state, 367). p. said pool be to be (see in the The acid a amino and is individual to

B. Protein turnover

body or in synthesized of (turned proteins. abnormal over), the the constantly Most degraded removal permitting proteins being then and are unneeded determines cell, the concentration of proteins, many with For in protein assuming minor regulation protein of degradation role. a the synthesis and levels other cellular rate (that essentially proteins, synthesis constant), For constitutive controlled the are protein degradation. is by of of is, selective the

1.

synthesis of replace is just protein the because Rate: protein the the degraded. the amount body constant protein of to that In sufficient rate adults, is remains healthy in total g and protein hydrolysis of to process, leads body resynthesis each the turnover, day. of called protein This 300–400 proteins. turnover individual for of rate The widely varies protein are proteins proteins) in Short-lived half-lives having degraded, measured misfolded minutes example, or rapidly hours. (for many regulatory proteins and the days half-lives to proteins, constitute in cell. of proteins of weeks, the Long-lived majority with as Structural proteins, have are stable in months collagen, years. such measured and or half-lives metabolically

2.

degrading the ubiquitin Protein proteins: enzyme the ATP-dependent the degradative of the responsible enzyme lysosomes. (Ub)–proteasome are degradation: systems and system for major ATP-independent of system There two cytosol short-lived degrade proteins. or selectively damaged Proteasomes plasma taken by p. Lysosomes (see acid hydrolases cell such degrade use endocytosis. are the (heterophagy), proteins nonselectively extracellular intracellular into 162) proteins that proteins, as (autophagy) and to

small, conserved selected by highly that globular, protein is attachment eukaryotic of a Ub, system cytosolic species. covalent degradation ubiquitin–proteasome for first Proteins the system: Ubiquitin–proteasome by across nonenzymic a. modified the are group substrate a to Ubiquitination the substrate the protein lysine of of isopeptide the group through occurs C-terminal of by three-step, of enzyme-catalyzed, α-carboxyl a of the process. ε-amino in the Ub ATP-dependent target linkage glycine [Note: transferred 1 E2 activating activates enzyme) is then to which (a (E1, conjugating an Ub, Enzyme enzyme). interacts the be degraded protein to E2-Ub. with E3 ligase) (a identifies and are than or E3 more are proteins E1 many E2.] there There four protein consecutive more chain. or to Ub target a of generates The addition molecules polyubiquitin the chains Proteins proteasome recognized a complex tagged macromolecular, (Fig. are a barrel-shaped, with large, called proteolytic Ub by 19.3). the pool. deubiquitinates, by further that proteases fragments amino to cuts unfolds, enter proteasome amino the then are The acid degraded protein cytosolic and into acids, which target is recycled. Ub The by ubiquitin–proteosome the by degradation requires proteolytic of complex noteworthy (unlike that the enzymes) simple It selective hydrolysis. proteins is ATP hydrolysis

cannot that be random by but, as of Degradation have an influenced degradation is Because b. that structural protein the some serves half-lives, bound aspect degradation a is by protein proteins E3. signal, is which signals: different it rather, clear and recognized N-end hours. also to (N)-terminal rule, a influenced from The amino so-called residue, the by minutes of and protein is ranges the half-life and include amino such modified acetylated Destabilizing acids as N-terminal acids arginine alanine. posttranslationally amino serine a In contrast, stabilizing acid. is amino sequences are and, sequences proline, rich amino and PEST have containing ubiquitinated and (called rapidly proteins the Additionally, designations short in degraded threonine one-letter for therefore, glutamate, half-lives. serine, these acids) after

III. DIGESTION PROTEIN DIETARY

nitrogen to the g/day protein, the of (see in American 70–100 Most of in typically Fig. form consumed diet amounting in the is diet the 19.2). by intestine. absorbed too the are generally be large Proteins to an exception milk.] example that to is of take this rule An newborns in up [Note: maternal can breast antibodies must proteins be absorbed. di-and as be amino yield as Therefore, acids, tripeptides individual which hydrolyzed can to well intestine produced the Proteolytic the (Fig. stomach, proteins three and degrading responsible pancreas, are organs: by enzymes small for the different 19.4).

secretion Digestion A. gastric by

of The a acid secretes unique proteins pepsinogen. solution proenzyme digestion (HCl) which hydrochloric begins the in the and gastric containing juice, stomach,

1.

HCl Stomach hydrolyze too dilute 2–3) (pH acid: Hydrochloric proteins. is to by making to instead of and kill more them parietal acid, some thereby proteins, bacteria The functions to by secreted the proteases. cells subsequent denature to stomach, susceptible hydrolysis the

2.

secreted of proenzyme), is acid-stable by pepsinogen. cells endopeptidase Pepsin: zymogen an (or the inactive stomach the This chief as them acids extra that being zymogens [Note: in their contain In from sequences catalytically active. general, prevent amino amino active permits required Removal an of for the these folding proper acids enzyme.] polypeptides proteins. a releases a which that dietary of undergoes change form, pepsin, acids it few from itself active free the (autocatalysis) amino In to and presence allows cleave to the HCl, conformational pepsinogen

by Digestion enzymes pancreatic B.

further action the endopeptidases cleave proteases oligopeptides the an acids by within) by pancreatic polypeptides cleaved and to produced and of small entering pepsin in are intestine, of amino (that cut both stomach the end). (that that group include exopeptidases at On the a raises intestinal pH.] response the secretin, [Note: hormone secreted by the the intestinal in to Bicarbonate pancreas (HCO3−), 1.

adjacent the acid to amino the these specificity peptide bond Specificity: R-groups has different enzymes Each susceptible (Fig. of for a 19.5). For the example, carbonyl the bond or only lysine. group trypsin of is contributed when peptide arginine cleaves by synthesized enzymes, above, and pepsin like inactive as described zymogens. are These secreted

2.

of The release: of secretion release are of (see and small zymogens cholecystokinin, mediated p. polypeptide the intestine activation Zymogen hormone the pancreatic the by 176). a

3.

N-terminus present trypsin from surface (apical) synthesized trypsinogen. of luminal intestinal called (also zymogen by of mucosal pancreatic Zymogen cells protease Enteropeptidase the to activation: border, brush (enterocytes) of of converts the a the on hexapeptide enterokinase), trypsinogen by serine and a removal the by to specific in cleaving peptide zymogen. number of the a subsequently molecules limited trypsin bonds converts Trypsin other trypsinogen the enteropeptidase common Fig. of Thus, the pancreatic of cascade is because activator zymogens proteolytic unleashes trypsin (see all activity a 19.5).

4.

cystic abnormalities: digestion absorption individuals the deficiency because and are pancreas), protein of incomplete. of fibrosis, pancreatitis, In surgical secretion or with chronic Digestion (for removal fat a the example, pancreatic of and in of as feces results protein. abnormal see the called as undigested in well steatorrhea; appearance condition the (a 177) lipids This in p.

sprue) (celiac in in response from of to from intestine gluten (or and gliadin a wheat, immune-mediated the protein barley, rye. of disease found a damage resulting gluten), to malabsorption Celiac small disease ingestion is produced

C. of oligopeptides intestine by enzymes Digestion small

The the N-terminal cleaves the exopeptidase peptides amino enterocytes that surface acids. luminal an aminopeptidase, produce even residue oligopeptides of contains repeatedly and free smaller from to

intestinal acid Amino peptide and absorption D. small

acids secondary of carrier apical free (SLC) proteins solute transport membrane. active sodium-dependent by via the enterocytes taken Most are into amino overlapping acid transport with known. least At seven amino different systems are specificities taken tripeptides, transporter however, by are Di-and peptide up a proton-linked (PepT1). to are then free The peptides hydrolyzed acids. amino acids enterocytes the are source, their from of membrane. Regardless transporters into system the by sodium-independent amino released free of portal basolateral protein. free acids are meal vein a found the portal in after containing amino only Therefore, acids circulation. either amino These metabolized or are into general by liver the released the but, the are not instead, acids from blood.] liver (BCAA) the metabolized muscle to [Note: are liver via Branched-chain the amino by sent

E. abnormalities Absorption

for kidneys intestine The systems proximal transport have common tubules uptake. and of acid the amino the small acids in particular a into absorb defect into any tubules. an systems Consequently, results kidney one these to the in amino inability intestine of the and dibasic the and acids is of (represented ornithine, one cystine COAL). lysine uptake and responsible example, the for For amino system arginine, as In is amino inherited the carrier cystinuria, the (Fig. appear and acids in urine all system this defective, disorder four 19.6). occurs common a acid in the Cystinuria individuals, frequency of 7,000 amino of 1 making transport. the it error of genetic inherited and diseases common most at one most block The of form (calculi), itself disease the cystine precipitation expresses which to can the by clinically stones kidney urinary tract. hydration an for of important this is part disorder. treatment Oral amino and uptake symptoms.] pellagra-like in p. (see Hartnup transporter and dermatologic acid 384) of in neutral tryptophan [Note: Defects by a result neurologic the can disorder

IV. REMOVAL FROM NITROGEN AMINO ACIDS

safely breakdown. of α-amino oxidative away keeps acids presence from The the amino group locked the essential the step in amino is α-amino all producing catabolism acids. of Removing is an for energy any acid from group amino and obligatory be compounds can other the this nitrogen Once skeletons being urea, removed, into carbon metabolized. as incorporated or with excreted urea nitrogen and This 253). the transamination aspartate, ultimately deamination, ammonia section two reactions oxidative provide and p. (see of sources describes that

to Transamination: Funneling glutamate groups A. amino

transfer catabolism to step their first The acids of of the the amino (Fig. α-ketoglutarate most is α-amino group in glutamate. an original producing acid) from 19.7), (derived amino acid the α-keto and amino the most thereby from becoming in pivotal metabolism groups plays amino acids, amino a by role acid α-Ketoglutarate glutamate. accepting below) nonessential oxidatively amino Glutamate donor amino (see the of can an B. transamination as in or group synthesis used be acids. deaminated produced by skeleton called amino of This enzymes transaminases). groups carbon family is another called transfer one aminotransferases to a (also of by catalyzed from are throughout and enzymes in These cytosol of the body. mitochondria found the cells acids, and in exception in of their lysine at catabolism. the with All some amino transamination participate point threonine, (see α-amino groups two lose These deamination by [Note: acids their pp. amino 265–266).] 1. donors. Each Substrate one specific most, or, specificity: at few aminotransferase for a amino is group of the the group always α-ketoglutarate. are the acceptor because is Aminotransferases named donor, after amino amino specific almost group Two by Figure alanine (AST), aminotransferase (ALT) and in aspartate aminotransferase are important as 19.8. aminotransferase reactions shown catalyzed

a.

ALT many tissues. Alanine present aminotransferase: is in transfer and of of the formation resulting catalyzes to enzyme The amino pyruvate group α-ketoglutarate, in of glutamate. the the alanine The is reaction reversible. readily acid during aminotransferases) glutamate of most synthesis. enzyme (like this However, the functions catabolism, in amino direction [Note: glutamate a most from nitrogen acts acids.] effect, of as collector In amino b.

funnel aminotransferases to rule amino glutamate. groups an AST that exception form aminotransferase: to Aspartate is the of source to in urea amino 255). from amino p. is nitrogen a glutamate the cycle oxaloacetate, During which catabolism, aspartate, forming transfers primarily used as acid (see groups AST transaminations, reversible. AST is other Like reaction the

2. aminotransferases the require of is residue covalently of All 382), a the the site B6; the to group which (a lysine derivative linked see phosphate ε-amino pyridoxal at specific Mechanism: enzyme. p. vitamin coenzyme active of to act phosphate. coenzyme amino pyridoxal amino to by an Aminotransferases the part transferring group of of acid pyridoxamine the the generate aldehyde form pyridoxamine acid α-keto the of an an with coenzyme. reacts of the form to at form original then the The acid, coenzyme time regenerating amino same the component transamination Figure 19.9 shows the catalyzed these by AST. two for reactions

3.

Equilibrium: most the constant For transamination is near 1. equilibrium reactions, nonessential meal) in diet adequate of the of acids supply acids after when meet reaction biosynthesis This groups amino allows the to acid of of protein-rich amino of needs consumption and addition acids α-keto (for of from both amino to the α-amino skeletons a degradation of example, not through synthetic amino example, function carbon is groups to (for the removal through cells). the

4.

cell release low found representing the levels normally the of are enzymes, value: plasma the in turnover. during Diagnostic with normal Aminotransferases intracellular contents cellular of rich aminotransferases in these Elevated cells to indicate levels plasma enzymes. damage can enzymes of cause release into a in disease process example, or intracellular resulting lysis, trauma blood. the physical For cell Two are when value are found they particular diagnostic the plasma. of AST and in aminotransferases, ALT,

a.

Hepatic cell disease: collapse. circulatory are high viral severe and such elevated but hepatitis, necrosis, as conditions and Plasma extensive toxic prolonged AST nearly hepatic injury, cause that in are all in particularly ALT diseases of because the contains AST. disease, more but than for more specific amounts AST ALT latter liver sensitive liver larger is the is course the function of and are in of often determining ALT useful damage. tests) (liver liver Serial measurements AST liver a ingestion 19.10 following of blood, Figure ALT release early into shows the of toxin. the bilirubin hepatocellular of hepatic The (see results in excretion that damage the p. [Note: conjugation decreases and elevation from bilirubin 282).] b.

or damage to Nonhepatic skeletal such as that disease: may those cardiac in cause diseases muscle. nonhepatic be elevated Aminotransferases clinically disease. disorders these from can be distinguished liver However, usually

group removal deamination: Oxidative Amino B.

ammonia transamination the in In to amino result contrast groups, reactions oxidative transfer that deamination (Fig. as the liberation of free group amino reactions 19.11). occur liver and the kidney. These in reactions primarily which in synthesis. acids and a ammonia, of energy central α-keto that the metabolism of provide hepatic source is They enter urea nitrogen can pathways as [Note: exists in form (NH4+) crosses the Ammonia it primarily is unionized but solution, (NH3) aqueous ammonium membranes.] that 1. described are Glutamate of amino As groups glutamate amino transamination acids funneled dehydrogenase: the above, means ultimately α-ketoglutarate. with of by to most undergoes glutamate ([GDH], catalyzed only it is see rapid oxidative deamination, the by unique acid is a Glutamate dehydrogenase Fig. amino in that reaction that 19.11). oxidative sequential released most groups be transfer α-ketoglutarate) acids Therefore, to most of the produce of that (regenerating amino amino ammonia. action α-ketoglutarate the whereby the glutamate acids glutamate) can amino groups amino a (resulting transamination pathway of and provide from the in as to of deamination

can a nicotinamide or its adenine mitochondrial Fig. form unusual (see either phosphorylated (NAD+) a. a reduced enzyme, (NADPH) is coenzyme dinucleotide Coenzymes: as use that GDH, it in 19.11). is oxidative in the skeleton, with Fig. the shown loss oxidation coupled simultaneous (the deamination as primarily of of carbon ammonia NAD+ used in reductive Fig. whereas NADPH shown amination the simultaneous in coupled reduction used as the in ammonia gain of with is of 19.12A), carbon (the skeleton, 19.12B).

= dinucleotide adenine NADP(H) phosphate. nicotinamide

b.

ammonia ratio relative to on of direction and direction: reduced coenzymes. oxidized of concentrations reaction the depends α-ketoglutarate, and of Reaction glutamate, the the The in glutamate formation elevated, Fig. levels proceeds ingestion containing in are (see of protein, and amino of the the ammonia example, of degradation meal reaction liver after acid and the a the direction For 19.12A). the levels ammonia are synthesis. drive required glutamate reaction to to High

c.

activator. is an triphosphate Allosteric GDH, an diphosphate inhibitor of is Guanosine adenosine regulators: whereas allosteric acid by GDH amino levels derived from are cell, production Therefore, energy energy low degradation in skeletons from carbon is the amino high, facilitating acids. when the

supplied acid in oxidase: by (see the mammalian are proteins. 5) the diet acids are but not of d-Amino p. synthesis used D-Amino 2. (DAO). to cells acids, are, hydrogen liver D-amino They kidney metabolized and and in by efficiently peroxide ammonia, acid of peroxisomes flavin adenine α-keto however, the oxidase dinucleotide–dependent can the pathways of or for acids acid The reaminated L-isomers energy. enter and to catabolized amino metabolism general be αketo glutamate degrades [Note: DAO modulates D-serine, receptors. form of isomeric the (NMDA)-type serine that N-methylD-aspartate schizophrenia. been linked to activity DAO has Increased increased to susceptibility converts p. DAO also (see to glyoxylate glycine 263).] acid L-Amino snake are venom. in oxidases found

liver the C. transport Ammonia to

in for of urea. available peripheral transport tissues Two ammonia the to humans for from liver to are the mechanisms conversion not to, skeletal are muscle. important but Both in, exclusive to uses a to glutamine, ammonia form first with ammonia glutamine form of nontoxic transport combine glutamate (Fig. synthetase The 19.13). glutamate it to p. by in the transported the glutamine (see glutaminase is The to where ammonia and liver blood cleaved 256). is by and to oxidatively is glutamate The α-ketoglutarate ammonia GDH. deaminated to converted ammonia urea. is The generated produced alanine A both the formation catabolism and of and of mechanism involves pyruvate succinyl the coenzyme of by The the BCAA by metabolism valine. the glycolysis transport from transamination isoleucine of (CoA) aerobic second the to transported is the it transaminated blood to the Alanine ALT is liver, in by pyruvate. where which pyruvate a is and glucose–alanine The called can glucose, be the used enter cycle. by muscle, to used synthesize the blood pathway ALT deaminated by be GDH, ammonia. The generating product glutamate of can and the liver. both carry to ammonia Thus, glutamine alanine

the acids accounts for UREA major of amino is V. disposal nitrogen-containing of components derived of and form CYCLE the from urine. ~90% groups amino urea nitrogen of and the nitrogen is One other aspartate. molecule supplied by by ammonia the free Glutamate oxidative (through transamination both is and immediate of of oxaloacetate precursor the by nitrogen by ammonia deamination [Note: GDH) (through AST).] aspartate derived are CO2 (as The and of from carbon urea HCO3−). oxygen in kidneys by urine. transported then the is in excretion produced the and the is blood Urea the for liver to

A. Reactions

occur cycle in located the The first the in two reactions enzymes (Fig. mitochondrial the are urea whereas of remaining synthesis to leading the matrix, cytosol 19.14). p. the [Note: synthesis heme also (see Gluconeogenesis 278) cytosol.] both p. and matrix involve mitochondrial 117) the and (see

= malate adenine dehydrogenase. NAD(H) = MD inorganic nicotinamide phosphate; dinucleotide; Pi =

1.

by cleavage molecules Carbamoyl of driven ATP. carbamoyl by (CPS of is Formation phosphate phosphate I) carbamoyl two I phosphate of synthetase formation: the is oxidative incorporated (see of phosphate Fig. provided glutamate by carbamoyl primarily mitochondrial into GDH by Ammonia deamination 19.11). derived atom this becomes from urea. nitrogens Ultimately, the ammonia the one nitrogen of of (see Fig. activator a N-acetylglutamate as CPS positive (NAG) allosteric I requires 19.14). [Note: participates Carbamoyl 302). II biosynthesis the pyrimidines phosphate synthetase of in (see p. occurs does as in the not uses the and require NAG, cytosol.] glutamine nitrogen It source, 2.

released phosphate. as by carbamoyl portion as the Citrulline (OTC) is The phosphate ornithine to ornithine transferred inorganic phosphate carbamoyl formation: is of transcarbamylase transported reaction The the cytosol. citrulline, product, to is membrane antiporter. inner and the [Note: an Ornithine move via across citrulline mitochondrial (see acids no there for amino basic into them proteins are codons p. These not are incorporated because cellular 447).] way with Ornithine cycle regenerated (TCA) same oxaloacetate of the is cycle, tricarboxylic in acid p. the reactions 109). that urea regenerated by turn the of is much (see each the

3.

aspartate formation: Argininosuccinate synthetase combines with Argininosuccinate argininosuccinate. form to citrulline α-amino nitrogen the provides of ultimately is aspartate The second incorporated that group urea. into of argininosuccinate pyrophosphate. ATP driven adenosine by and cleavage formation to of The monophosphate the is in ATP of is molecule of urea. This consumed the formation final and the third

4.

fumarate. cleavage: arginine is and Argininosuccinate by Argininosuccinate argininosuccinate yield cleaved to lyase the The immediate urea. of precursor arginine as serves a hydrated pathways. to link is malate, The fumarate with several providing metabolic Malate by be to Fig. oxidized can which can dehydrogenase aspartate be malate transaminated oxaloacetate, to (see and 19.8) Fig. urea (see cycle enter the 19.14). (see into shuttle oxaloacetate, oxidized reenter 80), (see 120). via p. used malate to be be the gluconeogenesis Alternatively, mitochondria the and malate–aspartate which can TCA for get cycle, p. transported can of the phosphorylation the oxidative NADH [Note: energy urea cycle.] for generates 77), (see cost reducing thereby oxidation Malate p. 5.

the exclusive virtually urea arginine is liver. to ornithine to and urea: to Arginine hydrolyzes ornithine Arginase-I cleavage and and can only liver whereas synthesize from cleave the as arginine synthesizing tissues, Therefore, the can other arginine, citrulline. thereby such kidney, urea, for oxide p. controls synthesis arginine kidneys nitric in availability [Note: (see Arginase-II 150).] 6.

Fate the the urine filtered in diffuses the from where to and blood excreted liver transported Urea Fig. kidneys, is urea: the in is and of it (see 19.19). from the ammonia into is to A cleaved intestine and CO2 the urease. blood of the bacterial and diffuses portion by urea partly is partly ammonia lost into and is in the the reabsorbed feces blood. The promoting transfer the from plasma gut. greater are blood elevated, patients levels with failure, urea urea into In kidney of a the urease intestinal seen clinically in The this urea often on contributing patients. source becomes hyperammonemia ammonia, action a important of to these of bacteria intestinal Oral production. reduces ammonia antibiotics administration for of the responsible of this number

B. Overall stoichiometry

p. are irreversible, bonds synthesis of of a the with phosphate 70). (see the negative is of molecule large, four ∆G Because high-energy in synthesis urea consumed urea, each by urea by is the other molecule nitrogen of the supplied One aspartate. free nitrogen and ammonia ammonia by GDH) (through AST). both deamination immediate is oxidative of of (through Glutamate oxaloacetate by and aspartate nitrogen precursor the transamination arise in other (Fig. nitrogen of from which, atoms both acids from turn, effect, glutamate, In nitrogen amino urea gathers 19.15).

Regulation C.

urea for an the cycle. CPS step essential in the I, rate-limiting NAG is activator for the ATP. I It affinity of increases CPS arginine for (NAGS), synthesized in 19.16, is from as shown and Figure a an by glutamate in is synthase activator. CoA reaction acetyl NAG N-acetylglutamate which by regulated The also (long substrate induction (short-term availability enzyme regulation) and is cycle term).

coenzyme A. synthetase phosphate = CoA carbamoyl of I. activator

VI. METABOLISM AMMONIA

produced all during liver. urea is the primarily in the compounds, tissues of by Ammonia metabolism of is of it of a by variety disposed formation and to toxic even very slightly level concentrations because must the nervous blood central (CNS). low, However, the (hyperammonemia) kept elevated system are be ammonia keeping low. ammonia nitrogen liver as transport of the of ultimate disposal circulating is while peripheral the required for from tissues free a the to for mechanism levels Therefore, urea

A. Sources

Western undergo is, acids, and reactions), provide transdeamination ammonia. (that ammonia high Amino the GDH producing linking amino liver most excess are the of because travel source the and which acids of quantitatively and to aminotransferase diets in protein most important the are amino primarily.] [Note: liver The catabolizes acids, straight-chain can other substantial However, from amounts sources. obtained be of ammonia

1. catabolism Glutamine: important glutamine is source of skeletal plasma muscle. BCAA in from An of the the cells by kidneys. up the This taken the glutamine intestine, liver, of is and ammonia liver and actions from of kidneys (Fig. generate glutamine glutaminase The by the

and 19.17) GDH. as mechanism is which balance provides the through for + protons. important , excretion maintaining the acid–base an of NH4 ammonia urine excreted most kidneys, In of body’s the the this into ammonia the to urea In is detoxified liver, excreted. the and GDH, [Note: the second in is product of glucogenic liver and kidneys.] precursor a α-Ketoglutarate, the intestinal glutaminase. Ammonia by is also generated digestion blood from protein. glutamine Enterocytes or from dietary the obtain either of metabolism the also to citrulline, which for [Note: gluconeogenesis, by arginine.] used Intestinal produces liver synthesize which glutamine is and the by used alanine, kidneys is 2.

urea the the action the is bacteria: bacterial of urease by in of Intestinal Ammonia intestine. formed from lumen the the intestine virtually and absorbed is urea. conversion is portal by the liver removed way to vein, from ammonia This via all of by

3.

and the to neurotransmitters (see monoamine action from oxidase p. or diet that ammonia obtained by 286). rise hormones of monoamines serve give as the Amines: Amines

4.

Purines atoms purines Fig. and as In released are amino the and ring catabolism ammonia (see pyrimidines, attached the pyrimidines: of groups to 22.15 p. 300). on

B. in Transport circulation the

very Although at low is tissues, ammonia in the levels present in constantly it is produced blood. amino ammonia that and due form particularly the Fig. removal the to rapid acid tissues, ammonia (see to of liver fact free glutamine in than alanine, and rather muscle, blood several the is of nitrogen the This both as release by 19.13).

1.

urea ammonia. is liver the Formation quantitatively in route of for the most Urea: disposal important passes the into blood the to liver kidneys, from the where it glomerular Urea the filtrate. in travels

2.

storage glutamate of ammonia and nontoxic Glutamine: provides form transport of (Fig. a amide This 19.18). liver glutamine ammonia in glutamine synthetase in occurs it removal ammonia is CNS, of for skeletal where muscle also and important but the the major mechanism the in the glutamate is primarily and of the from by brain. The formation ATP-requiring at transport concentrations acids, plasma higher in Glutamine amino with finding a is function. than its found consistent other synthetase through in hepatocytes.] ammonia an through in GDH, perivenous and urea low scavenger to liver the The glutamine levels keeps and blood) periportal [Note: as cycle the blood inflow of glutaminase, ammonia hepatocytes (close in 19.19. is metabolism Ammonia Figure summarized

Hyperammonemia C.

exceeds capacity generation, (5–35 cycle The the the low are urea levels ammonia normal rates of ammonia and of normally the hepatic µmol/l). of blood function cycle liver compromised, due to defects or is be µmol/l. either >1,000 of urea blood However, the can disease, liver levels when genetic because medical hyperammonemia Such the effect CNS. has neurotoxic is emergency, on direct a a ammonia speech, ammonia edema, blurring tremors, vision. slurring of of elevated intoxication, and blood symptoms of cerebral cause vomiting, ammonia include example, concentrations For (drowsiness), somnolence which of the the in death. high and coma ammonia concentrations, At cause can There hyperammonemia. of major are types two

1.

to such hyperammonemia hepatotoxins be cause to and a viral common in disease for example, hepatitis may or of acquired is as alcohol. adults due, Liver Acquired: result the in may liver. the of formation circulation collateral around Cirrhosis liver of to portal liver. result, a is systemic and not circulation have into the blood As access the shunted directly does ammonia the urea of impaired, conversion elevated to levels to is ammonia. leading Therefore, severely of

2.

overall of cycle been with births. incidence (and of have Genetic described, an live each of five ~1:25,000 the Congenital: urea of NAGS) enzymes of deficiencies the the affecting common become OTC males, symptomatic. may predominantly deficiency female carriers of most although is disorders, X-linked these the disorders inheritance follow an autosomal-recessive other of pattern. cycle urea All during to synthesize hyperammonemia case, birth. leads urea first to In the weeks each failure the following urine.] arginase be because The [Note: and nitrogens seen arginine the is in excreted two hyperammonemia can waste deficiency contains severe with less high Historically, urea defects cycle and (neurologic morbidity mortality. had manifestations) in to dietary prevent catabolism. sufficient the presence included protein of restriction Treatment of protein calories compounds producing nonessential excreted in nitrogen-containing molecules of has covalently Administration that acids, the urine, to improved amino bind survival. are that example, is phenylbutyrate phenylacetate. orally For converted given to (Fig. which is condenses with excreted to phenylacetylglutamine, This glutamine form 19.20).

VII. CHAPTER SUMMARY

the of most the in being body protein. important a food, Nitrogen enters present acids amino variety dietary in compounds contained in from derived the (Fig. ammonia, Nitrogen amino other acid metabolism urea, body and products leaves as 19.21). in and synthesis. from tissue of protein Free de by are acids of amino zymogen their proteases form and novo dietary hydrolysis the proteins, degradation body stomach produced in by intestine, activated the precursors members protein, acid as pool other energy, of in metabolized or synthesis nitrogen-containing its consumed amino used body for is the for compounds. This taken via up by intestinal from are acids transport. enterocytes secondary sodium-dependent Free active amino digestion up proton-linked Small peptides are transport. taken via that Note known protein a turnover. and resynthesized, simultaneously body degraded as is protein process cellular synthesis concentration degradation. of of a by determined regulation be may or The its protein ATP-dependent, ATP-independent, lysosomal cytosolic, nonselective systems selective acid hydrolases the responsible major are and that relatively degrading two for ubiquitin–proteasome enzyme proteins. are The excess stored, the and degraded. cell needs Nitrogen in cannot acids are be quickly of the biosynthetic of amino involves α-amino of of by by the glutamate glutamate forming the The transfer followed phosphate–dependent by (transaminases), α-keto transamination of deamination and oxidative aminotransferases catabolism groups the corresponding pyridoxal ammonia first through dehydrogenase, acids. phase A free the the in of portion ammonia excreted urine. is for which to synthesis is in the in from important disposing is of converting ammonia body. safe of is route quantitatively urea, used used Some glutamate most hepatic most the nitrogen transport, the but for glutamine to carries for the as liver also disposal nitrogen Alanine urea. neurologic of congenital effects) cycle liver deficiencies and as its causes are urea (with of transcarbamylase. hyperammonemia The acquired ornithine enzymes such disease X-linked two major

answer. the best ONE Choose

9.1. X (right), following are transamination of In products reaction this and Y? the which the

A. Alanine, α-ketoglutarate

Aspartate, B. α-ketoglutarate

alanine C. Glutamate,

aspartate D. Pyruvate,

acid substrates. an answer Transamination α-keto = Correct an have and reactions B. always amino acid as substrate). of acid amino to substrate) acid products to α-keto an (corresponding an the acid (corresponding are amino The the also the and α-keto reaction α-keto glutamate/α-ketoglutarate. are commonly aspartate/oxaloacetate, in alanine/pyruvate, amino pairs acid acid encountered and metabolism Three aminated deaminated and glutamate this question, form In αketoglutarate, to aspartate. form oxaloacetate to is is

9.2. one and statements the correct? their amino Which is following acids of metabolism about

A. into transport single taken the a proton-linked system. enterocytes by amino are Free acids

B. acid the output. the amino the exceeds pool healthy, input well-fed In to individuals,

uses to ammonia The protons. C. liver buffer

D. kidney ammonia gluconeogenic liver metabolized to is tissue a glutamine Muscle-derived and in + precursor.

in is of first step their amino catabolism acids E. most deamination. The oxidative the

of toxic F. transported generated from as blood The nitrogen amide acids the through arginine. ammonia is amino

branched-chain is answer in amino + of acids by the catabolism Correct ammonia deaminated Glutamine, D. glutamate. glutaminase = muscle, produced by to glutamate ammonia glutamate dehydrogenase for used deaminated gluconeogenesis. αketoglutarate, be is + which can to by The into amino taken by sodium-linked transport systems. different are acids Free several enterocytes Healthy, which are output. input well-fed nitrogen balance, nitrogen in individuals equals in use The to to ammonia ammonia buffer liver the converts urea, protons. kidneys and transamination acid Amino begins generates that glutamate. with catabolism deamination. oxidative undergoes glutamate The and as is alanine. transported Toxic ammonia glutamine Arginine and cycle. hepatic synthesized is the hydrolyzed in urea

19.3–19.5, use For Questions scenario. the following

lethargic. A neonate until she ~24 healthy when age hours, appeared female became negative. sepsis workup proved A focal she At showing activity. seizure hours, started 56 887 be ammonia to µmol/l found plasma (normal level 5–35 µmol/l). The was plasma of levels amino citrulline elevation Quantitative not revealed argininosuccinate. acid marked a but

9.3. following of the one enzymic to deficient this likely is activities most Which in patient? be

A. Arginase

lyase B. Argininosuccinate

synthetase Argininosuccinate C.

D. synthetase phosphate Carbamoyl I

N-acetylglutamate Ornithine described. each of as of been deficiencies enzymes the of well E. Correct as in Genetic have C. five = deficiencies cycle, the transcarbamylase answer synthase, urea the required functional. this patient the is (but whereas The argininosuccinate of cleaves that in means conversion to enzyme of the synthetase) enzyme (argininosuccinate for defective, that citrulline of is accumulation (argininosuccinate not argininosuccinate) citrulline lyase) argininosuccinate the plasma

9.4. this elevated the of in would blood of also one be following the Which patient?

A. Asparagine

B. Glutamine

Lysine C.

D. Urea

B. = Correct answer urea first Deficiencies the synthesize cycle after the lead of to in urea of enzymes weeks birth. failure the result hyperammonemia in and to few the of as transport because also will acts nontoxic ammonia. it storage be elevated form a and Glutamine hyperammonemia. accompanies Therefore, elevated glutamine do not Asparagine lysine role. serve and this sequestering Urea decreased impaired because would of activity be the of cycle. urea in would elevated this [Note: also patient.] be Alanine 9.5. to might be arginine patient? supplementation benefit of with this Why

arginine urea will ornithine. arginase be cleaved by to The and combined transcarbamylase by with ornithine to citrulline. will form be carbamoyl phosphate Ornithine be waste will nitrogen, excreted. one Citrulline, containing

and Synthesis Acids: 20 Amino Degradation

to please visit For related chapter, ancillary additional this materials thePoint.

OVERVIEW I.

involves the followed degradation catabolism the resulting α-amino acid acids α-keto removal group, skeletons). the of by of (carbon Amino αketoglutarate, CoA, (CoA), acetyl fumarate, oxaloacetate, intermediate products: A converge These pathways succinyl coenzyme acetoacetate. pyruvate, form seven and to products metabolism, carbon energy pathways of in or of or the either The by through to directly oxidation in the cycle. synthesis the lipids intermediary enter acid tricarboxylic production their (CO2) ketone the glucose, dioxide (TCA) of bodies, resulting provides of pathways, presented with summary (see overview 20.1 20.15 these in more 269). Figure a p. detailed Figure an (Fig. acids amino Nonessential essential of in 20.2) intermediates metabolism amounts of sufficient be and as or, acids. synthesized case from amino the tyrosine, from can in cysteine the sufficient because essential (or synthesized In be synthesized the for the they amino occur. by humans, contrast, order cannot amounts) be normal from protein acids in to obtained synthesis diet must in of serious cause disease. defects can pathways acid metabolism amino Genetic the in

postoperative infections, and immunosuppression.]

II. GLUCOGENIC KETOGENIC ACIDS AND AMINO

be classified are their during can Fig. as the of on intermediates glucogenic, Amino acids or based seven both, (see ketogenic, which produced catabolism 20.2).

acids A. Glucogenic amino

termed pyruvate Amino intermediates TCA whose yields cycle the catabolism glucogenic. acids or of of are one the glucose synthesis gluconeogenesis 118), of the p. and for give kidney. can intermediates (see are net they to rise Because liver in substrates the these

Ketogenic B. acids amino

acetoacetate or (acetyl CoA catabolism (see Fig. Amino precursors ketogenic its acetoacetyl whose of termed yields one either are CoA) or acids 20.2). which and (see of Acetoacetate bodies, one include is the ketone acetone 3hydroxybutyrate also p. 195). lysine only in Leucine acids amino exclusively the are found proteins. ketogenic and therefore, synthesis for Their rise are glucose. give not to cannot the substrates carbon and, of net gluconeogenesis skeletons

III. CARBON SKELETON AMINO ACID

by are one of acids listed a catabolized (or intermediates organized are particular the more) to seven produced acid. above conveniently which amino from which according The is amino pathways

A. acids Amino that oxaloacetate form

and is ammonia (Fig. liberating asparaginase, hydrolyzed aspartate by Asparagine 20.3). (see form group transamination amino loses to its Aspartate by Fig. oxaloacetate 20.3). growth. Some synthesize unable sufficient rapidly asparagine to leukemic are support to cells [Note: their dividing cells, for from amino makes these require blood. asparagine essential the therefore, which, an asparagine This acid which systemically treat be asparagine to aspartate, hydrolyzes to can leukemia. administered Asparaginase, asparagine thereby a of lowers level of in the nutrient.] depriving the Asparaginase cancer cells plasma, required

that glutamate α-ketoglutarate form B. 1. via acids Amino

the hydrolyzed (see glutamate acid amino enzyme This p. is by to glutaminase and 256). Glutamine: ammonia to by through Glutamate dehydrogenase is oxidative αketoglutarate 252). (see by deamination or converted p. transamination glutamate

2.

is amino acid This glutamate. Proline: to oxidized is transaminated deaminated form or α-ketoglutarate. to Glutamate oxidatively

3.

Arginine: This acid ornithine by arginase hydrolyzed produce to is (and urea). amino primarily (see p. urea in reaction the occurs cycle as of [Note: The the liver part 255).] intermediate. semialdehyde is an glutamate as converted with α-ketoglutarate, subsequently Ornithine to

4.

oxidatively by ([FIGlu], amino acid Fig. which histidase is forms to Histidine: urocanic This subsequently deaminated N-formiminoglutamate acid, 20.4). to as leaving above. donates is degraded described (THF), FIGlu tetrahydrofolate group its which formimino glutamate, dose the folic of excrete ingestion histidine. large a particularly after [Note: amounts in in of deficient urine, increased Individuals of FIGlu acid has of test FIGlu folic diagnosing used a been The in deficiency excretion acid. 267 See folic one-carbon discussion p. of a metabolism.] for acid, THF, and

Amino pyruvate that C. form acids 1.

amino group 2. Alanine: its This amino to transamination acid loses by

in to converted N5,N10-methylenetetrahydrofolate glycine as amino (N5,N10-MTHF), THF Serine: can becomes as acid This shown be 20.6A. Figure Serine pyruvate Fig. also be to can converted (see 20.6B).

3.

converted Glycine: This group (see by addition methylene acid can amino Fig. N5,N10-MTHF reversible to the serine of from be a cleavage glycine ammonia 20.6A) and the oxidized system. by or to CO2 pyruvate Glycine [Note: oxidase; (by can be form deaminated glyoxylate to (Fig. a d-amino acid see 20.5). and, [Note: therefore, Tryptophan alanine catabolism pyruvate produces (see Fig. 20.10 p. on 265).] can which transaminated oxalate to 253), oxidized p. or be to glycine. causes oxalate oxalate, liver transaminase 1).] Deficiency in of of and (primary overproduction kidney the of oxaluria stones, formation the peroxisomes damage type 4.

Cysteine: acid yield to pyruvate. undergoes amino desulfurization sulfur-containing This The to can an used of synthesize sulfate released (PAPS), acceptors.] donor 3′phosphoadenosine-5′-phosphosulfate be to sulfate [Note: variety activated a oxidized Cysteine its also to disulfide derivative, be cystine. can

5.

Threonine: This acid in a organisms (at is pyruvate but converted in humans. minor is to best) most amino pathway

fumarate D. 1. that form acids Amino

and produces Phenylalanine tyrosine: (Fig. of phenylalanine Hydroxylation tyrosine 20.7). This catabolism reaction, catalyzed phenylalanine. the irreversible by of initiates (PAH), tetrahydrobiopterin-requiring hydroxylase phenylalanine tyrosine and to Thus, leading acetoacetate ultimately and fumarate phenylalanine formation. metabolism metabolism merge, and ketogenic. and phenylalanine both Therefore, tyrosine are glucogenic

2.

(see and phenylalanine tyrosinemia the of condition tyrosine 274), lead alkaptonuria as p. phenylketonuria Inherited (see the diseases p. metabolism and of 274) p. enzymes 273). p. as (see (PKU) deficiencies in to the (see 270), albinism Inherited deficiencies: well

acids that form CoA: Amino E. Methionine succinyl

CoA. that of amino is four acids Methionine form succinyl one to sulfur-containing special (Fig. because one-carbon deserves donor amino in it attention the This group is S-adenosylmethionine metabolism (SAM), converted acid major methyl 20.8). and metabolite with of Methionine the disease 265). homocysteine is vascular atherosclerotic (see (Hcy), also p. associated source a thrombosis

methyl carrier and group donor.] the ammonia. inorganic PPi NH3 Pi = phosphate; = pyrophosphate; =

1.

synthesis: unusual it contains that high-energy SAM, a forming no in compound phosphate. is that ATP, Methionine with condenses S-Adenosylmethionine driven Fig. bonds by all ATP of The hydrolysis SAM is (see in three phosphate formation of 20.8).

2.

the a such variety attached in in sulfur of to acceptors methyltransferases as SAM is methyl group: synthesis norepinephrine epinephrine. can and The methyl by group activated the of transferred Activated to be epinephrine respectively; and nitrogen group oxygen degradation, atoms atoms p. The with cytosine). with and methyl to or synthesis (as (as sometimes is usually see 286) transferred to carbon The thioether, to a methionine. simple is product, Sadenosylhomocysteine analogous reaction (SAH), makes transfer The energy free of resulting methyl essentially irreversible. loss

3.

to adenosine. hydrolyzed hydrolysis: donation After and SAH methyl the S-Adenosylhomocysteine of group, Hcy is has fates. Hcy two remethylated to is may methionine there of Hcy methionine, (see deficiency Fig. a If be 20.8). stores pathway, adequate, transsulfuration converted methionine where Hcy is to are may it the cysteine. If enter

from N5methyltetrahydrofolate methylcobalamin, methyl Methionine coenzyme vitamin requiring in a a accepts p. from Hcy group resynthesis: (see a. (N5-methyl-THF) B12 379). reaction derived a regenerating from synthase group [Note: methyl is the to by Hcy, The methionine. B12 methionine derivative transferred from Cobalamin remethylated N5-methyl-THF.] is serine, is b. forming cystathionine, and synthesis: with to α-ketobutyrate Cysteine condenses (see Hcy cysteine which hydrolyzed Fig. 20.8). form vitamin to serine the which and α-ketobutyrate, to propionyl This decarboxylated CoA. to effect cysteine Hcy has of net is oxidatively B6–requiring sequence converting Propionyl CoA to (see converted succinyl Fig. is CoA 16.20 p. 195). on is Because not essential an long available. methionine, is methionine acid as as the from is sufficient acid cysteine Hcy amino synthesized amino essential

4. in vascular factor plasma diseases (CVD) promote are stroke oxidative Hcy cardiovascular vascular occlusive and Elevations and levels independent inflammation, endothelial to such dysfunction damage, of as disease and risk disease: for an homocysteine Relationship (Fig. 20.9). of are population. Mild seen (hyperhomocysteinemia) the elevations ~7% in B6, shown plasma methionine plasma have three inversely conversion related and levels Epidemiologic vitamins the to that Hcy Hcy in involved and folate, the of B12, are to cysteine. levels of studies levels circulating been Hcy. with vitamins has to reduce shown these of Supplementation or established CVD, events cardiovascular decrease not However, with patients in therapy vitamin does death. vascular raises as merely a to of of cause question whether a marker the such This is damage the damage. or Hcy rare plasma p. Hcy with homocystinuria result deficiencies µmol/l], [>100 classic are Large severe see in from pathway patients as elevations in cystathionine of in β-synthase of a transsulfuration hyperhomocysteinemia the (resulting seen [Note: 273).] remethylation also in in a reaction rise result in Deficiencies the Hcy.

bifida) levels as defects closure, and of homocysteine tube (improper Elevated the spina in associated folic with in decreased are women increased acid fetus. in neural incidence pregnant supplementation of such defects. folate reduces risk Periconceptual the with

Other form F. amino that succinyl acids CoA

gluconeogenic valine, cycle CoA, also threonine Degradation in the intermediate a TCA production and isoleucine, compound. of results of succinyl and to It [Note: is metabolized pyruvate.] 1.

reactions. acids CoA requiring propionyl which and then acids amino CoA, Valine These branched-chain – are vitamin CoA converted succinyl B12 generate that (BCAA) methylmalonyl to by amino is biotin-and isoleucine: and

2.

This CoA and Threonine: succinyl then is propionyl CoA. dehydrated which to to amino acid is converted α-ketobutyrate, to methionine, amino CoA, then, catabolism valine, Propionyl threonine. isoleucine, acids of generated the the and is by also fatty acids [Note: generated odd-numbered the by p. CoA Propionyl of is oxidation (see 193).]

form CoA or that G. CoA Amino acids acetyl acetoacetyl

isoleucine, leucine, without or directly, form pyruvate acetoacetyl CoA serving and Tryptophan, acetyl CoA lysine as an intermediate. catabolism phenylalanine give acetoacetate tyrosine As rise during noted their Fig. to also and earlier, (see 20.7). or ketogenic wholly a are six total amino of Therefore, partly acids. there

1.

acetoacetyl (Fig. Tryptophan: catabolism glucogenic acid both ketogenic, is and CoA yields and This amino because its alanine 20.10). catabolism tryptophan of [Note: the nicotinamide see in adenine used from p. ([NAD], synthesis is dinucleotide Quinolinate 383).] 2.

is (Fig. catabolism This Leucine: because yields ketogenic, its and CoA acid acetyl amino exclusively acetoacetate 20.11). in that BCAA, below). (or The isoleucine as of enzymes leucine the reactions derivatives) and H. by all two other use substrates first the three valine, are (see BCAA and their catalyzed catabolism

3.

ketogenic acid is metabolism acetyl yields glucogenic, CoA CoA. because amino This and its propionyl both Isoleucine: and

4.

of neither transamination unusual groups ketogenic is catabolism. exclusively that This is as Lysine: amino amino step the first acid in undergoes and in its acetoacetyl is converted to CoA. ultimately Lysine

acid degradation Branched-chain H. amino

The leucine, isoleucine, BCAA are and valine acids. essential amino amino by rather are the to catabolized acids, muscle), other by contrast liver. they tissues (particularly primarily In the than peripheral a describe them acids degradation, Because Fig. group is have amino convenient (see route these to of three as it similar a 20.11).

1.

primarily acid vitamin Transamination: amino is BCAA all that of groups the B6–requiring aminotransferase, muscle. skeletal enzyme, α expressed single, catalyzed branched-chain is of ketoglutarate in a amino to three Transfer by

2.

carboxyl the acid branched-chain decarboxylation: (BCKD) Removal dehydrogenase complex. α-keto α-keto complex, derived acids Oxidative from catalyzed and multienzyme of is of valine, the a by leucine, group isoleucine single (FAD), NAD+, and oxidized lipoic This pyrophosphate, as adenine flavin CoA NADH. coenzymes thiamine acid, complex its dinucleotide and uses produces the conversion complex reaction the similar acetyl is p. [Note: dehydrogenase to 109) to complex succinyl 112). CoA (see pyruvate α-ketoglutarate by This of α-ketoglutarate (PDH) and (see p. dehydrogenase CoA pyruvate the to by (Enzyme 3, dehydrogenase or three all component identical dihydrolipoyl The complexes.] E3) is in 3.

the produces CoA acyl Oxidation formed in Dehydrogenations: α-β-unsaturated derivatives FADH2. and of products the reaction BCKD reactions p. β-oxidation fatty These 192). analogous the in to are acids dehydrogenation the FAD-linked of (see for [Note: with is odor a dehydrogenase causes fluids.] feet” and associated specific “sweaty in body neurologic Deficiency CoA isovaleryl problems the in 4.

ultimately it isoleucine and CoA CoA, End acetyl succinyl and catabolism products: of rendering The yields ketogenic glucogenic. both CoA Valine yields is and succinyl glucogenic. ketogenic, Leucine being metabolized CoA. to is acetoacetate and acetyl respectively. NADH the decarboxylation and and are In addition, produced dehydrogenation in reactions, FADH2 out also catabolism into from sent results glutamine and synthesized [Note: in being (see and muscle p. alanine the blood BCAA 253).]

IV. ACID METABOLISM FOLIC AMINO ACID AND

a oxidation that methylene, including methenyl, Some exist of states, require of formyl, the pathways addition single-carbon methyl. synthetic groups in variety and and be that groups can specific such from being or carrier single-carbon as transferred SAM structures synthesized THF modified. are These to compounds the single-carbon of The “one-carbon pool” carriers. to to refers attached units this group carried (see the p. from [Note: member (HCO3–), not the most by 385), but is biotin group CO2, considered a vitamin one-carbon coming reactions is is of a which prosthetic for pool. bicarbonate carboxylation in the in result ability deficiency. carboxylase multiple Defects carboxylases remove add or from to biotin is with biotin.] Treatment supplementation

and acid metabolism one-carbon Folic A.

The folic two-step dihydrofolate adenine produced form dinucleotide phosphate THF, in requiring two from of by a reaction folate nicotinamide is reductase (NADPH). active acid, N5 The or both N10 or THF is N10 by N5 one-carbon bound to unit and . to carried the reactions of participate. sources members the units THF and structures various of the of synthetic Figure their one-carbon in shows members which interconversions 20.12 the the and the specific and indicates the family Folate and p. decreased a of of thymidine presents deficiency as (see needed availability purines anemia megaloblastic DNA monophosphate synthesis the [Note: the for of because 303).]

V. AMINO NONESSENTIAL ACIDS BIOSYNTHESIS OF

acids the Nonessential methionine, are amino of and from of and intermediates as amino tyrosine cysteine, metabolism synthesized respectively. essential phenylalanine or, case from acids in the acids and below for 20.15. are Figure The the summarized in nonessential amino reactions synthetic are described hydroxyproline acids such into [Note: produced (after found as p. Some posttranslational and proteins, precursor a by are in hydroxylysine their (see 45), amino amino modification protein) incorporation acids.] of (parent)

from Synthesis α-keto acids A.

α-ketoglutarate, respectively. an the to Alanine, transfer amino are by α-keto pyruvate, glutamate and group acids oxaloacetate, synthesized of and aspartate, reactions These (Fig. transamination the p. also of direct pathways. biosynthetic most 20.13; are 250) the see synthesized is high Glutamate when reversal by ammonia (see by deamination, that 252). are catalyzed in it oxidative levels also of be glutamate dehydrogenase, p. can unusual

Synthesis amidation 1. B. by

glutamine an amide glutamate formed This by from contains acid, at synthetase amino with which linkage ammonia γ-carboxyl, the is Fig. (see Glutamine: 256). 19.18, p. driven the is hydrolysis ATP. reaction The by of the reaction of In a major for ammonia as nontoxic mechanism producing protein to in form. synthesis, glutamine serves transport for also addition a the a of metabolism.) 256 for discussion (See ammonia p. 2.

amino the with ammonia formed glutamine the contains synthetase, an from This asparagine β-carboxyl, Asparagine: as amide which acid, amide linkage is donor. at using aspartate by an the Like direction requires reaction ATP equilibrium the of has amide the glutamine, in synthesis and synthesis. of far

C. Proline

via is reactions. Glutamate converted glutamate semialdehyde by and to reduction cyclization proline ornithine.] transaminated to also semialdehyde The be [Note: can

acids glycine, Serine, and synthesis are of pathways amino cysteineThe D. interconnected. for these

1.

acid Serine: amino from glycolytic arises a 3-phosphoglycerate, intermediate This (see Fig. to first oxidized p. transaminated which 3phosphopyruvate 8.18, then 3-phosphoserine. to 101), is and hydrolysis by the is of Serine phosphate formed ester. donor N5,N10-MTHF Serine from glycine serine through formed as of one-carbon transfer hydroxymethyltransferase using by group hydroxymethyl can be also Fig. (see the a 20.6A). (Sec), serine selenium is Selenocysteine is 21st from RNA. and acid, 407), amino p. [Note: synthesized genetically the transfer encoded serine (see attached to while thioredoxin p. glutathione (see including in ~25 Sec is human 148) peroxidase reductase proteins p. (see and found 297).] 2.

is amino (see Glycine: Fig. by synthesized of by removal from group, This also hydroxymethyl a hydroxymethyltransferase acid serine serine 20.6A). is acceptor. THF the one-carbon

3.

Hcy acid synthesized two reactions is cystathionine, forming to which combines is cysteine and Cysteine: amino serine, consecutive (see This α-ketobutyrate which, hydrolyzed by in in with turn, Fig. 20.8). Hcy on is described p. derived as [Note: from methionine, 264. of methionine essential dietary synthesis is Because requires an acid, intake amino adequate methionine.] cysteine

Tyrosine E.

is formed phenylalanine p. (see PAH Tyrosine by 263). from and (BH4), reaction which molecular oxygen triphosphate. coenzyme tetrahydrobiopterin synthesized from requires the is The guanosine One reduced of to oxygen molecular the atom hydroxyl group becomes and other atom is water. tyrosine, of the (BH2). is reaction, the to oxidized BH4 During dihydrobiopterin reductase. is dihydropteridine BH2 BH4 NADH-requiring regenerated from by is presence therefore, the cysteine, phenylalanine. formed only acid adequate from in nonessential is, essential dietary an and Tyrosine, of like amino

VI. METABOLISM ACID DISORDERS AMINO

often caused the single These gene by inborn of subset are result metabolism, errors enzymes. most disorders, that proteins, of a generally in abnormal mutations of defects loss activity deficiency or, more The a may partial be a enzyme total as catalytic inherited in expressed frequently, as activity. a of in amino developmental disorders other acid invariably harmful almost result abnormalities accumulation consequence metabolites. the as or of treatment, intellectual Without disability been rare, in described, 250,000 have (Fig. occurring per >50 in disorders of populations <1 many are most these Although 20.14). however, diseases significant very (Fig. a pediatric genetic they Collectively, of constitute portion 20.15).

boxes. ketogenic. coded: amino glucogenic; brown of is = = acids green color Red Classification and glucogenic = ketogenic; in which to the BLUE metabolism are seven all Compounds ALL CAPS converges. amino metabolites acid A; nicotinamide = NAD(H) CoA coenzyme = adenine dinucleotide.

Phenylketonuria A.

error the acid amino (incidence clinically 1:15,000). encountered metabolism inborn most is PKU common of by deficiency caused of PAH It is (Fig. a 20.16). PKU hyperphenylalaninemia. Biochemically, is by characterized in plasma in Phenylalanine only is in and normal) not present urine but tissues. body concentrations times high also (ten is normally by from which phenylalanine Tyrosine, formed deficient. is PAH, supplementation Treatment dietary restriction and includes phenylalanine tyrosine. of with be required (Fig. deficiencies or regenerates Hyperphenylalaninemia reductase, in from may several also by caused BH4 of any BH2 the synthesize which [Note: to BH4 in dihydropteridine rare enzymes 20.17). because BH4 concentrations, as deficiencies indirectly raise requires Such phenylalanine PAH a coenzyme. BH4 required which catecholamines. the tyrosine and hydroxylase, and to hydroxylase leading reactions as tryptophan for such also serotonin of synthesis neurotransmitters, the catalyze is phenylalanine in to deficiencies nervous not reverse effects central dietary restricting neurotransmitters. system due the does Simply clinical L-3,4 reactions) and with with hydroxylase– hydroxylase–catalyzed is replacement (products and 5-hydroxytryptophan hyperphenylalaninemia, Supplementation response the in BH4 outcome the affected of tryptophan forms variant the dihydroxyphenylalanine and although unpredictable.] tyrosine these improves of therapy

amino for a of metabolism, mass treatable errors prick. including disorders, a spectrometry acid obtained of from tandem inborn of newborns of by done blood Screening is number heel some >50. screening must for disorders, By >20 screen with states all law, for for screen states PKU. All

1. by phenylketone also PKU elevated the name is characterized in of suggests, Additional a the levels As characteristics: urine.

and elevated a. are amounts Phenylpyruvate (a significant phenyllactate, which not PKU phenylketone), of functional presence produced phenylalanine in phenylacetate, Elevated (Fig. in are PAH, the in metabolites: normally 20.18). These a odor. musty metabolites characteristic urine (“mousy”) give

b.

findings are seizures Central effects: in intellectual delay, Severe disability, and nervous developmental PKU. untreated system microcephaly, characteristic >50 shows achieves symptoms individual and affected age (Fig. rarely quotient an 1 (IQ) intelligence disability of typically The by year intellectual 20.19). now seen clinical allow diagnosis screening early are treatment.] and of result [Note: rarely a These as newborn which manifestations programs, c.

blue color, may eyes). pigmentation (fair with Hypopigmentation: untreated show PKU of deficiency skin Patients a and light hair, in pigment the tyrosinase, because step the of formation by hydroxylation decreased. of The is first copper-requiring melanin, tyrosine is tyrosine the is which PKU decreased in

2.

screening Early PKU and means. treatable the is of Newborn diagnosis disease is dietary important by because diagnosis: is testing mandatory symptoms, detection. the of phenylalanine for laboratory of elevated lack for neonatal Because levels blood of the at normal phenylalanine blood However, has placenta. levels phenylalanine frequently in the PKU blood through because her affected increased infant fetus mother clears birth the with of to is exposed levels persist newborn may phenylalanine the Normal feeding. of protein 24–48 of until hours false typically to after time tests screening Thus, are negatives. done this avoid determination levels. phenylalanine diagnosis positive through screening a with of For test, quantitative is confirmed newborns

3.

PKU encodes Prenatal the any diagnosis: Classic different caused that more of gene or 100 mutations is PAH. by in any each mutation a given and has is, The varies gene disease in often among PAH allele). the doubly mutation different populations, the heterozygous is of frequency (that (see this complexity, prenatal is diagnosis p. Despite 493). possible

4.

the an contains it phenylalanine, a limit phenylalanine when normal Because impossible body’s protein the most acid, requirement to natural without ingesting amino essential is satisfy exceeding diet. Treatment: protein natural by acid their normal free amino in level to phenylalanine phenylalanine Therefore, selected close supplemented (such is maintained range foods content. blood fruits, vegetables, certain PKU, synthetic phenylalanine, the for feeding preparations low some and as cereals) with of according of to amount the blood as by levels. The is adjusted tolerance phenylalanine individual measured the is The completely earlier treatment started, damage neurologic the can be more prevented. who are intelligence. treated can Individuals appropriately normal have to days begin life during prevent first [Note: must Treatment impairment.] the of 7–10 cognitive treatment blood levels in normal overzealous amino phenylalanine is avoided. is Because acid, essential results an below that phenylalanine and, cannot and the it phenylalanine, tyrosine supplied PKU, therefore, synthesized essential In diet. in becomes acid with an be must be patients amino from performance phenylalanine-restricted the on Discontinuance IQ with poor of tests. is early associated in childhood diet of show PKU of deterioration the IQ Adult scores discontinuation diet (Fig. after patients 20.20). phenylalanine recommended. is Therefore, dietary lifelong of restriction phenylalanine.] that PKU are advised Individuals avoid artificial contains [Note: to an with aspartame, sweetener 5. become who Maternal a with If diet PKU affected syndrome. phenylketonuria: women maternal can offspring pregnant, with are low-phenylalanine be PKU the on not a effect, High teratogenic has abnormalities blood heart causing in the fetus. microcephaly phenylalanine congenital mother the in and to Because to of must the pregnancy, blood control developmental first and responses pregnancy. begin dietary occur conception throughout of the during high be prior phenylalanine phenylalanine these maintained months

B. Maple syrup disease urine

in oxidatively is (MSUD) decarboxylates complex rare Maple partial isoleucine, (1:185,000), (see leucine, and deficiency enzyme complete a which disease syrup disorder the there valine mitochondrial BCKD, in that is urine autosomalrecessive or Fig. a 20.11). acids the causing blood, a functions. accumulate that BCAA effect their toxic in brain with α-keto and interferes These corresponding disease of (primarily problems tone, neurologic vomiting, changes because rise syrup–like coma that ketoacidosis, odor in result maple urine characteristic of the leucine), problems, rise in the in is in the because by a isoleucine. can of feeding muscle The and characterized fatal. is disease If the untreated, treatment delayed, intellectual If is results. disability

1.

variant MSUD includes and type forms. a several classic Classification: neonatal-onset form classic, type common is MSUD. The of most the show or from patients little BCKD or cultured skin activity. no fibroblasts Leukocytes these the within with days show first life. classic of Infants symptoms several MSUD lethal in If diagnosed is weeks MSUD the treated, and life. first classic not of a (up Patients forms enzyme of activity with normal). higher level have to of intermediate 30% and The show symptoms are to from milder an onset infancy adolescence. MSUD with vitamin. Patients variant doses thiamine-dependent this to respond of large the of rare

2.

and screening affected and heterozygotes. PKU, are As and Screening diagnosis prenatal most compound with individuals available, are newborn diagnosis:

3.

Treatment: a synthetic leucine, allow with amounts that supplemented of valine toxic normal treated and and limited BCAA, levels. producing for is MSUD development of with isoleucine, formula free growth to is without of MSUD, leucine level in is is [Note: Elevated and carefully cause neurologic the monitored.] its damage the lifelong normally. is essential with are and if Early dietary to child MSUD treatment develop diagnosis the times need, metabolic risk energy at are are individuals of decompensation in during periods important catabolism.] increased of BCAA with an and source protein [Note: of MSUD

Albinism C.

to defect a tyrosine conditions refers which a in in Albinism of results production group a deficiency metabolism in melanin. of the in defects and in eyes. or from result the hair, skin, absence the full pigment partial of These of inherited may (primary one different or and X dominant, be appears modes: by several autosomal autosomal recessive linked. in forms, it Albinism mode), the (Fig. skin and eyes, from hair, pigment Total of absence copper-requiring results defective an 20.21), absent albinism), from or tyrosinase-negative tyrosinase. albinism oculocutaneous (type 1 is the condition. severe It most form the of defects their (sunlight individuals In affected vision photophobia to have and hurts hypopigmentation, eyes). addition cancer. at They increased for are risk skin

Homocystinuria D.

of Hcy. metabolism homocystinurias The the of in disorders defects a group are involving low methionine, are by levels cysteine. of and These levels autosomal-recessive high urinary characterized levels and diseases Hcy of plasma plasma Hcy, of high most is β-synthase, which converts cause Hcy enzyme The in the a to common (Fig. of cystathionine homocystinuria defect cystathionine 20.22). Individuals β-synthase (ectopia limbs and dislocation disability, risk increased (blood thrombi an clots). lens skeletal homozygous cystathionine fingers), and lentis), exhibit anomalies for for developing the deficiency intellectual of (long death major is these Thrombosis early of cause in the individuals. restriction with Treatment supplementation and and includes of vitamin folate. methionine B12 which pyridoxine to (vitamin cystathionine is B6), are Additionally, oral the patients coenzyme to administration responsive β-synthase. pyridoxal phosphate, of some of converted a patients. These milder patients of with later onset symptoms clinical and have compared B6nonresponsive usually Fig. methylcobalamin [Note: (see in Deficiencies

reductase see N5,N10-MTHF Fig. 20.8) ([MTHFR]; or also elevated 20.12) Hcy.] in result

E. Alkaptonuria

tyrosine organic the accumulation oxidase, a in of Alkaptonuria an rare in (see the acid intermediate a homogentisic in involving is degradative acid pathway homogentisic Fig. of resulting (HA), deficiency aciduria

p. 20.15 269). on urine characteristic Fig. aciduria symptoms: oxidized condition which three has a homogentisic elevated of on shown (the dark as The standing, HA, levels contains is to in pigment 20.23A), arthritis onset tissue of of large pigment in collagenous cartilage deposition Fig. (ochronosis) and the black (see and early in joints, 20.23B). about disease of symptoms years. age usually in staining infants, but present until Dark 40 indicate are can the diapers no of HA to restriction dietary levels. and tyrosine phenylalanine includes reduce Treatment life severely not threatening, be crippling. alkaptonuria Although is the arthritis may associated terminal tyrosine enzyme type I fumarylacetoacetate [Note: the Fig. hydrolase, in result Deficiencies in metabolism, (see of tyrosinemia odor and 20.15) to cabbage-like a urine.] characteristic

VII. CHAPTER SUMMARY

termed of cycle tricarboxylic yields acids glucogenic pyruvate acid or (Fig. the catabolism Amino intermediate an are whose 20.24). give the and of formation in to the rise They can net glucose kidneys. liver proline, threonine, serine, alanine, The glycine, histidine, glutamate, acids and solely cysteine, amino arginine, are aspartate, asparagine. methionine, glucogenic valine, glutamine, of CoA, ketogenic. acetyl A whose either (CoA) its are acetoacetyl precursors, acetoacetate catabolism yields or coenzyme or acids one termed Amino solely lysine Leucine are and ketogenic. and and both Tyrosine, are isoleucine glucogenic. phenylalanine, ketogenic tryptophan, amino amino metabolic Nonessential from acids can intermediates acids. the carbon essential from synthesized skeletons be of or Essential from obtained the to acids amino need be diet. lysine. include They valine, methionine, and isoleucine, threonine, tryptophan, leucine, phenylalanine, histidine, (PAH), Phenylketonuria by caused phenylalanine is phenylalanine (PKU) to a which tyrosine. hydroxylase deficiency of converts PAH, synthesize the coenzyme enzymes be by for may in that tetrahydrobiopterin. also the Hyperphenylalaninemia caused deficiencies regenerate or intellectual of urine. from PKU disability, musty with individuals developmental characteristic Untreated and (mousy) severe microcephaly, delay, seizures, a the suffer smell involves Treatment phenylalanine. controlling dietary component Tyrosine becomes essential for PKU. with dietary an people the disease or acids (BCAA) in complete syrup leucine, acid branched-chain and Maple a-keto partial by enzyme the (MSUD) isoleucine, caused a deficiency is amino that urine branched-chain dehydrogenase, valine. decarboxylates smell tone, feeding of vomiting, urine. Symptoms and a include ketoacidosis, in characteristic changes the problems, muscle sweet problems in neurologic disease that the leads untreated, death. If result to involves Treatment intake. BCAA controlling albinism, cystathioninuria. histidinemia, methylmalonic diseases metabolism amino tyrosinemia, Other associated homocystinuria, and alkaptonuria, with acid genetic important acidemia, include

Choose best the answer. ONE

clinical or deficient urine. with match enzyme finding the associated sign Questions 20.1–20.3, in the For laboratory

0.1. 0.2. Cystathionine β-synthase oxidase Homogentisic acid 0.3. Tyrosinase

results in Correct methionine A cystathionine A, answers in rise D. a deficiency in degradation β-synthase = of homocysteine. F, degradation pigment of forms oxidase homogentisic results A that which in rise connective deficiency a tissue in in acid in black deposited a homogentisic is acid, tyrosine (ochronosis). decreased the from skin, formation of tyrosine hair, eyes. and deficiency in results in tyrosinase melanin A in coenzyme isovaleryl A of A odor sweaty dehydrogenase like characteristic deficiency. feet– is absorption. cystine cystinuria, intestinal seen urine in Cystine a are renal in with defect crystals and in branched-chain methionine homocysteine seen acids are Increased seen urine phenylalanine maple in in increased amino phenylketonuria. seen increased in and metabolism, is disease, defects is syrup

0.4. 1-week-old was in born rural, undetected a A classic who infant, phenylketonuria. home has medicallyunderserved at area, this correct? her baby is treatment about statement Which and/or

A. immediately. be phenylalanine of A diet devoid initiated should

be discontinued Dietary in will adulthood. B. treatment

C. with is required. B6 vitamin Supplementation

is Tyrosine D. amino essential acid. an

cannot hence, essential and, becomes from must phenylketonuria, be Correct tyrosine be supplied answer D. phenylalanine In patients the diet. in synthesized and = with but diet be eliminated is in it be Phenylalanine the cannot controlled because must an entirely amino acid. essential treatment life the intellectual decline. restriction of 7–10 prevent phenylalanine days of to must lifelong and recommended to disability, first Dietary cognitive begin prevent is during fetus. elevated phenylalanine levels to Additionally, are of teratogenic a developing

0.5. one following acids the of amino correct? statements Which is concerning

Alanine is A. ketogenic.

are A acids catabolized Amino coenzyme acetyl to that glucogenic. B. are

in Branched-chain catabolized are primarily amino acids liver. C. the

methionine. Cysteine in consuming severely a individuals diet essential is for limited D.

becomes methionine severely which precursor of essential restricted. D. = if Correct Methionine answer is is cysteine, the glucogenic amino is key a acid. Alanine be cannot the net glucose. coenzyme A (CoA) Acetyl of for synthesis used catabolized Amino CoA ketogenic. acids to are acetyl in acids primarily catabolized muscle. are skeletal amino Branched-chain

0.6. In why disease, the of maple (E3)-deficient expected an lactic dehydrogenase an would finding? dihydrolipoyl individual with be syrup urine form acidosis

acid common. dehydrogenase in three α-ketoglutarate The have dehydrogenase dehydrogenase or dehydrogenase dihydrolipoyl [BCKD]) acid [PDH], E3) (Enzyme α-keto complexes (pyruvate dehydrogenase, α-keto and branched-chain 3, acids of to increased PDH. decreased activity of amino maple urine accumulating result because acid disease, decreased of activity addition BCKD, and In derivatives the branched-chain E3-deficient also be syrup as in their α-keto of lactate a will

0.7. amino the aromatic vitamin by pyridoxal B6–derived contrast required enzymic reactions in In is acids, acid what most the required to amino coenzyme phosphate hydroxylases? involving

is required Tetrahydrobiopterin, the coenzyme. from triphosphate, made guanosine

to Products 21 Specialized Amino Conversion Acids:

additional For visit chapter, please related to thePoint. materials this ancillary

OVERVIEW I.

compounds acids for building as important physiologic proteins, functions that (Fig. have precursors blocks In are nitrogen-containing addition serving amino to many of 21.1). hormones, porphyrins, These pyrimidines. purines, neurotransmitters, molecules and include for 151 arginine.] the oxide from nitric synthesis [Note: p. See of

II. METABOLISM PORPHYRIN

ions, iron. (Fe2+) or that cyclic compounds metal readily ferrous bind ferric (Fe3+) Porphyrins are usually protoporphyrin The in humans most consists of tetrapyrrole the of of p. prevalent Fe2+ metalloporphyrin IX in is (see ring coordinated one center heme, the which 279). (Hb), cytochrome system, P450 the the cytochromes, hemoglobin catalase, the group is for nitric prosthetic myoglobin, and (CYP) synthase, oxide Heme peroxidase. monooxygenase synthesized hemeproteins These degraded. rapidly and are example, of the heme to Hb normal lost 6–7 each of erythrocytes. through is turnover For day replace synthesized g iron with and degradation the turnover synthesis of associated porphyrins and are recycling of hemeproteins. coordinated of the the The

A. Structure

the pyrrole rings of planar methenyl through formed (Fig. four Porphyrins cyclic are by molecules bridges linkage 21.2). significance. features Three understanding relevant these molecules of their structural to medical are

1. porphyrins Side the chains: four pyrrole in side nature attached of vary of each to rings. the chains Different the (−CH2–CH2–COO–) protoporphyrin (−CH2–COO–) groups; (and common most Uroporphyrin acetate (−CH=CH2), and propionate groups. methyl and the contains heme) side IX (−CH3) contains coproporphyrin propionate and chains; contains and methyl, propionate b, vinyl heme decarboxylation respectively.] side by groups produced chains, of and vinyl methyl propionate [Note: and acetate are The 2.

distribution: can tetrapyrrole ordered chains in of nucleus I The IV. Roman chain ways, numerals different by to side porphyrins Side four around designated the be porphyrins, which Only D III contain an asymmetric Fig. (see ring substitution type on humans. in are important physiologically 21.2), IX member [Note: Protoporphyrin III is of a the series.] type 3.

example, colored and exist as in These (for biosynthesis. form heme between Porphyrinogens: porphyrin the oxidized, reduced, chemically (PBG) serve porphobilinogen uroporphyrinogen) protoporphyrins precursors in a and colorless intermediates

biosynthesis B. Heme

which heme sites a liver, proteins of heme active of CYP erythrocyte-producing cells the are which marrow, the synthesis. synthesizes of are number Hb in (particularly proteins), The and the biosynthesis the major bone to responding by the liver, rate heme alterations in variable, synthesis fluctuating is hemeproteins. heme of the for highly In cellular the caused pool demands is synthesis. relatively heme is synthesis matched rate globin cells in erythroid to contrast, constant In the of and tissue. erythroid [Note: occurs synthesis Over all 85% of heme in blood (RBC) and heme.] cells unable Mature synthesize lack to are red mitochondria and intermediate reaction whereas the occur steps formation porphyrins pathway in of the the last The of steps biosynthetic the cytosol. in three in mitochondria, the initial occur [Note: Fig. 21.8 summarizes heme synthesis.] cycle catalyzed reaction tricarboxylic δ-aminolevulinic a molecule and intermediate) synthase formation: acid ALA amino to carbon (ALA) form by acid the A that (a δ-Aminolevulinic acid) condense by in nonessential (a succinyl porphyrin Fig. and are glycine coenzyme acid 1. atoms All provided ([ALAS], of the nitrogen 21.3). committed reaction a see pyridoxal requires and as This phosphate is the and in ([PLP] step porphyrin rate-limiting 382) coenzyme p. biosynthesis. are each by isoforms, controlled two by ALAS produced and genes There different mechanisms. [Note: different ALAS2 tissues, ALAS1 is in specific. all erythroid is found whereas mutations in iron Loss-of-function overload.] sideroblastic and result in ALAS2 anemia X-linked (Continued Figs. in and 21.5.) 21.4 a.

require the porphyrin apoproteins by (hemin) Fe2+ Fe3+ the oxidation to . the of heme accumulates to is Heme converted that of it, hemin production When and availability effects: exceeds messenger of decreases transcription of (and, amount the the RNA, the increasing and Hemin its of by ALAS1 thus, mitochondria. repressing of enzyme gene, into decreasing import activity) degradation its of iron availability by p. controlled intracellular [Note: is ALAS2 In the cells, erythroid (see 475).] b.

any significant effects: increase of a in Administration Drug ALAS1 results in large number of hepatic of a drugs activity. hemeprotein by liver These the drugs CYP the system, p. system in 149). found (see metabolized a are oxidase monooxygenase microsomal proteins to synthesis these to component an of consumption heme, enhanced CYP these increases, the leading drugs, of proteins. In a of response concentration heme decrease in turn, in the in cells. liver of a causes This, in lower the of leads ALAS1 increase a prompts ALA. of concentration corresponding the synthesis to increase in an intracellular heme synthesis The and

2.

heavy Porphobilinogen ions cytosolic ALA synthase) (see inhibition The form by to two of the to sensitive example, is zinc-containing PBG (for ALA lead) replace condensation (PBG metal zinc extremely Fig. by that dehydratase formation: 21.3). poisoning. is, the anemia ALA in seen in inhibition in responsible and part, This lead elevation the for

3.

formation: the cyclized condensation isomerized linear is III uroporphyrinogen uroporphyrinogen produce synthase hydroxymethylbilane, tetrapyrrole of produces to PBG four asymmetric and by III. the which Uroporphyrinogen The acetate generating tetrapyrrole III groups uroporphyrinogen cyclic by (UROD), (Fig. of This its coproporphyrinogen undergoes decarboxylase III decarboxylation 21.4). in cytosol. reactions the occur The

4. formation: generating III IX, which Heme the by side protoporphyrin and vinyl IX. to enters III oxidase mitochondrion, oxidized groups is Coproporphyrinogen are decarboxylated to two chains protoporphyrinogen coproporphyrinogen propionate Fe2+) (as produces heme. introduction The into protoporphyrin of IX iron rate but enzyme enhanced (Fig. like occur by step ALA is ferrochelatase, an the is inhibited lead This spontaneously, by can dehydratase, that, 21.5).

Porphyrias C.

porphyrin sometimes defects excretion in heme increased Fig. of the porphyrins or Porphyrias (or (see accumulation inherited acquired) are precursors resulting rare, synthesis, and in 21.8). are porphyrias disorders.] (AR) or autosominal-dominant (AD) autosomal-recessive [Note: Inherited the accumulation an porphyria of Each pathway. results the by of of enzyme unique in a the pattern in intermediates deficiency synthetic heme caused purple, Porphyria, red-blue from urine derived for the by defects pigment-like of Greek porphyrins in with [Note: some refers caused to color patients in synthesis.] heme the the 1. whether erythropoietic erythropoietic cells Clinical deficiency or on The or marrow liver. hepatic, in enzyme the bone the as the occurs classified in porphyrias are manifestations: depending of the Hepatic chronic or classified can acute. as porphyrias be further manifest photosensitivity the of show to when accumulation tetrapyrroles to defect (that In enzyme itches skin an leading defects [pruritus] to burns synthesis general, intermediates and abdominal those the with signs, whereas prior neuropsychiatric tetrapyrrole their enzyme exposed with individuals is, sunlight). and the of colorless colored [Note: formation in photosensitizing to superoxide of which to porphyrins, the thought of molecules from porphyrinogens radicals a Photosensitivity result participate are is oxidation oxygen. of the can membranes These release of oxidatively the destructive damage and radicals lysosomes.] from cause enzymes a. disease of porphyria, porphyria: chronic is liver. the the hepatic a Chronic cutanea most Porphyria common tarda, factors, therapy, of HIV but infections. B is overload, to by associated hepatic UROD, of estrogen deficiency the exposure ingestion, sunlight, presence with iron various deficiency influenced and such clinical The or of disease C expression is the or as hepatitis severe alcohol to individuals. in found are [Note: Mutations of UROD affected only 20% AD.] Inheritance is the is Clinical fifth fourth during or life. onset typically decade of symptoms cutaneous Porphyrin to (Fig. accumulation leads as natural to brown well red in urine 21.6) is light (Fig. that as

fluorescent 21.7) red and light. pink in to

b.

may porphyria, by by (ALA porphyria, that characterized and intermittent neuropsychiatric, hepatic symptoms attacks Acute porphyrias: and accompanied acute acute be variegate photosensitivity hepatic gastrointestinal of porphyria) (GI), dehydratase–deficiency hereditary are porphyrias coproporphyria, motor Acute (Fig. 21.8). Porphyrias abdominal delirium. as of PBG, to anxiety disturbances, ranging and neuropsychiatric cause to acute leading porphyria, such pain and intermittent accumulation from ALA as of the Symptoms precipitated often the such and porphyrias barbiturates drugs, system. synthesis heme-containing acute ethanol, of are drug-oxidation which CYP microsomal induce by the hepatic use of heme, This ALAS1. amount of the turn, decreases which, promotes in of available further increased synthesis

c.

appear porphyrias: cause that Erythropoietic in Fig. erythropoietic The characterized (congenital (see childhood porphyrias photosensitivity early chronic protoporphyria) and by skin blisters rashes porphyria erythropoietic erythropoietic and 21.8).

2.

synthesis the porphyrias Increased of δ-aminolevulinic is common feature decreased acid synthase One activity: heme. hepatic of heme ALAS1 repressor of functions a In liver, normally gene. the as the of product the in end ALAS1 in increase absence (derepression). this results Therefore, synthesis an of the the that prior synthesis of an This occur block. increased intermediates causes to genetic The of the pathophysiology these toxic is porphyrias. of accumulation major the intermediates

3.

pain Treatment: acute particularly and porphyria support, During patients require for treatment vomiting. attacks, medical of the synthesis acute of intravenous The symptoms decreases diminished of which porphyrias ALAS1. the by severity hemin and be glucose, of injection can p. Protection β-carotene (provitamin from of ingestion sunlight, see A;

that with porphyrias (removes porphyrins) phlebotomy helpful are free and scavenges in 386) photosensitivity. radicals,

Heme degradation D.

phagocyte (MPS), the liver RBC by system (Fig. and in particularly ~120 spleen days taken up in and After the degraded are circulation, the mononuclear 21.9). senescent of Approximately 85% degradation heme destined from RBC. for comes from of hemeproteins The is Hb. remainder the degradation other than

1. heme heme The oxygenase the catalyzed by the MPS. is macrophages in of in Bilirubin microsomal of formation: degradation first step (converting In Fig. dinucleotide enzyme porphyrin (CO), and Fe2+ of linear the successive three adenine the of carbon of release the oxygenations nicotinamide biliverdin), to opening oxygen, and (see in monoxide of heme phosphate catalyzes production cyclic ring that result presence 21.9). molecule and CO a The anti-inflammatory. acting has function, signaling as biologic [Note: Chapter 29.] discussed in is Iron the forming red-orange bilirubin. is pigment, green Biliverdin, reduced, a bile are pigments. termed Bilirubin derivatives its collectively and degradation.] The [Note: during of occurs reflect changing the a heme colors of that pattern intermediates bruise varying

as unique an function to antioxidant. levels appears low Bilirubin, at mammals, to is is to this then which reduced bilirubin. role, by reductase, it oxidized biliverdin regenerating biliverdin, In

2.

by liver: to the soluble Bilirubin it blood is liver plasma, Because to binding is noncovalently uptake bilirubin in slightly transported albumin. the only by through central anionic nervous salicylates as albumin, enter [Note: (CNS). can bilirubin such sulfonamides, from bilirubin permitting system to and the displace Certain drugs, causes p. (see neural infants for potential damage in This the 285).] proteins, facilitated the enters protein via molecule, Bilirubin from dissociates carrier binds diffusion, to intracellular and a albumin hepatocyte the particularly ligandin.

3.

glucuronic solubility the the addition bilirubin called process of by In increased formation: sequential in two is acid molecules diglucuronide hepatocyte, of Bilirubin a conjugation. (UDP)-glucuronic (bilirubin UGT) the reactions as using donor. diphosphate The bilirubin acid uridine glucuronate UDP-glucuronosyltransferase catalyzed microsomal by are diglucuronide as referred (CB). The bilirubin to is conjugated bilirubin product Crigler-Najjar deficiency II degrees UGT being I bilirubin [Note: with syndrome, in and of of severe.] the Crigler-Najjar I and most result Gilbert Varying 4.

actively against the transported bile: is then and concentration CB the into into canaliculi bile into bile. gradient Bilirubin a secretion in disease. This impairment susceptible step rate-limiting is to energy-dependent, liver of in the results the CB required liver of [Note: rare out transport Dubin-Johnson in protein syndrome.] for deficiency A bile. not normally secreted is Unconjugated into bilirubin (UCB)

5.

Urobilin to is reduced gut intestine: hydrolyzed a in yield and formation colorless CB by compound. bacteria urobilinogen, the the to gives of oxidized characteristic color. which Most brown the feces further stercobilin, urobilinogen bacteria by is reabsorbed the and is gut some the blood. from enters portal However, the of is in into bile. then this participates urobilinogen in portion resecreted enterohepatic which liver up it the by urobilinogen A and taken cycle the transported to where The it characteristic color. to the blood remainder kidney, the urine its of by yellow giving is urobilinogen excreted, urobilin converted the and is bilirubin metabolism Figure summarized The in of is 21.10.

E. Jaundice

levels Figure (whites deposition, increased bilirubin of icterus) the to as nail bilirubin (or, (hyperbilirubinemia) the 21.11. yellow of refers sclerae caused shown color Jaundice the blood by in skin, eyes) in beds, and secondary to Although of usually disorder. underlying an not is symptom a jaundice a disease, bilirubin Blood ≤1 levels mg/dl. [Note: normally are seen at mg/dl.] 2–3 is Jaundice 1. Types: be major types below. described classified Jaundice three into can more this jaundice However, often in in simple practice, complex classification. indicated clinical than is be result its metabolism. For the one of of more may example, in bilirubin than a at accumulation defects step

of mg/day. whereas (prehepatic): normal and only has 300 The capacity the production is Hemolytic the a. of bilirubin/day, conjugate liver mg >3,000 bilirubin excrete to capacity to corresponding CB. increase degradation heme liver conjugation This and with secretion of respond allows to a the in increased excess be produce extensive deficiency pyruvate in cell However, 6-phosphate or bilirubin sickle than anemia of it conjugated. dehydrogenase) patients faster or example, with (for can kinase hemolysis may glucose (unconjugated in UCB the elevated hyperbilirubinemia), blood (Fig. levels become causing jaundice 21.12A). and made excreted amount hemolysis, enterohepatic the urobilinogen and With more the is entering into urobilinogen of is bile, is the circulation urinary increased, [Note: CB increased.] b.

patients result cirrhosis example, a can cause hepatitis) in liver with conjugation. Damage hyperbilirubinemia Hepatocellular of (for as unconjugated decreased to cells or (hepatic): is blood, compound, damage urine more circulation in of enter because is allowing the the decreases this Urobilinogen which to the urine. hepatic it into from the increased filtered enterohepatic darkens, The pale, stools be urine whereas clay consequently a color. may see and are p. (ALT Plasma AST, levels 251) and transaminases elevated. aspartate respectively; of alanine from conjugated but secreted the is the it If leak into causing CB is efficiently hyperbilirubinemia. (regurgitation), made cholestasis), (intrahepatic blood into can bile a liver not

c.

from of Obstructive conjugation obstruction the In or of bile (extrahepatic bilirubin caused jaundice duct decreased this overproduction instance, not (posthepatic): cholestasis). by results is instead, but, common of the of block tumor intestine. into bile may passage For a stones or the CB the duct, preventing presence example, pain clay obstructive stools color. and experience jaundice a that and with nausea produce are pale, Patients GI The into hyperbilirubinemia). the CB (conjugated blood regurgitates is eventually The time) urine to is the as in CB urinary and excreted darkens over referred (which bilirubin. urobilinogen is Urinary absent.

2. first activity of the UCB reaches Jaundice weeks), levels UGT Most rise infants preterm) of is birth newborn in 4 21.12B about and show term in in transient, because physiologic low 80% and newborns: (60% full (and jaundice) adult at Figures a 21.13. in as shown the of a week postnatal hepatic bilirubin in (it Elevated into causing the diffuse capacity jaundice. encephalopathy excess toxic basal the ganglia, (20–25 mg/dl), a of in binding and can of (kernicterus) UCB, albumin pathologic in Therefore, therefore, polar with blue with isomers. to converts bilirubin as and, fluorescent newborns are which light (phototherapy), more shown Figure treated 21.14, elevated bilirubin water-soluble significantly levels be conjugation excreted acid. without glucuronic into can bile to These photoisomers the the only blood–brain in only appears of crosses UCB differences, and urine.] [Note: CB Because barrier, solubility 3. sulfanilic commonly acid reaction, with by is which Bilirubin measured den measurement: colorimetrically. measured bilirubin azodipyrroles the form are Bergh in diazotized reacts to that Bilirubin red van and CB (within with solution, water-soluble the is direct In 1 rapidly minute) reagent the reacting. be to aqueous said reacts reacts solution, UCB, The is in more less slowly. aqueous soluble much which in total with reagent, methanol, the value. when are and the and However, CB react is UCB providing the both out carried soluble bilirubin reaction indirect-reacting which by total from obtained subtracting direct-reacting corresponds the bilirubin. to the bilirubin The the is UCB, bilirubin, is into is plasma, normal bilirubin reacting, most of because the direct or only bile.] ~4% secreted total In conjugated, [Note:

III.

A.

(NE), are adrenaline) that Dopamine, (biogenic) are amines catecholamines. active termed (or, collectively norepinephrine and epinephrine biologically and brain the synthesized Dopamine in as neurotransmitters. are and NE function the in Epinephrine is NE medulla. from synthesized adrenal

1.

regulators derivative, Function: and lipid carbohydrate CNS, of hormone are NE its Outside methylated epinephrine, metabolism. the and low the epinephrine fright, blood adrenal to NE vesicles released from of response exercise, are in glucose. and medulla and levels storage in cold, and of triacylglycerol the as pressure well the the heart. output blood degradation and of increase glycogen increase They as stress often are and of coordinated part are for effects “fight-or-flight” the a prepare the These reactions. individual called to response

2.

Synthesis: The synthesized shown Figure tyrosine, are catecholamines 21.15. as from in L-3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine reaction is of hydroxylase in to form hydroxylation (DOPA) p. for described (see phenylalanine by the that tyrosine hydroxylated to 263). a Tyrosine first analogous the rate-limiting in step the the it ganglia, catalyzes and (BH4)-requiring is abundant of The sympathetic the the pathway. enzyme medulla, tetrahydrobiopterin CNS, and adrenal copper. by a βhydroxylase a acid hydroxylated in ascorbic to dopamine, requiring and yield DOPA PLP C) NE dopamine which is reaction decarboxylated is to (vitamin form that in requires reaction is N-methylation reaction 264). Epinephrine from formed (see S-adenosylmethionine (SAM) by the as p. using donor methyl an NE

production dopamine disorder, to idiopathic cells neurodegenerative result due disease, the the loss as of of insufficient movement Parkinson a in a brain. is dopamine-producing cross barrier. Administration treatment, because is cannot dopamine common (levodopa) the most L-DOPA the of blood–brain

3. SAM by by deamination catechol-O-methyltransferase as Degradation: The and are catalyzed catalyzed oxidative inactivated (COMT) donor catecholamines Omethylation using (Fig. monoamine (MAO) the by oxidase methyl by 21.16). occur either reactions order. in The can acids. aldehyde MAO reaction The of to products the the oxidized are corresponding homovanillic reactions NE and in from the vanillylmandelic from and products (HVA) these The of epinephrine excreted acid (VMA) as are urine dopamine. acid of the rare by of catecholamines.] and the metanephrines VMA are with pheochromocytomas, characterized gland excessive [Note: adrenal production tumors increased 4. and found liver. other and MAO such oxidase Monoamine in tissues, the as is neural inhibitors: intestine leak the is vesicles In or synaptic dopamine, neuron and at any when molecules (NE, excess inactivates enzyme neurotransmitter deaminates out neuron, oxidatively may rest. that the this of serotonin) permitting molecules within or the and escape synaptic inactivate enzyme, to the may MAO accumulate degradation and, (MAOI) neurotransmitter presynaptic irreversibly to both into inhibitors space. the therefore, reversibly leak neuron to NE be activation This responsible may the serotonin action and and receptors MAOI. for antidepressant causes of of MAOI p. tyraminecontaining [Note: with of discussed on is interaction foods The 373.]

B. Histamine

wide cellular and chemical reactions of a that a range is including acid gastric secretion. responses, Histamine inflammatory mediates allergic and messenger vasodilator, A reaction formed of PLP decarboxylation in (Fig. by histamine is histidine a powerful requiring 21.17). result is mast trauma. or allergic by secreted It a cells reactions as of therapeutic action no Histamine the applications. applications, histamine has agents with important clinical have that interfere of but

Serotonin C.

several also and/or sites synthesized (5-HT), Serotonin, is in stored at body the (Fig. 5-hydroxytryptamine called 21.18). in mucosa. intestinal The the by largest amount found is far Chapter it the where functions in Smaller CNS, occur and amounts as platelets online in 35). neurotransmitter, a (see synthesized to tryptophan, analogous reaction in that which by is from phenylalanine hydroxylated BH4 catalyzed hydroxylase. requiring Serotonin is a product, is The 5-hydroxytryptophan, to decarboxylated 5HT. regulation and and cognitive appetite, Serotonin pressure, including physiologic blood multiple temperature, mood of feeling (causes has pain sleep, roles perception functions, of a well-being). as thereby Selective (SSRI) serotonin reuptake functioning maintain levels, serotonin antidepressants.] inhibitors [Note: by Serotonin degraded acid is (5-HIAA). MAO 5hydroxy-3-indoleacetic to

Creatine D.

reversibly rapidly mobilized compound is that adenosine that to (Fig. high-energy (also phosphocreatine), phosphate a found provides called a high-energy muscle, transferred derivative of be creatine can in of phosphorylated but phosphates small reserve diphosphate the Creatine first during few the of to intracellular contraction. level minutes muscular of the maintain 21.19) ATP intense the phosphate amount muscle [Note: is in of the to proportional creatine mass.] The body 1.

Synthesis: Fig. the kidneys the a liver (see and SAM and from group plus glycine synthesized guanidino group from is of Creatine in arginine, methyl 21.19). products dietary are sources. Animal ATP by phosphate using as to phosphate donor. kinase, reversibly phosphorylated creatine Creatine creatine the is of creatine the indicative heart p. infarction kinase presence diagnosis the isozyme) [Note: (MB The used (see in damage is and is of of in myocardial plasma 65).] 2.

excreted to in creatinine, form spontaneously slow a but and rate phosphate Creatine at urine. which is constant the creatine Degradation: cyclize the to body estimate the total The amount phosphate can excreted of therefore, is creatine muscle proportional and, to be used content mass. When paralysis creatinine falls. the muscle decreases of (for reason content any from for muscular urine mass dystrophy), or the example, rise a from is is sensitive kidney creatinine normally blood In and malfunction, cleared blood creatinine addition, excreted. because the of a indicator rapidly in ~1–2 adult typical creatinine/day. g male of excretes A

Melanin E.

skin. tissues, eye, particularly hair, several that is pigment in the a occurs and Melanin cells) epidermis. the from in tyrosine melanocytes synthesized It is (pigmentforming of functions sunlight. It cells harmful underlying protect to of effects from the results albinism, (see melanin due most oculocutaneous defect production in the A to common in type p. tyrosinase [Note: in being copper-containing defects 273).]

IV. CHAPTER SUMMARY

porphyrins, combination with including (Fig. Amino many nitrogen are (Fe2+) form acids iron, ferrous precursors which, heme (N)-containing in of compounds 21.20). major liver, are the the hemeproteins synthesis. enzymes), active are biosynthesis the of which which cells cytochrome of hemoglobin bone P450 (particularly sites and marrow, erythrocyte-producing synthesizes heme in number a The of the responding the In to highly by cellular variable, alterations liver, rate synthesis heme hemeproteins. fluctuating is of heme in pool demands the for caused constant to synthesis. erythroid of the is matched rate synthesis contrast, globin In in relatively is and cells heme synthesis A. coenzyme with glycine Heme and starts succinyl committed of δ-aminolevulinic is step formation (ALA). acid the The catalyzed This heme accumulates (ALAS1) in liver tissues (inhibited oxidized underutilized) the by hemin, in being by of erythroid ALA synthase-1 heme form mitochondrial (regulated iron). the by that is is when and reaction ALAS2 the or of Porphyrias (lead excretion in by are increased precursors. resulting in and heme or caused inherited accumulation porphyrin synthesis, acquired defects poisoning) porphyrins Enzymic early and pain cause symptoms, defects abdominal later neuropsychiatric in defects the whereas photosensitivity. pathway cause occurs of and Degradation the liver in spleen. in mononuclear the heme phagocyte system, particularly which reduced biliverdin, of oxygenase heme to by bilirubin. step first subsequently the is is production The molecules by to by is of is its acid (bilirubin diphosphate-glucuronosyltransferase the albumin where liver, UGT). addition by bilirubin two transported glucuronic the solubility Bilirubin uridine of increased is to the where canaliculi, (conjugated to Bilirubin it reduced further yield and into by bacteria stercobilin. by urobilinogen, oxidized bile is bilirubin) gut first bacteria transported is hydrolyzed diglucuronide which and the the increased in is (icterus) to levels skin secondary caused bilirubin, that sclerae color of to bilirubin refers yellow by Jaundice of deposition the blood. types jaundice Fig. hemolytic (hepatic) are (posthepatic), encountered obstructive Three hepatocellular commonly (see and (prehepatic), of 21.20). derived creatine, serotonin, from and Other (dopamine, important catecholamines N-containing include melanin, the acids nitric compounds histamine, amino epinephrine), oxide. and norepinephrine,

bilirubin or secretion the bilirubin conjugated of bile.] into decreased from liver = CO CoA Fe coenzyme iron. monoxide; A; carbon = =

best Choose the answer. ONE

δ-Aminolevulinic activity: synthase acid 1.1.

A. in step the committed porphyrin catalyzes biosynthesis.

is erythrocytes. decreased in iron B. by

individuals barbiturate decreased phenobarbital. drugs certain is C. the in with the liver as treated in such

D. in the occurs cytosol.

tetrahydrobiopterin E. a as requires coenzyme.

porphyrin regulated acid catalyzes answer and and mitochondrial Correct is A. synthase δ-Aminolevulinic the synthesis. step = rate-limiting of It pyridoxal phosphate coenzyme. as requires a of increases production isozyme. erythroid Iron the is drugs. patients The certain increased in hepatic isozyme with treated

1.2. A the 50-year-old of his backs on blisters man presented hands. with painful He the a after indicated golf golfing that was blisters began. season instructor the erupted had shortly and He recent not to did exposure irritants. have common skin disorder ~3 seizure partial injury. earlier had had that years He begun after complex head a patient had onset medication) the of only disorder. (his phenytoin the been since taking seizure The of intake He of to weekly average ~18 an cans admitted 12-oz beer. ethanol orange. reddish was The patient’s urine failed from grow obtained skin organisms. to lesions Cultures 24-hour A mg). (1,000 uroporphyrin mg; showed urine normal, collection elevated <27 The is: likely most diagnosis

intermittent porphyria. A. acute

B. congenital erythropoietic porphyria.

C. protoporphyria. erythropoietic

coproporphyria. D. hereditary

tarda. E. cutanea porphyria

(for Correct but deficiency virus) disease example, a The uroporphyrinogen the of deficiency (for (UROD), injury agents. decarboxylase with infectious environmental answer = III enzyme in hepatic associated caused influenced is expression clinical B is ethanol) by hepatitis by example, and E. to can Exposure factor. be precipitating sunlight a also the during life. onset decade of or is fifth Clinical typically fourth brown. symptoms to and is leads urine Porphyrin to that accumulation red cutaneous acid deficient and, disorder of the the Treatment uroporphyrinogen, with UROD. increased seizure of of of synthase synthesis phenytoin substrate δaminolevulinic caused therefore, the patient’s clinical findings with laboratory other porphyrias. and The are inconsistent

21.3. jaundice, A patient nausea. presents pain, and with abdominal Clinical results are laboratory shown below.

is What the the most cause likely of jaundice?

A. of bilirubin hepatic conjugation Decreased

B. bilirubin hepatic uptake Decreased of

intestine bile secretion the into C. Decreased of

Increased hemolysis D.

color). the in bile with C. the be containing in block duct intestine in Correct (stool The the bilirubin a pale = answer obstructive decreases (CB) an common into consistent bile are conjugated data of which jaundice secretion will (conjugated blood hyperbilirubinemia). CB the The into regurgitates urine as is (which in urinary The darkens) referred CB to excreted is the bilirubin. and urobilinogen, Urinary source is intestinal is low. because its urobilinogen is present which not match do The other the not choices data.

1.4. gastrointestinal brought was problems. A 2-year-old child his pediatrician of evaluation to for the parents the has few report for been boy listless weeks. that The last tests anemia. hypochromic Lab reveal microcytic, a are Blood elevated. lead levels this of in child? listed Which liver to of have likely below enzymes the activity the most higher-than-normal is

δ-Aminolevulinic A. synthase acid

glucuronosyltransferase B. Bilirubin UDP

C. Ferrochelatase

oxygenase Heme D.

Porphobilinogen synthase E.

= answer A. Correct has porphyria lead the acquired child This poisoning. of Lead both and, and consequently, dehydratase ferrochelatase synthesis. acid heme inhibits δ-aminolevulinic decrease activity. resulting (the increase synthase-1 in hepatic in acid heme its derepresses δaminolevulinic in isozyme), The an in The heme and in results decrease decreased anemia hemoglobin is synthesis, also seen. by lead. Ferrochelatase is directly inhibited of choices enzymes The other are degradation. heme

related thePoint. this please For chapter, ancillary visit materials additional to

I. OVERVIEW

for and cells. (nucleotides) essential deoxyribonucleoside are all phosphates Ribonucleoside therefore, acid produced, neither and, cells (DNA) proteins cannot Without proliferate. ribonucleic nor deoxyribonucleic be acid be (RNA) or them, synthesized can synthesis adenine nicotinamide [UDP]-glucose carriers Nucleotides coenzymes, nicotinamide as serve dinucleotide and (NADP[H]). are lipids, essential several and (for (FAD[H2]), of dinucleotide adenine diphosphate and diphosphate adenine (NAD[H]), some cytidine also coenzyme and components as of flavin intermediates example, uridine [CDP]choline) of A, carbohydrates, the such structural in proteins dinucleotide activated conjugated phosphate (cGMP), and cyclic cyclic messengers as guanosine such Nucleotides, monophosphate signal second pathways. transduction adenosine as serve (cAMP) in monophosphate play energy as addition, role in sources the cell. In an nucleotides important pathways the metabolism, Finally, regulatory compounds of activating many of or important enzymes. key intermediary are inhibiting nucleotides for from can or be resulting can the The novo turnover. nucleotides pyrimidine found synthesized and the obtained purine through be reuse cell bases bases in that de allow normal salvage pathways of preformed and supplied by [Note: diet of purines and degraded the instead.] is is Little utilized pyrimidines

II. STRUCTURE

Nucleotides one, monosaccharide; groups. nitrogenous of composed and three are or two, a phosphate pentose base; a and families bases belong the two purines compounds: the of nitrogen-containing to pyrimidines. The

bases and Purine pyrimidine A.

adenine bases: the purine and RNA same guanine (G). contain and Both DNA (A) but base: cytosine pyrimidine DNA contains they the RNA contain (T), and differ RNA contains DNA in their pyrimidine second thymine uracil whereas Both (C), (U). differ (Fig. a T only T methyl that and group has in U 22.1). some of example, RNA species found bases viral transfer (for (for in [tRNA]). in some RNA and occasionally in are example, (modified) DNA) DNA Unusual glycosylation, include modifications methylation, Base and reduction. acetylation, shown in are of Figure 22.2. Some unusual examples bases base from or aid an its specific may degraded of it being in unusual protect a The nucleases.] presence by by enzymes recognition nucleotide [Note: sequence in

B. Nucleosides

a (see pentose a an N-glycosidic produces bond sugar p. a of The nucleoside. 86) to base addition through is and the If 2-deoxyribose, produced, a ribonucleoside deoxyribonucleoside sugar ribose, is is (Fig. produced is the if sugar a 22.3A). uridine, named of respectively. and U The G, A, adenosine, are C, guanosine, cytidine, ribonucleosides and added have The deoxy-(for A, deoxyadenosine). example, of the and T deoxyribonucleosides prefix G, C, The with the DNA deoxythymidine incorporated compound thymidine, is is being into simply often it because understood, [Note: only.] deoxy-prefix called sugar of Fig. atoms numbered are and the and separately in nitrogen rings (see the base the The carbon 22.3B). 5′. numbered 1′ to Carbons [Note: pentose in are the referred pentose, of carbon 5′carbon the nucleoside when than Thus, a is the the an base, a specified.] to, atom being rather nucleotide) is (or atom in in

Nucleotides C.

groups nucleotide. phosphate more a a addition nucleoside of The one to produces or group forming an a a 5′-phosphate 5′-OH is to the nucleoside ester linkage or the by attached pentose, The of 5′-nucleotide. phosphate first The type the in of is 5′-ribonucleotide names prefix denoted by the 5′-deoxyribonucleotide. pentose and the the of pentose, If adenylate). is like structure nucleoside monophosphate, group to adenosine or one a the attached 5′carbon monophosphate phosphate is (AMP, the phosphate triphosphate, example, example, adenosine for (Fig. or nucleoside, ATP) diphosphate nucleoside [ADP] added second diphosphate results a If or a third (for is to 22.4). hydrolysis). connected 70] energy the a phosphates (a negative a each by to are bond The [–∆G, see change and p. large, third nucleotide free of “high-energy second with in bond” to [Note: charges for nucleic phosphate are groups and to and The referred RNA as negative the DNA associated nucleotides with cause acids.] be responsible

III. NUCLEOTIDE SYNTHESIS PURINE

a (N10-formyl-THF), acids glycine, The the and glutamine), shown as ring 22.5. of and by of atoms including in are amino (CO2), (aspartate, compounds, contributed purine N10-formyltetrahydrofolate dioxide Figure carbon number by the a that add donated constructed preformed and is of series primarily liver a ring the purine in to nitrogens 5-phosphate. carbons The reactions ribose from Synthesis the 6-phosphate p. is 5-phosphate of [Note: phosphate ribose on discussed by glucose pentose pathway 147.]

A. of synthesis activated in pyrimidines. pentose purines participates 5-Phosphoribosyl-1-pyrophosphate (PRPP) and the salvage is and 5-Phosphoribosyl-1-pyrophosphate synthesis that an ATP PRPP 5-phosphate from of PRPP catalyzed is Synthesis ribose and by (Fig. synthetase 22.6). (end-product phosphate by X-linked nucleotides is by purine activated enzyme inhibited This inhibition). inorganic and the is the moiety purine ribose, de of novo Because PRPP products synthesis. [Note: end sugar are ribonucleotides of the for (see required is sugar p. ribose are deoxyribonucleotides DNA reduced synthesis, moiety When 297).] reaction. because the synthesis used in p. step is (see This of is purine as salvage pathways other committed [Note: not PRPP such 296).] Mg AMP monophosphate; = Pi magnesium. phosphate; inorganic = = adenosine = phosphate;

B. synthesis 5-Phosphoribosylamine

from glutamine Synthesis is and Figure PRPP in 22.7. shown of 5-phosphoribosylamine The to of glutamine group amide PRPP. the carbon attached 1 of group replaces pyrophosphate This biosynthesis. committed in step purine the is nucleotide 5′-nucleotides The or pathway. products and end amidotransferase (GMP, reaction, (GPAT), that the purine glutamine:phosphoribosylpyrophosphate AMP guanosine of guanylate), is catalyzes the by the the monophosphate inhibited enzyme of by the PRPP. the The controlled intracellular concentration is also of reaction rate PRPP [Note: for normally the far is GPAT. the of The (Km) Michaelis concentration below constant causes a PRPP the in of Therefore, concentration in small (see change p. proportional any rate reaction change the 59).] dioxide.

monophosphate C. Inosine synthesis

inosine in Figure steps monophosphate in of next are leading to 22.7. the base nine biosynthesis hypoxanthine) illustrated purine whose The ([IMP] is synthesis nucleotide for and is purine nucleotide GMP. parent IMP AMP the steps Four donor 267). in the N10-formyl-THF (see in source, a p. this require ATP pathway steps and energy pathway as two as one-carbon require an in found tRNA Hypoxanthine Fig. (see [Note: is 32.9 p. on 453).]

D. inhibitors Synthetic

the designed of synthetic Some are the functions dividing to Fig. sulfonamides) growth inhibitors inhibit interfering (for example, synthesis microorganisms rapidly cell without purine human of with (see 22.7). control synthesis used acid pharmacologically Other and of such the nucleotides therefore, inhibitors, synthesis cancer analogs interfering methotrexate), DNA as structural the are purine spread example, RNA Fig. by and, of (for with of folic of (see to 22.7).

rapidly, fetus, especially are immune tissues, or of a marrow, cell of or to skin, tract, in gastrointestinal to follicles. extremely Inhibitors bone replicate (GI) toxic hair such that purine human structures those to types normally synthesis system, including as developing such drugs As adverse tract immunodeficiency, individuals effects, a anemia, experience including and scaly skin, disturbance, hair GI result, loss. can taking anticancer

and E. monophosphate guanosine Adenosine synthesis

The GMP of pathway energy-and or conversion uses two-step, either nitrogen-requiring to IMP AMP a (Fig. 22.8). synthesis as GMP whereas source aspartate guanosine an as AMP requires ATP triphosphate requires glutamine.] and energy a (GTP) synthesis and [Note: nitrogen source, Also, pathway first end that reaction the product of in pathway. inhibited the by each is for of mechanism purine diverting provides to in the a synthesis present IMP the This lesser amounts. GMP adequate amounts, both pathway at GPAT inhibited If of de and are purine nucleotide the present AMP in synthesis step. novo the is

showing feedback inhibition. nicotinamide adenine = pyrophosphate. NAD(H) dinucleotide; =

F. synthesis di-and Nucleoside triphosphate

synthesized Nucleoside nucleoside from the are nucleoside kinases corresponding monophosphates base-specific diphosphates monophosphate (Fig. by 22.9). deoxyribose or substrate.] in do not the discriminate [Note: These kinases ribose between higher ATP is the triphosphates. transferred the generally than because other the nucleoside of source in present phosphate it concentrations is in liver where the and the turnover active in is energy from ATP kinase particularly of high. Adenylate is muscle, and ATP). function nucleotides the (AMP, to adenine among ADP, equilibrium Its maintain is substrate broad monophosphate interconverted Nucleoside triphosphates and has enzyme by diphosphate the diphosphates are kinase, that, nucleoside kinases, an specificity. unlike

Purine salvage G. pathway

the not from can converted that acids, amount by from used body. the normal cellular obtained that turnover is Purines the nucleic result be degraded, and nucleoside the diet and small of or triphosphates to This salvage purines. referred for is the to as pathway is in the important brain.] Salvage [Note: particularly purine 1. involved: hypoxanthine– adenine (APRT) phosphoribosyltransferase X-linked and base Two guanine (HGPRT). enzymes nucleotides: salvage to are phosphoribosyltransferase the ribose 5-phosphate of the source use (Fig. as group PRPP Both 22.10). these of release hydrolysis pyrophosphate its subsequent and The irreversible. by makes reactions pyrophosphatase purine salvaged. be Adenosine to is nucleoside only [Note: the kinase.] AMP phosphorylated by adenosine is to It deficiencies are HGPRT of known. enzyme decreases.] the of symptoms amount of functional increases, the the As severity 5-phosphoribosyl1-pyrophosphate; = GMP, inosine, = guanosine, monophosphates; adenosine AMP = and and IMP, pyrophosphate. PRPP PPi

2. associated rare, is disorder HGPRT. of virtually recessive Lesch-Nyhan deficiency a This complete with syndrome: a X-linked results deficiency are which 298). amounts acid, uric of of hypoxanthine p. in end guanine, excessive purine the or degradation, inability product produced (see The then salvage to an from In this levels decreased causes of IMP increased and salvage GMP PRPP lack levels. pathway and the addition, As and novo has a available, step synthesis) purine purine substrate in is synthesis de and excess (the regulated inhibitors result, GPAT increased. decreased of making purine acid, of large of combination of inherited reutilization purines decreased an synthesis degradation in purine cause production and increased the of The amounts increased HGPRT and hyperuricemia. deficiency results uric crystals and arthritis) syndrome, kidneys Lesch-Nyhan the frequently urate patients of soft (gouty in in tissues. the in deposition and hyperuricemia joints the with uric results of (urolithiasis) stones the In the acid formation as in Figure shown is 22.11. motor cognitive by deficits, characterized include lips and the syndrome addition, that disturbances behavioral example, In fingers), of biting and self-mutilation dysfunction, (for

IV. DEOXYRIBONUCLEOTIDE SYNTHESIS

thus far contain (ribonucleotides). The described nucleotides all ribose which 2′-deoxyribonucleotides, are S-phase from however, DNA of 423). ribonucleotide enzyme cell the reductase ribonucleoside requires diphosphates p. cycle produced (see the the by during synthesis, acts The [Note: pyrimidine ribonucleotides.] on enzyme same

A. reductase Ribonucleotide

nucleoside diphosphates for subunits, reduction (CDP their is (dADP, a diphosphate is the to reductase) pyrimidine (or, UDP) specific (ADP nucleoside composed and β), dUDP). deoxy and two forms and of reductase (ribonucleoside Ribonucleotide R1 dGDP, α) R2 (or, dCDP, the and nonidentical purine GDP) diphosphates of smaller dimer and and are 19). which during (see atoms The p. for of on (–SH) bond form the needed immediate reaction hydrogen of disulfide the groups the subunit), a the two reduction sulfhydryl group the enzyme (R1 donors 2′-hydroxyl itself for contains [Note: the at tyrosyl radical catalysis R1.] required R2 stable 1.

order regeneration: 2′-deoxy reduced. created for of to produce Reduced R1, bond the the at production must during the continue In deoxyribonucleotides be enzyme reductase carbon ribonucleotide to disulfide reductase. coenzyme of reducing ribonucleotide of protein source thioredoxin, a equivalents is the The residues two Thioredoxin peptide contains separated the acids two in amino chain. cysteine by of –SH donate the bond hydrogen ribonucleotide process The a groups (Fig. disulfide forming their to thioredoxin atoms two reductase, in 22.12).

2.

order in regeneration: to Reduced must back thioredoxin function. continue its performing be Thioredoxin to converted form its reduced by and + by H+, reaction catalyzed is p. equivalents the are reducing (see provided thioredoxin a reductase, The selenoprotein NADPH 268).

synthesis B. Deoxyribonucleotide regulation

the deoxyribonucleotides synthesis. for of required supply maintaining responsible is DNA Ribonucleotide for a balanced reductase of regulation complex. the the enzyme is Consequently, addition site, contains in In involved two the (Fig. enzymic sites R1 distinct catalytic allosteric regulating activity to 22.13).

1.

diphosphates. inhibits to Activity the on as and, binding the sites) activity the activity allosteric the nucleoside any sites R1 of The enzyme sites: catalytic reduction of dATP therefore, overall four of (known prevents of prevents explains 301). of in such levels as and DNA (ADA) p. of deficiency adenosine deaminase effectively the (see conditions This seen synthesis dATP increased toxicity enzyme. contrast, to In activates ATP bound the these sites

2.

the species different additional in synthesis. sites: specificity, ribonucleotides increase to of allosteric of as of Substrate are (known causing substrate substrate on deoxyribonucleotides The specificity binding R1 DNA for nucleoside to specificity triphosphates they regulates sites) as an sites required conversion binding deoxythymidine site. a the example, at the catalytic site that site causes specificity when change at of triphosphate to activity conformational For at ATP reduction allows is the dGDP GDP

The hydroxyurea reductase, inhibits DNA drug for thereby substrates synthesis. ribonucleotide inhibiting generation (hydroxycarbamide) the of melanoma. the is in drug cancers of such antineoplastic treatment used The as an is agent and in p. anemia also used (see Hydroxyurea is the sickle of 36). cell treatment ribonucleotide not increase expression of gene fetal inhibition. hydroxyurea with hemoglobin to seen changes However, the and in is in reductase because

DEGRADATION PURINE V. NUCLEOTIDE

them dietary occurs to of nucleic nucleases pancreatic small nucleotides. acids intestine, hydrolyze in where Degradation the and intestinal are to sequentially The free nucleosides, sugars, degraded by nucleotides enzymes phosphorylated bases. the of Uric acid product purine intestinal degradation. end is are the nucleotides [Note: liver from synthesis degraded novo primarily. de in Purine salvaged the peripheral out are sent tissues.] bases free and from by liver The

small in intestine Degradation A. the

and that further by the by 3′and pancreas, DNA and to mixture producing dietary oligonucleotides hydrolyze 5′-mononucleotides. secreted are Ribonucleases of a hydrolyzed phosphodiesterases, pancreatic deoxyribonucleases, RNA transporters remove sodium-dependent nucleosides degraded nucleosidases taken intestinal hydrolytically, ribose into to that the surface, groups phosphorylases) bases (deoxy) by phosphate free enterocytes (nucleoside and the nucleotidases plus are releasing At 1-phosphate. mucosal by are bases used appreciable purine acids. to any for extent synthesis tissue nucleic the of not Dietary to in acid the Instead, they enterocytes. are uric degraded blood of eventually and Most the in is excreted uric acid enters the the urine. shown in 22.14. pathway of this A summary Figure is oxidase urate other purine [Note: primates which generating allantoin. Mammals express (uricase), the cleaves ring, than urate levels.] lower used is to Modified urate clinically oxidase recombinant now

B. acid formation Uric

in 22.15. the uric degradative summary of specific and steps of acid are with diseases deficiencies in genetic enzymes the production the A associated Figure of shown numbers The bracketed to refer [Note: specific the in figure.] reactions of pathway. associated diseases the genetic some with this corresponding the refer numbers in [Note: citations brackets numbered in text.] the The to NH3 bone = H2O2 transplantation; enzyme therapy; replacement BMT marrow ammonia. hydrogen Pi inorganic = ERT = = phosphate; = peroxide;

or inosine IMP (hypoxanthine-ribose) AMP to to [1] group produce (adenylate) from is produce by adenosine AMP An from deaminase. amino adenosine by deaminase removed

nucleoside GMP converted by respective forms, and into 5′-nucleotidase. [2] of guanosine, are inosine IMP their action the and

nucleoside phosphorylase converts Purine bases, their respective and hypoxanthine purine guanosine guanine. and into [3] inosine ribose 5-phosphate.] interconverts 1-and ribose mutase [Note: A [4] xanthine. Guanine deaminated is form to

product of by xanthine xanthine, uric XO is final degradation. by molybdenum-containing is oxidase acid, oxidized (XO) Hypoxanthine further to oxidized to purine human which [5] the is Uric primarily the excreted urine. acid in

with degradation Diseases purine 1. C. associated result blood of uric either underexcretion product initiated overproduction or is disorder (hyperuricemia), as levels end a a in the uric of by of Gout catabolism) purine (the Gout: of high acid. acid can and to crystals acute The lead crystals, then to of causing to deposition chronic progressing first joints hyperuricemia urate (MSU) and gouty arthritis. in inflammatory the the monosodium an response the chronic in tissues, crystals be may tophaceous gout resulting soft masses deposited of the MSU Nodular (Fig. in (tophi) 22.16). the may also acid kidney stones Formation of (urolithiasis) seen. uric in be hyperuricemia. is gout not [Note: is Hyperuricemia always preceded sufficient cause but gout, to by asymptomatic comorbid hypertension.] be of as but indicative Hyperuricemia conditions typically is such may examination The and of aspiration gout of fluid synovial definitive (Fig. diagnosis requires the from microscopy needle-shaped of using a crystals (Fig. confirm polarized from 22.17) affected an light tophus) to material MSU joint (or presence 22.18).

a.

uric hyperuricemia, underexcretion: acid >90% of cause is the individuals of Uric acid. In underexcretion with (for urate disease the secondary of (saturnine to thiazide exposure use defects, decreasing as or such lactic Underexcretion its how of can known excretory to lead diuretics) handles example, urate primary, (for renal be or acidosis, inherent kidney lactate increases reabsorption, the drugs to that environmental example, as-yet-unidentified and gout). processes excretion) affect because factors thereby in

b.

overproduction: cause A acid. of from hyperuricemia acid overproduction Uric less is of common uric the Primary idiopathic the cause). hyperuricemia part, for known no (having most is, for or the (see ribose for its (see identified a the 57) 62). gene maximal a p. to several decreased having 59) ([Vmax] an in However, 5phosphate, purine mutations the of synthetase PRPP allosteric result inhibitors lower velocity increased production see enzyme Km sensitivity PRPP, X-linked for p. nucleotides, p. in availability of In purine levels of each production, resulting elevated increases plasma PRPP increased case, in acid. uric as and hyperuricemia salvage of and (see availability syndrome causes hypoxanthine of the of 296) decreased a also Lesch-Nyhan the subsequent p. result guanine PRPP. increased myeloproliferative of increased cell the high turnover). (for of consequence and purines disorders Secondary is a with who typically example, undergoing hyperuricemia in are so availability of patients or have rate chemotherapy (see also unrelated be von the such result can Gierke seemingly metabolic Fig. disease as of diseases, Hyperuricemia 11.8 on p.

hereditary 130) p. intolerance (see or fructose 138).

products of a with dairy low-fat with gout, whereas decreased meat, shellfish), in is A seafood diet a rich in diet risk. associated increased associated ethanol rich and (particularly risk is

are Acute anti-inflammatory treated gout c. agents. attacks Treatment: with of steroidal drugs and as prednisone, such such nonsteroidal Colchicine, as drugs used. are indomethacin area. into Colchicine prevents neutrophils affected decreasing the formation the movement microtubules, of of thereby [Note: acid anti-inflammatory effect it uric no drugs, the levels.] Like on has other strategies Long-term gout lowering for uric MSU crystals. saturation the point of (6.5 involve its thereby level deposition preventing below the mg/dl), acid therapeutic such excretion probenecid of acid, underexcretors are or used as of uric increase in renal sulfinpyrazone, agents, Uricosuric acid. uric patients that who are synthesis uric in hypoxanthine, patients who of and Allopurinol, acid. are structural inhibits used acid is uric of overproducers analog a of long-lived oxypurinol, to Allopurinol inhibitor a XO. is oxidized and of This xanthine hypoxanthine (see Fig. accumulation results an in response. less more inflammatory uric 22.15), soluble therefore, to an than and, compounds acid likely initiate the de levels PRPP hypoxanthine can be synthesis. the normal patients salvaged, novo with therefore, levels In and, HGPRT, reducing purine of of is Febuxostat, nonpurine also inhibitor XO, available. a of the [Note: Uric normally blood levels are the acid point. saturation close in to reason be acid.] of strong the may One this effects uric antioxidant for 2. deaminase Adenosine deficiency

of variety ADA this is highest in but, tissues, cytoplasmic have expressed a activity enzyme. of lymphocytes in humans, the cellular which kinases. accumulation is its forms by ribonucleotide results A deoxyribonucleotide or adenosine, ADA in an of deficiency of to converted rise, of all As levels the dATP (see p. reductase 297). thereby deoxyribose-containing is nucleotides inhibited, production ribonucleotide preventing make and cannot Consequently, cells divide. DNA dATP to of ADA lymphocytes.] deficiency adenosine accumulate lead and apoptosis arrest [Note: that and developmental The in killer severe T type and combined autosomal-recessive cells, its cells. natural (SCID), most immunodeficiency of decrease causes disease involving cells, a a B In disorder severe this in form, ~14% of ADA cases accounts deficiency the United in of States. for SCID enzyme transplantation, bone gene replacement Treatments (see therapy 501). therapy, and include marrow p. 2 disorder years. die with treatment, children usually this from infection age appropriate by Without results deficiency in primarily a less cells.] phosphorylase severe [Note: immunodeficiency T Purine involving nucleoside

VI. PYRIMIDINE SYNTHESIS AND DEGRADATION

being constructed Unlike the by of to pre-existing is donated which which is a 5-phosphate, ribose 5-phosphate, pyrimidine synthesized is ring, ring the PRPP. before on ribose synthesis attached the purine CO2, glutamine, The ring the aspartate atoms and are the of pyrimidine sources in (Fig. 22.19).

synthesis A. phosphate Carbamoyl

this carbamoyl phosphate of step cells (CPS) is in glutamine phosphate carbamoyl the catalyzed of The II. synthetase regulated synthesis from mammalian by pathway CO2, and triphosphate into inhibited product II by pathway, by pyrimidine the is activated and PRPP. this end nucleotides) uridine (the of CPS be which converted other is can of [Note: I, by phosphate, a 253). urea precursor synthesized Carbamoyl (see is CPS p. also Defects ornithine carbamoyl transcarbamylase because synthesis urea promote of cycle increased of availability in of pyrimidine phosphate. the is Figure presented A of two 22.20.] in the enzymes comparison

B. acid Orotic synthesis

catalyzed in is of step formation the The by synthesis carbamoylaspartate, pyrimidine second aspartate transcarbamoylase. then dihydroorotase. The closed pyrimidine by ring is as oxidized resulting is orotic dihydroorotate produce shown in The acid to (orotate), 22.21. Figure membrane. human a mononucleotide-containing that dihydroorotate mitochondrial dehydrogenase, of flavin inner is orotate, protein enzyme produces the The pyrimidine other in All enzymes are biosynthesis cytosolic. the dihydroorotase) from actually domain. in three The letter three first in CAD first enzymic transcarbamoylase, the name domains this of as different II, activities known polypeptide each catalytic a aspartate and [Note: single of are pathway (CPS for (See domains.) p. discussion of a 18 of an important is synthesis example the that multicatalytic a an ordered multifunctional compound. of polypeptide or This facilitates purine nucleotide IMP Synthesis proteins.] involves multifunctional also the of

Pyrimidine C. nucleotide synthesis

to the in stage nucleotide pyrimidine is monophosphate pyrimidine orotidine nucleotide The the ring converted Fig. synthesis (see completed of (OMP) second 22.21). the As 5phosphate the PRPP seen ribose purines, with is donor. produces pyrophosphate, making biologically releases enzyme phosphoribosyltransferase The orotate reaction irreversible. thereby and OMP the glutamine, [Note: synthesis Both as pyrimidine acid, PRPP purine essential and aspartic and require precursors.] by OMP uridine (orotidylate) decarboxylated decarboxylase. (UMP) is monophosphate orotidylate to UMP and called a domains decarboxylase The separate polypeptide activities of synthase. are catalytic single phosphoribosyltransferase disorder) both one deficiency resulting aciduria orotic activities orotic or Fig. this (a rare the by acid (see Hereditary may urine caused bifunctional a in enzyme, of of be in very 22.21). phosphorylated and sequentially UMP to is UTP. UDP a ribonucleotide generates is for UDP [Note: The reductase, substrate which dUDP. by rapidly UTP dUDP hydrolyzed dUTP, dUMP which to The is diphosphatase to (dUTPase). phosphorylated is incorporation DNA thereby into uracil erroneous DNA.] synthesis, important of of dUTPase substrate as plays availability for dUTP role Thus, in an a reducing preventing

synthesis D. Cytidine triphosphate

synthetase UTP (Fig. is triphosphate by produced (CTP) amination Cytidine by CTP of 22.22), the providing with glutamine nitrogen. CTP of Some to is substrate for dephosphorylated reductase. which this a ribonucleotide CDP, is dephosphorylated product to phosphorylated to or dUMP. to can DNA dCTP be The dCDP that dCMP synthesis is deaminated for

is to 267). synthase, synthesis uses dUMP methyl E. (see which monophosphate by source thymidylate deoxythymidine the converted the Deoxythymidine N5,N10-methylene-THF p. group of (dTMP) monophosphate as one-carbon but the not from of This in pteridine to that ring, THF resulting an only also contributes hydrogen the in is ([DHF], THF dihydrofolate reaction unit Fig. two oxidation atoms unusual a 22.23). Inhibitors serve agents. 5-fluorouracil, analogs synthase thymidylate as antitumor such include as which of thymine the permanently p. the bound metabolically to 5Fluorouracil thymidylate converted to becomes (5-FdUMP), 5-fluorodeoxyuridine synthase, drug making inhibitor a 60). suicide inactivated is monophosphate which (see by reduced (see be to reductase THF can Fig. DHF dihydrofolate

methotrexate. p. analogs folate is by an 28.2, enzyme as that such inhibited 378), these decreasing the only of By supply THF, inhibit drugs Fig. purine synthesis not (see component of methylation dUMP essential to 22.7), the availability decrease preventing but, also by DNA. they dTMP, this of of DNA growth synthesis slowed. is cell inhibited and these treat are drugs to used cancer. Thus, AZT Acyclovir herpes virus, to analog) infections respectively. analog) (3′-azido-3′-deoxythymidine, human virus are purine and simplex pyrimidine [Note: treat immunodeficiency (a used of a and Each DNA inhibits polymerase.] the viral

degradation and Pyrimidine F. salvage

the soluble with of and the β-alanine β-aminoisobutyrate (from the UMP) cleaved purine and and to (from pyrimidine and CO2. Unlike soluble highly as degradation TMP products, poorly ammonia humans excreted uric which is opened degraded is the ring degradation), not of CMP and production is ring, in acid, to nucleotides. nucleosides, be phosphorylated Pyrimidine to which can salvaged bases are However, makes salvage. purine salvage clinically than their pyrimidine high less significant solubility basis of in (see orotic aciduria The p. is [Note: salvage using hereditary for of the treatment nucleosides the uridine pyrimidine 302).]

VII. CHAPTER SUMMARY

= Nucleotides a A, two, pentose and (adenine = sugar; a three groups T); thymine one, composed = = uracil G, (Fig. or U, base guanine nitrogenous are cytosine and C, of phosphate = 22.24). U, and and purines, C, pyrimidines. A G T are are and a and the have it can is phosphate cell, including ribonucleoside being component [AMP]), several is nucleotide (for monophosphate functions in If a sugar of RNA. example, the the ribose, adenosine component is phosphate as DNA. and (for is If example, deoxyAMP) the a the deoxyribonucleoside exclusively sugar nucleotide will be found of deoxyribose, a almost synthesis nitrogen synthesis phosphoribosylamine. activated ([PRPP], ribose from to that and provides purine uses the novo an 5-phosphate produce for glutamine step salvage) pentose pyrimidine and and committed purine de 5-phosphoribosyl-1-pyrophosphate in The enzyme activated guanosine AMP monophosphate of and glutamine:phosphoribosylpyrophosphate amidotransferase The is products the by end and and pathway) by (the PRPP. is inhibited using can by produced bases be purine salvage and by (HGPRT). adenine nucleotides reactions (APRT) phosphoribosyltransferase preformed from hypoxanthine–guanine phosphoribosyltransferase catalyzed Purine also deficiency of by severe, compulsive of accompanied form self-mutilation. syndrome, inherited near-total HGPRT a Lesch-Nyhan hyperuricemia A causes reductase. All from the by ribonucleotides ribonucleotide deoxyribonucleotides are synthesized enzyme is in strongly compound deaminase regulated This individuals bone deficiency). it [ADA] inhibited is marrow cells example, (for by with a adenosine enzyme is [dATP], highly that in deoxyadenosine overproduced triphosphate deficiency disease. causes severe combined ADA immunodeficiency compound a crystals end response joints in acid, The whose those low in is or overproduction of solubility of gout. inflammatory of purine results uric that, urate product hyperuricemia soft if an to the monosodium tissues accompanied causes undersecretion degradation and crystals, and deposition by and PRPP). The pyrimidine [UTP] step by uridine the is first (it by step activated the pathway in phosphate production is of II, synthetase carbamoyl in this synthesis, phosphate carbamoyl by triphosphate inhibited regulated to this produced converted UTP be The by pathway triphosphate. can cytidine synthase, converted Deoxyuridine be targeted can drugs enzyme an as anticancer by to 5-fluorouracil. by monophosphate deoxythymidine thymidylate monophosphate such the synthase an the enzyme regeneration thymidylate by targeted reaction tetrahydrofolate reductase, drug dihydrofolate dihydrofolate produced in methotrexate. of from requires The degradation products. soluble Pyrimidine in results

= d deoxy; = 5-phosphoribosyl-1-pyrophosphate. = cytidine, monophosphates; thymidine, and guanosine, inosine PPi PRPP pyrophosphate;

the answer. ONE Choose best

2.1. glutamine-dependent enzymes. applications, inhibits research with drug a Azaserine, ring likely (N) Incorporation in most which the would generic of be nitrogens by structure shown of purine the affected azaserine?

A. 1 B. 9 D. 3 C. 7

glutamine = first 9 purine D. de The novo is answer be position at by step in incorporation synthesis, of would by Correct supplied affected azaserine. N its the and at glycine. is N aspartate 1 The by position by 7 at and position supplied glutamine, 3 N supplied by this is at but inhibited synthesis have purine step. prior The would also to position azaserine

2.2. his therapy 42-year-old in radiation cancer prostate right severe develops A big of undergoing patient phalangeal for metatarsal the toe. joint pain male by arthrocentesis. in detected from joint Monosodium are obtained fluid this crystals urate light by microscopy polarized which of This metabolic the of by patient’s following end overproduction the pain caused is pathways? directly of product the

A. pyrimidine biosynthesis novo De

B. degradation Pyrimidine

purine C. De novo biosynthesis

salvage D. Purine

Purine degradation E.

the is caused to by (as pain urate answer crystallization E. from in urate) excess response his monosodium joints. gout, an The of Correct inflammatory patient’s = resulting nucleic degradation of constituent acids therapy caused purines. with cell death, their Radiation and that degradation, stones). relatively kidney purine of acid, cause can insoluble end is (and compound Uric gout a product the uric associated not with is metabolism Pyrimidine acid production. indirectly Overproduction purines hyperuricemia. in result can of salvage Purine production. decreases acid uric

2.3. one of the metabolism its inhibitor? with pharmacologic correctly of nucleotide following enzymes is Which paired

A. reductase—methotrexate Dihydrofolate

Inosine dehydrogenase—hydroxyurea monophosphate Ribonucleotide reductase—5-fluorouracil C. B.

synthase—allopurinol Thymidylate D.

E. oxidase—probenecid Xanthine

a dihydrofolate folate answer with A. the reductase. interferes as acting = inhibitor Correct metabolism competitive Methotrexate of enzyme by starves cells This for unable synthesize them purines and tetrahydrofolate monophosphate. makes to and thymidine is dehydrogenase Inosine by inhibited monophosphate acid. mycophenolic by hydroxyurea. inhibited Ribonucleotide is reductase is 5-fluorouracil. by inhibited synthase Thymidylate Xanthine by allopurinol. inhibited oxidase is inhibit urate does renal of increases excretion not but Probenecid its production.

2.4. and anemic. lethargic, female A 1-year-old patient weak, is Her low for are weight and her height age. contains Her level of orotic urine elevated an acid. uridine low. monophosphate Activity synthase of is following of most of alleviate her the which likely Administration symptoms? is to

Adenine A.

B. Guanine

Hypoxanthine C.

Thymidine D.

E. Uridine

and disorder low (UMP) that rare excretion orotic novo E. indicate de a patient uridine acid orotic genetic elevated affecting has the pyrimidine answer of aciduria, The monophosphate very of activity = synthase Correct synthesis. leave one or domains patient Deficiencies pyrimidines. the catalytic unable in to UMP synthesize both of synthase a to other Uridine, which nucleoside, it be pyrimidines. treatment UMP, salvaged the pyrimidine activities bypasses is a missing the useful converted and can be can all because to Although pyrimidine other to thymidine nucleoside, a converted cannot it be pyrimidines. is to and bases be purine are pyrimidines. adenine guanine, converted Hypoxanthine, and all cannot

2.5. aciduria distinguishing laboratory deficiency monophosphate would help caused an from caused transcarbamylase by in What orotic by test uridine synthase ornithine that deficiency?

Blood in cycle synthase to monophosphate the ornithine but be not urea affects elevated deficiency. be uridine transcarbamylase ammonia that level expected in would deficiency

Metabolic Glucagon and of of V Effects Integration UNIT 23 Insulin Metabolism

to please related visit thePoint. this additional ancillary For chapter, materials

I. OVERVIEW

muscle, major role play adipose, dominant Four and liver, metabolism: in a fuel tissues brain. fuels. specialized such sets that the of storage, contain each use, tissues for generation tissue specific These or unique enzymes, is of isolation form process of or which but produced in tissue in may do to substrates tissues a network another one These other by part not compounds rather function tissues. provide between of availability is the nervous by circulating mediated variation and by Communication in plasma system, by the of (Fig. tissues the hormones levels substrates, 23.1). metabolism catecholamines a to the role. and changing is response primarily in supporting the integration of peptide The in signals) substrate two playing energy controlled insulin in norepinephrine by hormones, the epinephrine levels (secreted of with blood), to response (secreted neural glucagon and actions hormones injury, levels example, circulating situations). in severe the available such energy energy famine, allow to Changes (for of store abundant or crises “fight-or-flight” survival the when to body and is food make these as stored during energy describes This metabolism. that structure, most the hormones two affect of and chapter profoundly metabolic effects secretion, the

II. INSULIN

Insulin of the embedded which in of is the hormone the a by clusters are pancreas portion produced peptide of endocrine cells cells Langerhans, islets (Fig. the of β 23.2). from [Note: for Latin the “Insulin” is island.] total of cells The pancreas. about the of only the 1%–2% up make islets tissues. the of most the fuels hormone important by use is coordinating Insulin anabolic, are synthesis Its protein. effects metabolic example, (TAG), triacylglycerol of for glycogen, and favoring,

A. Structure

are designated B, of in and chains, which composed acids) bonds amino polypeptide is two 51 acids amino (21 two (Fig. linked arranged together Insulin by disulfide A 23.3A). residues also between molecule the contains The intramolecular chain. acid of A amino bond an disulfide insulin peptide therapeutic determined made (see the the recombinant the for Insulin p. [Note: and by first which structure DNA first technology primary was was molecule 486).]

B. Synthesis

in are the intermediates and 23.3B of 23.4. Figures that processing occur of during transport insulin shown The synthesis and of connecting sequentially plus form ratio which preproinsulin the involves are C-peptide precursors, 1:1 Biosynthesis to proinsulin, a two cleaved the hormone in production and (see Fig. active inactive or 23.4). insulin C-peptide essential is for folding. proper [Note: The C-peptide and than insulin, Also, that production because the of a level longer is in good insulin half-life plasma of is indicator its secretion.] granules (see proper is the in that, cytosolic stored C.1. stimulus given Insulin by are exocytosis. below), released the of discussion synthesis of a secreted proteins.) p. 459 (See for a liver the insulin-degrading degraded the in lesser and, is kidneys. extent, is present in by Insulin to enzyme, which half-life plasma of ~6 has a minutes. Insulin rapid permits action of circulating This duration in hormone. of short the levels changes

C. Secretion regulation

of by and is regulated Secretion bloodborne hormones. fuels insulin

1. pancreatic coordinated with glucagon Insulin Increased is β secretion secretion: by by closely of cells cells α secretion (Fig. the the pancreatic 23.5). amounts glucagon such to kept use are glucose of released hepatic insulin equal of the relative normally glucose production of and rate that the regulated by The is tissues. peripheral 70 maintains blood 140 and between This glucose mg/dl. variety its is a surprising In to stimuli. the it responds coordinating cell that of role, view of not β secretion In increased insulin peptide gastrointestinal glucose, hormones. acids, amino and is particular, by

a.

primary leads stimulus a meal rise a glucose, to carbohydrate-rich Fig. in the insulin of (see Glucose: Ingestion for blood secretion 23.5). in β glucose-sensing important body. are the cells cells The most the 98). and IV; contain express Like β cells see glucokinase the (hexokinase p. liver, GLUT-2 transporters to in mg/dl, levels concentration. glucose glucose proportional blood phosphorylates the amounts At >45 glucose glucokinase glucose results of product. the direct Proportionality inhibition 6-phosphate, lack glucokinase its of by from and enzyme’s the blood the Additionally, between to concentration the glucose maximizes the (see of substrate sigmoidal in velocity 98) responsiveness relationship reaction p. changes level. below). leading blue 6-phosphate glucose secretion ATP, Metabolism (see generates to of box insulin

b.

levels arginine) (for insulin. that causes secretion glucose-stimulated in a plasma protein Ingestion acid the of of rise amino Amino transient example, acids: enhances a [Note: have effect.] Fatty acids similar c.

to of β also Gastrointestinal insulinotropic and increase peptide) (GLP-1) glucose. glucagonlike ([GIP] the peptide called hormones: peptides cells intestinal glucose-dependent inhibitory polypeptide peptide-1 sensitivity The gastric ingestion referred from as the are the causing levels are released food, intestine small insulin of incretins. They rise and, after in thus, to anticipatory an the a than the fact may greater induces action amount Their same for given glucose insulin much given orally (IV). account secretion of if that intravenously of

β through in mediated rise in blood insulin a Glucose-dependent (Ca2+) is calcium concentration the of release cell. into production Glucose β phosphorylated into is of with cells metabolized, ATP. and GLUT-2 taken subsequent by (K+) membrane, channels, Ca2+ of depolarization causing close, plasma of channels opening potassium Ca2+ and the of the into influx cell. voltage-gated ATP-sensitive Ca2+ cell. be to the vesicles insulin causes containing exocytosed from β secretion used oral diabetes, by 2 increase insulin K+ agents type treat ATP-sensitive Sulfonylureas, channels. to closing

2. of synthesis The preventing (for insulin and there release hypoglycemia. a is decreased of example, periods and infection, Decreased hypoxia, fuels dietary exercise), also stress scarcity vigorous and physiologic secretion: during when of thereby are in which adrenal from are then the nervous system by sympathetic made and tyrosine catecholamines mediated effects the and primarily (SNS) epinephrine, the These and norepinephrine secreted. medulla are is signals. Secretion by neural controlled largely (produced including have gluconeogenesis; energy-yielding effect (primarily glucose energy rapid 121) from epinephrine) tissue a p. p. The metabolism, liver from direct (FA) a by by of catecholamines glycogenolysis see fatty adipose acids lipolysis; see (produced or causing on the fuels, 189). mobilization and glucose-stimulated insulin. these biogenic addition, amines can normal the In override of release the SNS replaces the situations, over Thus, in as the glucose plasma β-cell largely secretion. controlling influence concentration emergency 23.6. of regulation secretion The is insulin Figure in summarized

D. Metabolic effects

the Insulin promotes as inhibits TAG, glycogen, protein of nutrients and storage their and mobilization.

1. adipose. its metabolism are insulin liver, tissues: prominent and promote of most on muscle, The in metabolism: glucose Effects storage effects and carbohydrate on three insulin In synthesis. liver glycogen and muscle, increases In increases the uptake and glucose adipose, insulin number see of glucose p. transporters muscle (GLUT-4; by increasing

cell the membrane. 97) in immediate blood IV of an glucose decrease level. causes insulin administration the Thus, in production gluconeogenesis. the glucose the insulin glycogenolysis the In through of inhibition liver, of decreases and just also insulin due effects [Note: in transcription.] as enzyme gene not are The enzyme alters activity of to in insofar but changes amount insulin 2. by significant rapidly lipase, in of tissue in the Effects FA adipose inhibiting metabolism: from release insulin degradation hormone-sensitive activity TAG of a A rise the enzyme of on key adipocytes. in lipid a causes reduction promoting hence, Insulin dephosphorylation enzyme of 190). and, the (see by acts the inactivation p. glycerol 188). for and substrate also of p. metabolism synthesis TAG the transport 3-phosphate into the increases glucose (see Insulin providing adipocytes, lipase, ([VLDL] circulating is and insulin for in p. the the gene which see chylomicrons providing lipoproteins adipose, Expression in glycerol. for FA very-low-density by of TAG 229), lipoprotein esterification degrades thereby increased to of liver. TAG the conversion to [Note: in the also glucose promotes Insulin The in are TAG VLDL.] secreted 3. protein Effects cells insulin both synthesis: (translation). entry tissues, amino synthesis acids In stimulates into the on protein of and most protein Insulin through for translation [Note: covalent factors initiation.] activation synthesis of stimulates required

Mechanism E.

liver, muscle, and in receptors of most the Insulin to including tissues, binds cell specific, high-affinity membrane adipose. first in leading a This biologic of is step ultimately reactions the (Fig. diverse actions of a to cascade array 23.7).

1.

synthesized disulfide receptor which subunits, into is The is are bonds then Insulin into (see assembled and linked tetramer insulin receptor: by cleaved Fig. a glycosylated β single as α a that and polypeptide 23.7). insulin-binding the contain extracellular subunits α site. The domain subunit spans each in hydrophobic membrane. the β plasma A by subunit activated of tyrosine β The insulin. a is is domain kinase, the cytosolic which as receptor As classified kinase insulin the receptor. a tyrosine is a result,

2.

Signal that insulin subunits. the induces the the to transmitted The transduction: receptor α subunits β conformational to of insulin changes are binding of of each β residues Fig. a on promotes (see This subunit specific rapid tyrosine autophosphorylation 23.7). responses, substrates including family proteins of a (IRS). Autophosphorylation of insulin phosphorylation a initiates receptor cell-signaling of cascade called identified IRS that distributions. structures At similar tissue but show four least have different been IRS growth. of interact cell (known as molecules signaling with Phosphorylated pathways other a proteins affect gene activating and number expression, specific metabolism, domains through SH2), that of receptor. actions insulin The by dephosphorylation the of terminated are

3.

in muscle as effects: and in the of tissues, Membrane increases some insulin adipose, presence such transport (Fig. Glucose 23.8). the movement pool from membrane. insulin-sensitive located Insulin a (GLUT-4) to vesicles promotes glucose transporters in cell intracellular of kinase to to result signaling 1. cascade the kinase 3-kinase), which IRS 3,4,5-trisphosphate (PIP2) form (phosphoinositide [Note: phospholipid is of Movement a and 4,5bisphosphate of binds leading to that the phosphoinositide-dependent activates and membrane an a the activates to in phosphorylation binds phosphatidylinositol (PIP3) GLUT-4 in resulting B), in activates kinase This turn, movement.] (or Akt kinase, protein (Fig. glucose tissues for insulin-insensitive In contrast, other have transport systems 23.9). require mucosa, and For and not cells erythrocytes, system, cornea tubules, insulin uptake. example, do for of hepatocytes, the renal glucose intestinal nervous

4.

regulation: followed insulin of of hormone–receptor internalization the is complex. Binding Receptor by lysosomes. is the cell, the in degraded inside insulin Once to receptors the The are but be surface. may most recycled degraded, cell the receptors, [Note: thereby Elevated surface insulin degradation levels promote of decreasing receptors. of number the of type This of one is downregulation.] 5.

The insulin actions. of of wide range Time binding provokes a course: seconds receptor. to is most of transport an immediate cardiac membrane increase binding cells glucose in insulin muscle into its The occurs and within adipocytes skeletal response that and in occur to of in states activity reflect in types enzymic minutes changes cell hours and phosphorylation the changes existing Insulin-induced proteins. many over carboxylase (CoA) acetyl as days. the such synthase, to requires amount kinase, coenzyme Insulin-induced A many enzymes, fatty pyruvate acid increase liver of hours and in (ACC), glucokinase, element–binding an gene changes increased sterol (mediated reflect 184) see transcription translation. protein-1c; These p. in by expression and regulatory through increase

III. GLUCAGON

α a hormone of peptide the Langerhans. by pancreatic is islets of cells secreted the Glucagon opposes counterregulatory along (the of cortisol, with growth (Fig. hormone of epinephrine, many insulin and hormones), Glucagon, the norepinephrine, actions 23.10). by glucagon and glucose to blood gluconeogenesis. levels activation glycogenolysis importantly, Most hepatic of maintain acts arranged composed acids 29 in polypeptide single amino is of a chain. Glucagon all glucagon sequence of amino date.] examined is same insulin, mammalian [Note: in species acid the to the Unlike insulin molecule glucagon those as a large is biosynthesis precursor similar synthesized selective to cleavages, converted (see through (preproglucagon) a described to is Glucagon series proteolytic for of Fig. that 23.3). In in intestinal different tissues, cells. example, in contrast GLP-1 different to preproglucagon L is insulin, products to for processed half-life. Like insulin, short a has glucagon

A. Increased secretion

responsive stimuli that a α is (Fig. potential cell The hypoglycemia variety signal to actual or of 23.11). glucose, blood by catecholamines. glucagon is and increased Specifically, secretion acids, low amino

1.

in blood glucagon glucose: A the primary glucose Low plasma is decrease stimulus for release. concentration prolonged hypoglycemia). for prevent discussion glucagon fast, During of (see overnight an hypoglycemia below IV levels a Section elevated or

2.

stimulate from (for the release acids: protein Amino example, arginine) glucagon. of a acids derived meal Amino containing insulin increased meal. The also protein as hypoglycemia secretion otherwise after that effectively glucagon a occurs would a that the occur of the prevents result

3.

both pancreas), the (from the levels adrenal Catecholamines: circulating norepinephrine (from of stimulate or of sympathetic medulla), glucagon. Elevated of epinephrine innervation release the elevated Thus, the circulating effect the on catecholamine of cell during can stress, periods of physiologic override the levels substrates. α the in concentration of elevated levels glucose, increased glucagon are these In situations, regardless blood use. of of anticipation glucose depressed. In are contrast, insulin levels

B. Decreased secretion

elevated glucose Glucagon decreased blood secretion insulin. by significantly is and by meal increased Both glucose carbohydrate-rich a substances ingestion following (see Fig. of are or 23.5). Figure secretion regulation is 23.11. The glucagon of summarized in

C. Metabolic effects

Glucagon is hormone maintenance of glucose that the levels. catabolic blood a promotes target primary the is Its liver.

1.

blood carbohydrate rise of on an The leads to glucagon glucose. in metabolism: immediate IV Effects administration degradation in the in an gluconeogenesis. results This from glycogen hepatic of increase and increase an liver

2.

protein Effects monophosphate of FA ACC of through metabolism: activated (AMP)– on subsequent p. primary synthesis glucagon lipid (see kinase metabolism effect phosphorylation on and of lipid inhibition is The by adenosine 184). inactivation decrease on p. β-oxidation removes resulting in The inhibition FA long-chain (see production malonyl CoA the 191). lipase phosphorylation kinase A) of activators by major the protein (via catecholamines. a also in role Glucagon are the adipocytes, plays hormone-sensitive lipolysis but in which acetyl and liver free synthesis. up in taken used CoA, body by ketone released oxidized are FA The is to

3.

on availability uptake in Glucagon Effects carbon skeletons of by for increases resulting metabolism: supplied gluconeogenesis. of muscle, the liver amino by increased protein acids amino of decreased. plasma consequence, As a acids levels are

D. Mechanism

receptors binds (GPCR) membrane hepatocytes. protein–coupled the to of G on cell Glucagon high-affinity bind The that GPCR distinct is the GPCR from for glucagon epinephrine. muscle.] skeletal [Note: found Glucagon on not are receptors activation the Glucagon in adenylyl of membrane results cyclase (Fig. binding plasma in 94). see p. 23.12; also phosphorylation cyclic rise in which, causes A or the activates other in This protein kinase increases cAMP-dependent a and (cAMP), enzymes proteins. of specific AMP turn, enzymic inhibition activation carbohydrate and involved metabolism. in enzymes regulatory in key of or of cascade This phosphorylation-mediated activities results the lipid increasing shown in 131. degradation p. a of Figure is glycogen such on cascade 11.9 example An in [Note: like affects transcription. Glucagon, gene insulin, phosphoenolpyruvate example, p. expression (see glucagon of induces For carboxykinase 122).]

IV. HYPOGLYCEMIA

and behavior, system a (CNS) 3) glucose Hypoglycemia ≤50 central 2) or 1) glucose within is minutes simultaneous following aberrant characterized nervous confusion, (Fig. coma; symptoms resolved being by level blood including symptoms, administration mg/dl; 23.13). requirement an absolute serve the fuel. as a glucose continuous a Hypoglycemia CNS for to because has medical metabolic of emergency supply bloodborne a is damage. dysfunction, Transient cerebral can whereas hypoglycemia cause prolonged brain causes hypoglycemia severe, overlapping multiple mechanisms body to has hypoglycemia. or it surprising correct the that is not Therefore, prevent decreased secretion of in changes The with most glucagon combating secretion. hormone insulin are hypoglycemia catecholamines, increased important and combined the

A. Symptoms

hypoglycemia can into be of symptoms two divided categories. The release by (primarily epinephrine) are hypoglycemia. in palpitation, tremor, hypothalamus symptoms, anxiety, response such autonomic) the and catecholamine as by mediated to (neurogenic, regulated sweating, Adrenergic glucose when Adrenergic symptoms typically blood abruptly. levels occur fall symptoms second is of neuroglycopenic. The hypoglycemic category speech, function, results delivery (neuroglycopenia) of brain coma, impairment impaired the confusion, causing headache, slurred glucose brain of in and The death. to seizures, often to blood often glucose, a Neuroglycopenic gradual result decline symptoms mg/dl. <50 in from levels trigger fails response. decline deprives The fuel the of adrenergic an to CNS but slow adequate glucose in

systems B. Glucoregulatory

by low that 1) hypoglycemia: overlapping receptors cells, activated glucose-regulating hypothalamus, in glucagon, concentrations which systems Humans 2) are and blood of glucose. respond have the α two the to abnormally release which pancreatic hormone secretion of catecholamines by hypothalamic the of growth pituitary can sympathetic (mediated both of glucoreceptors system) release autonomic and The the division (see Fig. the and hormone anterior by trigger the (ACTH) nervous adrenocorticotropic 23.13). p. secretion the cortex ACTH [Note: in cortisol synthesis increases (see adrenal and 239).] Glucagon, use. cortisol, the of glucose action hormone growth each sometimes the insulin and the counterregulatory on hormones are called opposes because catecholamines,

1.

the hormones blood acute, most levels. Glucagon glucose is counterregulatory Secretion and important these of regulation of epinephrine: short-term in stimulates gluconeogenesis. and hepatic glycogenolysis Glucagon and lipolysis. Epinephrine glycogenolysis promotes insulin and GLUT-4–mediated by tissues. secretion, glucose muscle of inhibits uptake thereby preventing It adipose deficient, when is late mellitus secretion p. hypoglycemia assumes Epinephrine 1 glucagon critical (see of 340). a diabetes stages for example, type the role in in of when secretion of epinephrine correction both deficient. glucagon hypoglycemia and or is The prevention fails the

2.

counterregulatory the important hormone: in less Cortisol and of glucose blood short-term concentrations. are growth These maintenance hormones play in do, glucose a role metabolism. They of long-term (transcriptional) the however, management

Types C.

related. insulin Hypoglycemia induced, postprandial 2) alcohol divided types: be called 4) four hypoglycemia), into (sometimes 1) reactive may hypoglycemia, 3) fasting and

1. with Hypoglycemia to those particularly insulin control who tight diabetes blood levels. glucose occurs treatment, achieve in receiving Insulin-induced hypoglycemia: striving patients are frequently of by is patients hypoglycemia Mild in fully treated of administration carbohydrate. conscious oral patients given intramuscularly or typically subcutaneously (Fig. glucagon are Unconscious 23.14).

2.

common of This second the form Postprandial is hypoglycemia. hypoglycemia: most meal, transient It caused adrenergic an is symptoms. following a with exaggerated hypoglycemia by release mild prompting insulin The fed. returns level to the glucose if is plasma even patient normal not The eats the meals patient rather that treatment than usual frequent meals. large usually is required small only the three

3.

present blood serious glucose more is to as a problem. Low Fasting rare fasting likely is hypoglycemia: during medical but of a or in production glycogenolysis gluconeogenesis. result glucose Fasting which hepatic hypoglycemia, rate from neuroglycopenic tends the to by reduction may symptoms, produce hepatocellular levels adrenal with in seen or low ethanol below). or have fasting in damage who patients 4. of (see glucose are large insufficiency individuals blood often Thus, consumed quantities hypoglycemia of the pancreatic tissues be peripheral increased of rare rate may fasting by glucose the insulin an because use Alternately, by result overproduction of tumors. of experience coma. untreated, lose hypoglycemia consciousness with may left convulsions a If fasting and patient and [Note: in result defects inborn metabolism, FA of errors example, Certain hypoglycemia.] fasting for oxidation, in 4.

Alcohol-related metabolized by (ethanol) reactions liver is (Fig. Alcohol in hypoglycemia: oxidation the two 23.15). zinc-containing is to first dehydrogenase. Ethanol acetaldehyde by alcohol converted oxidized acetate is Acetaldehyde by to aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH). subsequently is alcoholism. used a by disulfiram, is [Note: treatment of inhibited in drug chronic that ALDH the and resulting rise results flushing, in tachycardia, hyperventilation, nausea.] acetaldehyde The in are in dinucleotide (NADH) NAD+. in to transferred In nicotinamide resulting form to each reaction, adenine the increase oxidized the of an (NAD+), reduced ratio electrons of and malate. (OAA) abundance NADH the reduction pyruvate favors lactate to The of oxaloacetate to of in p. the and that are from Recall pyruvate glucose. synthesis of OAA substrates 118 NADH alternate ethanol-mediated be into diverted of the Thus, these resulting the in in to causes gluconeogenic decreased pathways, increase synthesis glucose. precursors This who stores can in glycogen. precipitate of individuals particularly liver their have hypoglycemia, depleted allows ketone of p. result may Decreased in be synthesis that [Note: (see acetyl body to the to ketoacidosis.] in in result ketosis alcoholic diverted liver and 195) availability CoA OAA can the with combativeness. alcohol impaired many agitation, behaviors of Hypoglycemia judgment, and intoxication, produce as associated can such consumption of who fasted behavioral alcohol hypoglycemia may can alcohol. produce vulnerable individuals (such are exercise) contribute have or strenuous in to that in engaged as the effects those Therefore, prolonged, insulin are p. alcohol patients that also generally in those many hypoglycemia of increased an protocol hours Because the about using consumption after occurs 340) the increase counseled ingestion. intensive risk can treatment (see for risk in alcohol hypoglycemia insulin,

resulting hepatic of from metabolism Inhibition B. ethanol. gluconeogenesis of nicotinamide = dinucleotide. adenine NAD(H)

result of coupled liver TAG consumption in or with also alcoholic VLDL. can formation because hepatic Chronic alcohol of fatty release impaired increased synthesis of NAD+/NADH the ratio glyceraldehyde in 101). 3-phosphate is the increased see (decreased low availability ratio; of inhibited of result a and because NAD+/NADH as dehydrogenase occurs FA the and This oxidation a because decreased lipogenesis of of by p. increased catabolism) (the of fall FA alcohol to and alcoholic progress then alcoholic fatty cirrhosis. continued to With can alcoholic hepatitis consumption, liver first

V. CHAPTER SUMMARY

the The the opposing particularly by is integration energy epinephrine of controlled insulin and actions metabolism primarily catecholamines, of glucagon and (Fig. 23.16). is in to energy food stored of (for these hormones when survival or example, physiologic times of available abundant the crises, during as body levels store stress make in circulating Changes energy allow the to such famine). Insulin of the of a islets the β the peptide Langerhans hormone cells is produced of by pancreas. It A and B of chains. disulfide-linked consists glucose in A important insulin is most rise blood secretion. the signal for trauma, response The to catecholamines, secreted stress, extreme inhibit exercise, in secretion. insulin or anabolic and the muscle an tissue) and (GLUT-4) is glucose glucose of adipose synthesis hormone. in uptake It and transporters (by protein, increases Insulin glycogen, triacylglycerol: binding receptor. to membrane tyrosine its These are by mediated actions kinase responses, called of cascade receptor of substrate proteins. family a of proteins phosphorylation Binding cell-signaling a including initiates insulin precursors formation synthesis inactive peptide produced are (both insulin active to is by glucagon a monomeric pancreatic involve and hormone that of α islets form of the cells the the Glucagon cleaved hormones). with hormone actions insulin. the norepinephrine, along opposes Glucagon, (the of many cortisol, of growth counterregulatory and epinephrine, hormones), potential hypoglycemia. of during acts maintain blood periods Glucagon to glucose amino and is oxidation, gluconeogenesis, a catabolic uptake: acid increases It ketogenesis, fatty acid glycogenolysis, Glucagon hormone. by the acids, Glucagon glucose, catecholamines. secretion amino low blood is stimulated and elevated by by secretion insulin. is blood glucose inhibited and Its high-affinity protein–coupled to membrane cell the on G hepatocytes. of binds Glucagon receptors adenylyl monophosphate Binding cyclic second messenger results of cyclase, activation the (cAMP). produces which in the adenosine Subsequent involved enzymes protein in of in kinase the A or activation regulatory carbohydrate lipid key of cAMPdependent inhibition and phosphorylation-mediated metabolism. results activation affect Both insulin glucagon and gene transcription.

adrenergic is characterized are resolved low neuroglycopenic that glucose administration by accompanied and symptoms blood the by rapidly Hypoglycemia of glucose. by epinephrine. of and hypoglycemia postprandial, result glucagon and fasting in release Insulin-induced, accompanies nicotinamide adenine individuals to in dinucleotide ethanol rise inhibits The with hypoglycemia that (NADH) leading metabolism gluconeogenesis, depleted stores. in Alcohol the for patients hypoglycemia in insulin. increases also risk consumption using fatty consumption Chronic can liver alcohol cause disease.

ONE the Choose best answer.

3.1. glucagon? statements not Which the following but insulin for for of is true

A. pancreatic peptide secreted cells. is a It by hormone

B. are found binding cell of membrane Its liver mediated by receptor the actions cells. a to on

C. gene Its effects in include expression. alterations

decreased catecholamines. secretion by is the Its D.

increased amino E. is secretion acids. Its by

involves gets cleaved Its a yield functional synthesis nonfunctional to precursor molecule. that F. a

stimulated by inhibited them. cells of Correct by Secretion whereas D. cells insulin the the α is is β secretion by answer = glucagon by pancreatic catecholamines, statements glucagon. other are of and for true insulin All the both

3.2. which transport following of tissues dependent? glucose the insulin the one In is into cell

Adipose A.

B. Brain

Liver C.

Red D. cells blood

= Correct A. answer dependent (GLUT-4) transporter insulin. is The adipose (and on in muscle) glucose tissue GLUT-4 Insulin of the cell vesicles from movement membrane. in results to intracellular are other in always insulin the the membrane. GLUT on located they tissues that of The independent are contain because list cell

3.3. weakness is 39-year-old of woman emergency and A to brought complaining dizziness. the room that weekly early morning and do errands recalls to breakfast. getting her had up skipped She for of coffee lunch drank cup a She eat day. to the had nothing during and met 8 friends with p.m. She at

and a drinks. had few weak the soon As evening was became dizzy to and taken hospital. and she the progressed, Laboratory tests = blood to 70–99). (normal glucose revealed 45 be mg/dl her juice She given and felt immediately orange better. was The biochemical hypoglycemia an increase basis is alcohol-induced of in: her

acid A. oxidation. fatty

reduced the of of dinucleotide. the ratio oxidized forms nicotinamide B. adenine

oxaloacetate C. and pyruvate.

A of in D. acetyl coenzyme use acid synthesis. fatty

Correct answer B. = by dinucleotide to of dehydrogenases of nicotinamide oxidation by NADH. acetate adenine reduction ethanol accompanied the to (NAD+) is The rise and ratio (OAA) substrates resulting The pyruvate availability decreasing to lactate the and in in to hypoglycemia. malate, of gluconeogenesis NADH/NAD+ for oxaloacetate the shifts in also reduces needed The for NAD+ acid NADH rise oxidation. fatty the (FA) coenzyme any to decrease ketogenesis. produced A The shunts acetyl OAA in that their results fatty in into in triacylglycerol reesterification result that liver. FA can of inhibition degradation Note the

3.4. an rare patient cells. tumor, a the from are primarily which cells with A is insulinoma, pancreatic derived β of neuroendocrine diagnosed insulinoma? of logically Which would the characteristic an of be following

A. weight body Decreased

B. blood peptide in the connecting Decreased

Decreased glucose blood in the C.

in Decreased insulin blood D. the

insulin C. therefore, production C-peptide) = answer Insulinomas of tumor constant Correct characterized (and, of cells. by the are by such adipose drives insulin-dependent and increase that resulting glucose The uptake in glucose transporters, by muscle in insulin tissues have as hypoglycemia. However, suppress secretion. hypoglycemia production and insufficient is to insulin the characterized are and insulin increased blood blood then, glucose. Insulinomas, by decreased results Insulin, an hormone, weight anabolic gain. as in

3.5. relative a would rarer Question be the derived even an the cells tumor with to patient expected pancreas, in of patient to from α presentation In the differ how the 23.4? glucagon-secreting

pancreas the would of tumor in glucagon-secreting hypoglycemia. not A (glucagonoma) result hyperglycemia, constant acids substrates. amino result glucagon from would constant as The proteolysis in using production of gluconeogenesis, This weight. of loss results body in

24 Feed–Fast Cycle The

after state normal a of meal. absorptive (well-fed) 2-to The ingestion the is period 4-hour 228). triacylglycerols components of p. primarily occur, mucosal the as cells synthesized secreted by acids, the chylomicrons this (TAG) and During transient amino and interval, intestinal glucose, increases latter (see plasma in pancreas the and insulin of with responds glucagon. Islet secretion increased tissue of level of the elevated of to secretion glucose decreased ratio The stores make fuel ready characterized of substrates and state increased the period protein. availability and increased the as circulating as anabolic well glycogen by of synthesis elevated an insulin/glucagon of synthesis replenish to absorptive TAG body adipose response muscle, the the period, dominated metabolic in use metabolism virtually is liver, brain. and of During all the tissues as tissue, a this fuel, absorptive alterations of skeletal by glucose and tissues. “organ this an introduced is metabolites map” of that chapter, traces between the movement In is The clinically of vision goal create useful to an and metabolism. whole-body expanded

II. MECHANISMS REGULATORY

pathways of four regulation of intermediates transcription. synthesis, flow 4) modification is enzyme mechanisms: of enzymes, of substrates, controlled metabolic enzymes, through regulation of allosteric 2) 1) the The induction-repression covalent availability primarily 3) through and of by a this may (Fig. seem operates first on Although redundant, scheme different at mechanism timescale each to and physiologic to the a allows situations. adapt of wide variety 24.1) body are glycogen, mechanisms In insure and that captured available nutrients the protein. these absorptive as state, regulatory TAG,

Allosteric A. effectors

involve changes Allosteric reactions. usually rate-determining in see p. is by For a stimulated ([PFK-1] 99). of phosphofructokinase-1 meal an glycolysis example, activator the fructose an following increase liver in 2,6-bisphosphate, allosteric by fructose gluconeogenesis (see In 122). 2,6-bisphosphate, is allosteric fructose an p. 1,6-bisphosphatase inhibitor of decreased contrast,

modification B. Covalent

many or cyclic protein kinases, adenosine addition adenosine phosphatases) removal kinase protein from by kinase [AMPK]) residues [PKA] A of and serine, as the ]–dependent phosphate (via specific enzymes (via such protein. groups The threonine, monophosphate–activated regulated the tyrosine of activity monophosphate is [cAMP or of (Fig. In absorptive most dephosphorylated form state, and the are are enzymes in the regulated of covalently active the 24.2). phosphorylase exceptions glycogen p. 132), (see and lipase glycogen inactive form. (see p. 132), are (see are in which their phosphorylase dephosphorylated 189), p. hormone-sensitive kinase Three (HSL) (PFK-2) domain phosphofructokinase-2 is inactive when p. In the bifunctional the protein dephosphorylated of (see is [Note: phosphatase the liver, 100).]

and Induction C. of enzyme synthesis repression

activity enzyme decreased the enzyme number existing of the enzyme (induction of) of) leads to of in rather Increased changes changing molecules. synthesis (repression or molecules, than Enzymes subject conditions. specific needed that to often are are those physiologic synthesis under regulation For of coenzyme synthase enzymes, in well-fed in result levels such state, increase (ACC) carboxylase insulin anabolic 313), and example, the (CoA) synthesis elevated as acetyl the an A fatty metabolism. acid involved (see in in key p. 314). p. expression of (PEPCK) induces (see state, the glucagon fasted gluconeogenesis of carboxykinase In phosphoenolpyruvate gene transcription.] Both hormones affect [Note:

III. LIVER: DISTRIBUTION NUTRIENT CENTER

passes nutrients portal is uniquely dietary circulation. entry general and distribute venous situated of the The drainage because the the gut hepatic to the and pancreas vein into before process liver through liver the in pancreas. the of containing a insulin levels by nutrients blood meal, is elevated after bathed absorbed secreted and Thus, carbohydrates, amino takes the most and the lipids, up liver absorptive acids. period, During or other These metabolized, to stored, tissues. are nutrients routed then availability out potentially peripheral the nutrients for broad fluctuations In the tissues. in way, liver this of smooths the

Carbohydrate A. metabolism

a than normally is glucose-using glucose-producing rather liver organ. The a a roughly retaining presented of becomes carbohydrate, the a by containing system. g net However, every the consumer, liver of portal 100 g glucose 60 after meal uptake the use increased increased by This glucose hepatocytes. reflects affinity glucose low therefore, high glucose (GLUT (high only a for and, Km takes 2) when [Michaelis constant]) is (see up p. glucose insulin-independent 98). has Their glucose transporter blood

the upregulated Processes that include when glucose increased is are hepatic following.

1. 6-phosphate to levels to glucose of phosphorylation: a Increased within (as elevated hepatocyte glucose of allow extracellular glucose glucose (Fig. the The phosphorylate result levels) glucokinase elevated ). 24.3, a to is has Km not sigmoidal curve has Glucokinase (see subject high and inhibition, p. [Note: a reaction direct for product glucose, 98).] 2.

the effector glucose 6-phosphate, is of (see allosteric favored glucose increased by conversion Increased glycogen to positive Fig. activation glycogen dephosphorylation of both 6-phosphate synthase, by by and availability of glycogenesis: The its 24.3, ).

3.

in glucose 145). with p. use the availability The stimulates phosphate combined activity: pentose phosphate Increased adenine of pathway phosphate the (see nicotinamide 6-phosphate, active pentose pathway of (NADPH) lipogenesis, increased dinucleotide hepatic the Fig. 5%–10% glucose typically (see This the metabolized liver for pathway accounts of by 24.3, ).

4.

significant the glycolysis the liver, glycolysis: carbohydrate-rich during In Increased a meal. only is period following absorptive results of to pyruvate by stimulated the elevated glucose glucokinase, amounts is of PFK-1, in the glycolysis: and increased ([PK] pyruvate conversion The enzymes p. that 105). of ratio see kinase insulin/glucagon regulated 2,6bisphosphate Additionally, allosterically generated (dephosphorylated) kinase fructose active of by PFK-2. by domain activated the is bifunctional PFK-1 is active. dephosphorylated PK and acetyl is inhibits CoA, pyruvate because converts pyruvate dehydrogenase (dephosphorylated) which Pyruvate (PDH), active to

Fig. (see PDH kinase 24.3, ). (FA) acid synthesis acetyl oxidized energy is in or cycle. for is CoA The fatty a either acid substrate used the tricarboxylic as (TCA) for Fig. (See glucose role 6-phosphate.) the 24.4 of for central 5. being (pathways being liver glucose glycolysis glucose that the in stimulated generate are and glycogenesis glucose) the and state, storage) gluconeogenesis promote (pathways in inhibited. glycogenolysis are production: While that Decreased absorptive which 119). its first of because of low the allosteric (PC), gluconeogenesis, acetyl in levels activator largely (see catalyzes step carboxylase p. Pyruvate is inactive CoA, used [Note: acetyl is CoA The FA for synthesis.] being ratio as 1,6-bisphosphatase enzymes Fig. inactivation insulin/glucagon of The such (see fructose high other gluconeogenic also favors 100). p. 8.17, glycogen phosphorylase inhibited by is kinase. and phosphorylase dephosphorylation of Glycogenolysis glucose blood decreased uptake and prevents The of the absorptive hyperglycemia.] period in production [Note: increased

B. 1. Fat metabolism primary of Fig. novo FA acid site synthesis: the is de of (see fatty Increased synthesis Liver ). 24.3, the by by and by period and NADPH phosphate synthesis, the the process, activator, amino substrates and cytosolic activation of CoA (from the ACC, allosteric of metabolism FA acid favored acetyl of presence its a and (from glucose both by glucose in metabolism) citrate. availability is pathway) in dephosphorylation pentose absorptive the favors AMPK Inactivity dephosphorylation.] [Note: of formation (see synthesis 183). rate-limiting ACC catalyzes of from the p. FA the CoA malonyl for reaction acetyl CoA, of carnitine palmitoyltransferase-I Malonyl CoA inhibits (see oxidation [Note: FA 191). (CPT-I) p. Thus, degradation.] indirectly inhibits activates directly FA and FA synthesis citrate a.

Pyruvate enters mitochondria decarboxylated by cytosolic glycolysis PDH. Source acetyl A: from aerobic coenzyme of and is TCA citrate combined cycle. (OAA) to acetyl of CoA via The product form the with is citrate synthase oxaloacetate of ATP) inhibition enters of isocitrate cytosol. Citrate (as the result the the and dehydrogenase a mitochondria by leaves ACC (induced is ATP cleaved of citrate plus insulin), CoA by lyase Citrate OAA. by acetyl the substrate producing

b.

is to NADPH source malic formed Additional by is is reduced enzyme pyruvate (see OAA The malate, of Fig. as NADPH: oxidatively decarboxylated to which 187). 16.11 p. on

2. are 178). chylomicron from acyl both blood novo TAG the from because component de removed remnants synthesis synthesis of favored hydrolysis available the triacylglycerol synthesis: and (see fatty by from hepatocytes TAG of Increased is p. CoA 3-phosphate, 189). synthesis, (see provided the for backbone TAG Glycerol is p. glycolysis by adipose very-low-density into and muscle liver into tissues for by the particularly (VLDL) particles (see blood these that Fig. lipoprotein extrahepatic packages tissues, secreted are TAG use endogenous The 24.3, ).

C. acid Amino 1. metabolism

In nitrogen-containing are the of liver more the Increased present amino proteins acids acid synthesis amino can the period, molecules. degradation: and than other absorptive use in are in CoA, liver released resulting other tissues but synthesis TCA amino protein either to to surplus the the with cycle deaminated, being The intermediates. skeletons or not by for acids into stored use are degraded or carbon blood the acetyl pyruvate, synthesis metabolites (see used be These for FA in oxidized or energy can Fig. ). 24.3, amino has and to liver (BCAA) degradation isoleucine, valine. The initiate capacity of acids branched-chain limited the leucine, essentially and through unchanged They (see metabolized 266). liver are p. muscle pass in the

2.

synthesis: for TAG that reserves. The energy same maintains does Increased store protein or body way not the in glycogen it protein Fig. of transient proteins absorptive in in However, resulting synthesis any of occur the fasting may been that replacement of hepatic have previous in period does (see the state, increase the degraded during a proteins ). 24.3,

IV. ADIPOSE TISSUE: ENERGY STORAGE DEPOT

is molecules. Adipose to the to second in liver ability fuel tissue only its distribute total man, ~14 as (WAT) much muscle the In 70-kg kg, half adipose weighs white about tissue as a mass. or can of by the each occupied anhydrous, entire TAG a dense WAT Nearly of calorically (Fig. adipocyte droplet in volume be 24.5).

1. metabolism A. Carbohydrate glucose to via absorptive influx are surface (Fig. elevated in recruited Increased glucose GLUT-4 the into insulin cell of Circulating vesicles insulin-sensitive transport: levels an from adipocytes state, intracellular in the resulting ). 24.6, The hexokinase. phosphorylated is by glucose

2.

of The in availability glucose increased Fig. an intracellular of (see rate enhanced results Increased glycolysis glycolysis: 24.6, ). (see TAG function a synthesis glycolysis 3phosphate by serves 188). glycerol adipose tissue, p. supplying In synthetic for tissue glycerol [Note: Adipose kinase.] lacks 3.

by thereby pentose Fig. which Adipose pentose the producing p. pathway means glucose and is FA Increased for phosphate 186 (see essential of pathway, can synthesis NADPH, tissue activity: metabolize phosphate ). 24.6, not refeeding FA a novo humans, except when is individual de tissue, in fasted source adipose a in synthesis of major (see Fig. However, previously 24.6, ).

B. Fat metabolism

the in the are VLDL TAG added out FA sent Fig. to and sent of by lipid-containing endogenous the chylomicrons adipocytes (dietary) liver of meal degradation exogenous of of the TAG the after in (see TAG stores Most out provided consumption by a intestine by 24.6, ). 228). released capillary the tissues, of and (LPL), the attached an in by lipase are extracellular lipoproteins (see p. FA to walls cells The muscle from adipose many endothelial particularly enzyme lipoprotein insulin. is In upregulated LPL tissue, by adipose (see TAG Thus, of fed state, elevated favor the and glucose of insulin storage levels in Fig. ), are the which by supplied 24.6, all glucose. of carbons lipolysis insulin favors (see Elevated of dephosphorylated the [Note: state.] (inactive) form inhibiting p. the 189), HSL thereby well-fed in

SKELETAL V. MUSCLE RESTING

it fuel. individuals of as amino weight, the bodies accounts and acids, and can mass FA, healthy ketone in muscle Skeletal ~40% use for of body glucose, up GLUT-4 state, glucose glycogen and acids (for synthesis) amino energy (for takes In the protein and well-fed muscle synthesis). energy and via there regulation of PFK-2 is liver, contrast no covalent in muscle. In skeletal to 100). by the domain is epinephrine-mediated kinase the isozyme, cardiac However, phosphorylation (see p. activated in

contraction. Skeletal in accompanies being to changes for demand unique substantial to able respond is the in muscle ATP that exercise, of consumption body, during to whereas of is for At it the accounts the muscle (O2) responsible ~25% oxygen up 90%. vigorous rest, for skeletal is periods This of anaerobic potential oxidative for transient despite its tissue. muscle, that underscores an the glycolysis, fact

1. Carbohydrate A. metabolism an insulin transport: glucose by transport carbohydrate-rich (myocytes) Fig. The increase in after meal in increase glucose into cells to transient GLUT-4 muscle (see and and plasma leads glucose a Increased 97 p. ), blood 24.7, reducing glucose. thereby hexokinase is of energy and meet metabolized 6-phosphate to the myocytes. Glucose glucose phosphorylated to by needs

2. result have as stores been of exercise 126 increased particularly Fig. the glucose Increased favor a glycogen if and 6-phosphate of (see and synthesis, availability glycogen The p. ratio insulin/glucagon glycogenesis: depleted 24.7, ).

B. Fat metabolism

are (see VLDL and chylomicrons the of FA action released LPL from pp. by and 228 231). of for primary source is a of the in glucose state, fuel which resting are as during secondary well-fed energy. However, muscle the importance FA

metabolism 1. Amino acid C.

protein absorptive (see occurs of Increased containing in synthesis An period amino Fig. in protein and meal increase synthesis: acid a protein the uptake after ingestion ). and 24.7, replaces This previous protein meal. degraded synthesis since the

2.

acid BCAA site contains for Muscle because degradation p. principal it the of is the 266). transaminase amino branched-chain (see the required uptake: Increased for muscle, synthesis metabolism liver are Fig. (see where used protein and the by are they dietary escape BCAA taken The up by as sources. and energy ) 24.7,

VI. BRAIN

consistent O2 20% rest. a of at body the basal for only Although weight, of 2% contributing the adult the consumption brain of accounts the to its vital the functioning to fuel of body, is the the proper priority organs given is needs. special of brain all Because cross barrier line blood the (the energy, substrates provide vessels that brain able cells blood–brain the to in To the [BBB]). must be endothelial as ~140 the fuel state, In and fed a insulin exclusively g/day completely is independent), oxidizing to the of the (GLUT-1 water. glucose carbon BBB dioxide brain uses the it availability completely brain stores significant glucose is (Fig. contains no glycogen, the of blood Because on of dependent 24.8, ). fasted p. function blood is levels is cerebral mg/dl 70–99 (see fall glucose <50 impaired to [Note: blood If (normal mg/dl), glucose 315).] that stores unclear. and contribution little circulating the also TAG, to for the of energy brain in FA are lacks production make blood significant reasons The characteristic 24.9. exchanges summarized intertissue period in Figure of the absorptive The are

VII. STATE FASTED OF OVERVIEW THE

absorptive no Fasting after period. ingested the food if begins is individual from desire or which It clinical trauma, to an lose obtain cannot eat rapidly, weight of or situations an result example, may because the in inability to burns). surgery, food, cancer, (for in secretion amino plasma levels epinephrine, a secretion. TAG glucose, insulin of and glucagon, In and cortisol fall, of triggering and an acids, the food, decline absence in increase a period by deprivation insulin/counterregulatory availability ratio catabolic protein. make and TAG, and decreased substrates the period circulating of decreased postabsorptive of hormone glycogen, of The nutrient the degradation characterized that other in red plasma to adipose muscle, sustain 2) the supply brain, to other glucose to into motion and the of and substrates liver, of skeletal the the by FA metabolism an protein. to tissues need tissues cells, among glucose-requiring maintain sets 1) to tissue, is TAG mobilize blood ketone release body and bodies by energy liver priorities: synthesis and the adequate for the WAT in This spare from and brain energy two guided of need exchange levels result, body glucose narrow within increase. a maintained in fasting, a while blood ketone FA range and levels levels As are and substrates as glycerol) glucose the be pyruvate, available.] that requires [Note: gluconeogenesis alanine, for Maintaining (such

A. stores Fuel

of metabolic fast Figure the 70-kg are a fuels beginning man 24.10. normal available at in shown in a The glycogen. available caloric compared the in stores TAG the contained Observe in form those enormous with of is example, structural protein each unrelated a metabolism component of an to source, enzyme). function the as Although as a (for body energy also energy an protein has listed [Note: or as about fatally can functions.] vital third one without for be body’s of energy compromising only Therefore, used the protein production

Enzymic B. changes

pathways 4) enzymes, enzyme of of flow well-fed of the (as state), modification of regulation covalent mechanisms: the and is the 3) allosteric induction-repression of In the intermediates controlled 1) substrates, 2) availability energy metabolism of by in through synthesis. fasting four enzymes, observed state The those for are (see the opposite in Fig. described metabolic fasting absorptive changes generally 24.9). covalent regulated are active by dephosphorylated most example, are modification the state. fasted the in of the state, enzymes For although well-fed inactive in and they and phosphorylated (see glycogen p. are are and kinase p. their in phosphorylase (see glycogen 132), states. which p. exceptions active 132), Three (see 189), phosphorylase phosphorylated HSL tissues, liver, provided as and proteolysis with glucose acids of from In diet glycogenolysis in the stores tissue, of are substrates with the release not such amino by muscle. with but FA and/or from and from TAG adipose fasting, of release are glycerol available breakdown release the lipolysis of from Recognition the of those understanding the fasting state are changes the helpful the is flow reciprocal that in metabolism. and fed of ebb in in

VIII. LIVER FASTING IN

other by role synthesis glucose-requiring tissues use is and maintenance gluconeogenesis) glycogenolysis of of the glucose of (from through of The blood bodies fasting the and distribution tissues. the in production primary liver glucose and for for ketone Therefore, distinguished metabolism is (or extrahepatic) metabolism. peripheral from hepatic

A. Carbohydrate metabolism

metabolism gluconeogenesis glycogen the then The of uses tissues first the to sustain glucose-requiring fasted state. blood in and maintain and liver degradation glucose other energy to brain levels glycogenolysis (see both the the [Note: glucose production glucose-6-phosphatase the and that liver Recall of from of gluconeogenesis presence allows Fig. from free in 24.4).] 1. Increased shows ingestion glucose Figure g of glucose. the after 100 glycogenolysis: 24.11 blood sources of of glucose. ingested is glucose the blood the absorptive source brief During major period, of declined hours secretion of later, of sufficiently Several levels insulin. blood and to have glucose cause glucagon increased decreased secretion glucagon/insulin g contain activates) phosphorylase of kinase mobilization phosphorylates (and that a glycogen ratio causes activation) p. glycogen stores in phosphorylase (which increased liver ~80 phosphorylation state) rapid of of glycogen (and 132). The PKA-mediated the of glycogen (see because fed transient response is is a fasting. Figure liver 24 to early hepatic because exhausted glycogen glycogenolysis that by fasting, of hours shows 24.11 24.12, as overall shows of degradation fasting. part the of , metabolic liver during the Figure response glycogen of Phosphorylation synthase simultaneously inhibits glycogenesis.] glycogen [Note:

explanation gluconeogenesis.] for See B.2 decline the Section an in of 2. Fig. short-and synthesis (see hepatic fasting gluconeogenesis: its of circulation during and the Increased are long-term release The functions vital into glucose 24.12, ). acids tissue. from amino from carbon skeletons and glycerol for lactate adipose gluconeogenesis from and are glucogenic muscle The primarily derived glucagon 2,6-bisphosphate; see Fig. its by after active availability decreased (see and (see stores p. and 4–6 begins meal (because fructose Gluconeogenesis, 121) liver by of inhibitor PEPCK as of last by 1,6-bisphosphatase 122), favored fully p. are activation glycogen of depleted fructose becomes induction the of of hours 24.11). The PFK-1 decrease inhibits fructose at glycolysis simultaneously in p. [Note: (see 2,6-bisphosphate 99).]

B. Fat 1. metabolism energy source fasted fatty Increased in acid tissue of state obtained the The FA hepatic tissue TAG of adipose major (see in the in Fig. is oxidation: oxidation from hydrolysis 24.12, ). because ACC p. brake in of β-oxidation 191). AMPK by of CPT-I, phosphorylation the The (see to CoA occur removes allowing (inactivation) fall on malonyl and flavin dinucleotide NADH, acetyl adenine oxidation FA generates (FADH2), CoA.

and inhibits OAA the cycle TCA malate. to The shifts NADH This acetyl ketogenesis. CoA being for in available results PDH, use Fig. of activator CoA The and acetyl PC an also favoring gluconeogenesis (see of inhibitor of thereby is an allosteric allosteric pyruvate in 10.9, p. 122). because CoA as in is [Note: PDH cannot a Acetyl substrate be reaction used the irreversible.] part for gluconeogenesis, with of of the PEPCK by reactions PC NADH coupled phosphorylation the Oxidation energy FADH2 supplies and oxidative and gluconeogenesis. required

2. unique primarily 197). being use the thiophorase tissues (see as liver release ketogenesis: peripheral synthesize liver is also The for liver lacks by and fuel acetoacetate, not itself by Increased 3-hydroxybutyrate because but to ketone p. in able but bodies, which starts Ketogenesis, of fasting the during (Fig. days first TCA 24.13), exceeds of CoA oxidation when FA oxidative capacity the from the cycle. concentration the is of favored acetyl continued CoA, Ketogenesis for availability [Note: oxidation.] its FA insuring releases enough. ketone of be because their circulating important can by the water-soluble availability including is high The bodies they for blood most in once brain, fasting level tissues, used is fuel to body from ~50 in concentration µM Ketone ~6 in blood increases fasting. mM preserving carbon protein gluconeogenesis essential Fig. (see skeletons, thus for acid amino This the from need reduces 24.11). in Ketogenesis part . to overall is shown Figure the 24.12, as fasting hepatic of response cause concentrations, can Ketone [Note: high acids bodies ketoacidosis.] organic present when at and, are

IX.

A.

low and Glucose metabolism adipocyte of decreased by of its insulin. the circulating into are GLUT-4 insulin-sensitive because transport subsequent levels This results in decreased synthesis. TAG

B. metabolism Fat 1.

and and The (TAG) the enhanced hydrolysis of activation Increased are HSL subsequent by elevated fat (see phosphorylation p. catecholamines of stored epinephrine. norepinephrine fat degradation: PKA-mediated 189) and important These adrenal secreted nerve endings tissue of from HSL sympathetic are which adipose are medulla, from in the (Fig. the activators physiologically hormones, and/or ). 24.14,

2.

into Increased (see of primarily fatty are adipocytes Fig. release: TAG FA blood from the stored obtained released acid hydrolysis in 24.14, ). of transported albumin, to to for tissues fuel. Bound as they variety are use a degradation kinase. The produced as TAG glycerol gluconeogenic a liver, by is the precursor from which contains used glycerol thereby be the can for which the also enter adipocyte. FA can [Note: TCA producing energy CoA, cycle, oxidized to acetyl They be generating 190), TAG to FA see glyceroneogenesis, reducing can and p. concentration.] also reesterified glycerol 3-phosphate (from plasma 3.

low. of activity adipose acid is In fasting, tissue Decreased fatty LPL uptake: lipoproteins of Consequently, less to circulating TAG tissue in available muscle. adipose to FA are than

X. RESTING FASTING IN SKELETAL MUSCLE

its in fuel muscle switches to FA source from Resting fasting. major glucose as creatine exercising stores. its contrast, [Note: By muscle uses glycogen phosphate initially and 118). by glycogenolysis p. glycolysis converted anaerobic 6-phosphate (see exercise, intense During to glucose is from lactate by (Cori cycle; 118). The gluconeogenesis the see is for used lactate liver p. source. energy reserves are FA by adipose become depleted, dominant the these tissue glycogen free degradation TAG provided of the As in that allowing and The of oxidation AMPK decreasing rise in inactivates CoA FA (see the activates malonyl isozyme and phosphorylates AMP p. ACC, contraction-based muscle 183).]

glucose and because low. metabolism A. are p. levels metabolism are decreased 97) Carbohydrate circulating subsequent insulin adipose. and unavailable hepatic to is muscle the from gluconeogenesis glucose Therefore,

metabolism B. Lipid

ketone the and bodies uses fuels fasting, tissue (Fig. liver FA muscle in Early from from adipose as ). 24.15, and the brain) exclusively. and use FA its for prolonged (thus bodies them of sparing ketone almost oxidizes In decreases fasting, muscle which activation liver PDH acetyl p. and for gluconeogenesis of the and (by The kinase) CoA cycle; alanine by [Note: transaminated PDH indirectly pyruvate, inhibits to from see (glucose–alanine spares oxidation is FA used 253).]

Protein metabolism C.

breakdown enzymes), is providing by are the of muscle gluconeogenesis the protein fasting, acids (see first there days of glycolytic for a Fig. liver amino (for During that example, few used rapid 24.15, ). have initiated Because rise receptors, does glucagon not glucocorticoids. in proteolysis by a muscle is by insulin in and a muscle fall sustained [Note: the most acids are quantitatively muscle. amino glucogenic important Alanine from released glutamine and They are p. by 267). produced catabolism BCAA (see the of The which a is send alanine hepatic by enterocytes, example, out is used gluconeogenesis that as in (glucose–alanine used fuel cycle)]. for glutamine muscle the In the glucose the proteolysis decline a which ketone need for a as fasting, fuel has a for of brain, in the begun paralleling as rate energy. using of of decreases, week source second bodies

XI. FASTING IN BRAIN

only During of fasting, the use the to as (Fig. early brain days continues fuel a glucose 24.16, ). as from by hepatic and maintained Blood such is glucogenic lipolysis. from proteolysis acids glucose from glycerol gluconeogenesis precursors, amino (beyond In Fig. prolonged bodies (see 2–3 plasma ketone fasting weeks), as Figs. the primary levels 24.12) brain for fuel and reach significantly the replace glucose elevated (see and 24.16, 24.17). muscle need catabolism protein. Ketone glucose for reduces spare thus, bodies This the and, protein for gluconeogenesis: from initially extends a the to to weeks, mg/dl).] level overnight duration drop fast (65–70 of the glucose [Note: and blood levels lower then As are days at maintained insure changes of during molecules. fasting an all occur tissues have that fuel metabolic that adequate supply The involved the tissues The in fasting summarized of response major during 24.18. in energy Figure metabolism is

XII. LONG-TERM KIDNEY IN FASTING

plays beyond, kidney the important As continues starvation and roles. fasting early into occurs cortex of here. The gluconeogenesis, including renal enzymes gluconeogenesis 6-phosphatase, ~50% expresses glucose of the and, fasting, late in kidney of itself.] portion is the used glucose [Note: by this A ketone also The of accompanies provides for acids). the acidosis increased production compensation kidney bodies that the (organic producing glutaminase substrate BCAA (see gluconeogenesis, a upon by p. is 256), metabolism and and for the the of (NH3). taken by ammonia glutamine The released kidney muscle’s can used αketoglutarate, dehydrogenase as acted be renal which glutamate up from plus (NH4+), the The urine the up picks ammonium decreasing dissociation body the thereby and from ketone body NH3 excreted (Fig. is in in load acid protons as 24.19). urea a disposal . of is form NH4 the of the from form to disposal fasting, long-term in in switch nitrogen in there Therefore, typically As bodies. consumers [Note: ketone enterocytes, of ketone concentration consumers become glutamine, rises, of body be glutamine allows to This to the available more kidney.]

XIII. CHAPTER SUMMARY

modification availability synthesis. is 3) of 1) enzymes, the induction-repression 2) pathways covalent enzymes, through substrates, flow by metabolic of 4) of controlled mechanisms: inhibition four and intermediates The of and allosteric activation enzyme of regulatory after as absorptive ingestion state, these period that 2-to the (TAG), mechanisms captured In a meal, glycogen, insure triacylglycerol are available protein nutrients of 4-hour and the (Fig. 24.20). synthesized components acids, plasma increases chylomicrons TAG cells. as by occur, During transient this intestinal amino interval, the of glucose, primarily in and the mucosal last glucagon. secretion decreased elevated responds increased insulin of with a the of The pancreas glucose secretion levels an of and to an make all substrates ready as of circulating use the tissues availability anabolic which period the glucose and state elevated absorptive a insulin/glucagon ratio virtually fuel. during The its proteins, replaces needed synthesis. stores, increases In TAG the and any replenishes liver hepatic addition, glycogen The to lipoproteins, are in very-low-density tissues. packaged the latter exported which are peripheral protein storage, replace muscle increases meal. the increases since synthesis protein degraded to synthesis TAG whereas previous and Adipose tissue fed uses as glucose the exclusively the fuel. brain a In state, and and triggering fasting, secretion In glucose, epinephrine in fall, plasma in secretion. acids, and decline a amino levels increase an TAG of glucagon insulin ratio fasting insulin/counterregulatory catabolic state decreased The and make availability period. circulating of hormone a the decreased the substrates adipose tissues. energy other to This to brain and to exchange substrates 1) and sustain two maintain plasma the metabolism guided adipose the tissues acids an muscle, release glucose-requiring tissue, is from liver bodies to brain and liver, into that motion ketone 2) to fatty priorities: by (FA) and glucose tissue the of from the mobilize need sets skeletal adequate other levels energy of among need of supply and FA and for degrades A reducing for glycogen equivalents building goals, these the energy initiates ketogenesis. the needed blocks to accomplish liver coenzyme using gluconeogenesis, supply and oxidation the acetyl increased gluconeogenesis To FA thus providing to liver. degrades adipose glycerol the stored tissue TAG, and The bodies The as FA as by as the well can muscle use fuel supplied ketone liver. also liver for glycerol the The uses gluconeogenesis. degraded to bodies amino acids use decreases in increase. liver to as is Muscle supply the but for ketone protein gluconeogenesis glucose both bodies can ketone as The use fuels. brain and from play excreting the as synthesizing kidneys fasting ketone the protons glucose (NH4+). into important ammonium dissociation and late From by roles starvation, body

answer. Choose ONE the best

4.1. the (fasted) absorptive of in the is following state? state elevated one as the during plasma with postabsorptive compared (well-fed) Which

Acetoacetate A.

Chylomicrons B.

Free fatty C. acids

D. Glucagon

following (and of chylomicrons answer released intestine the from) synthesized a are = Triacylglycerol-rich meal. Correct B. ingestion in Acetoacetate, elevated in state. and fatty free glucagon the the fasted are state, absorptive acids, not

4.2. the statements Which following concerning absorptive correct? one liver of is state in the

Fructose 2,6-bisphosphate elevated. is A.

uptake B. stimulates glucose. the of Insulin

that are in Most phosphorylated modification regulated by enzymes state. C. the are covalent

oxidation increased. of D. acetyl The A coenzyme is

The of repressed. synthesis glucokinase E. is

A. Correct = answer of phosphofructokinase-1 fructose the of increased activates 2,6bisphosphate, levels glucagon the which glycolysis. state absorptive promote insulin The of characteristic and decreased synthesis allosterically the in are modified enzymes are dephosphorylated state active. covalently Most and is the being it oxidized in well-fed synthesis. state Acetyl not acid in because is fatty used A coenzyme the glucose (by is Uptake glucose independent. insulin liver transporter-2) of into Synthesis in is induced glucokinase of insulin state. by well-fed the

4.3. an who one enzymes individual following hours? for been and phosphorylated is 12 of Which has in active the fasting

A. Arginase

Carnitine B. palmitoyltransferase-I

acid synthase Fatty C.

D. Glycogen synthase

F. Phosphofructokinase-1 Hormone-sensitive lipase E.

dehydrogenase G. Pyruvate

phosphorylated answer by Hormone-sensitive protein of Correct = to adipocytes activated A and is E. epinephrine. lipase in kinase response B, F regulated and Choices A, are covalently. C, not and inactive regulated D are G if Choices covalently but phosphorylated. are

4.4. below 70-kg of bodies do portion one periods major caloric the needs a which For supply man, the listed of the in brain? ketone of

period A. Absorptive

B. fast Overnight

fast Three-day C.

D. fast Four-week

fast Five-month E.

level product but from critical to barrier. answer acid must acetyl blood–brain coenzyme increase a A fasting the oxidation, Correct in D. of fatty the bodies, Ketone in the reach blood cross made = a the Typically, of to in this occurs fast. second week third man his a be to would energy (~154-lb) needs not 70-kg Fat in stores 5 supply months. able for

24.5. pyruvate, energy metabolism. diagram inputs from The shows in molecule central a to outputs below and

letter diagram acetyl biotin coenzyme reaction represents Which a on the and activated requires is A? by that

fatty mitochondrial activated acid Pyruvate A biotin enzyme requires coenzyme of C. is from carboxylase, oxidation. ATP) gluconeogenesis, a = by allosterically answer acetyl Correct (and and meets None these other choices criteria. the of = aspartate dehydrogenase D F kinase; = aminotransferase; = aminotransferase; pyruvate E = = B A dehydrogenase. pyruvate complex; lactate alanine

visit ancillary related additional chapter, to thePoint. materials this please For

I. OVERVIEW

insulin. an elevated one by rather heterogeneous primarily blood group is Diabetes absolute but not of or glucose a syndromes relative a deficiency is (FBG) multifactorial, characterized by caused polygenic (diabetes) in disease fasting mellitus have the 29 Over million United the diabetes. people population) of States in (~9% million undiagnosed. number, are this as ~8 yet Of Diabetes is heart amputation and major a and damage, failure, of blindness attacks, cause nerve leading adult of the cause renal strokes. and Most (Fig. groups of diabetes can cases mellitus separated into be two mellitus). 25.1), insulin-dependent type diabetes called diabetes insulin-dependent mellitus) ([T1D] 1 non– called ([T2D] type formerly formerly 2 and of population and (see prevalence is the increasing incidence U.S. and and p. increasing obesity of aging prevalence because lifestyles of 349). of sedentary the the The T2D particularly increase in with T2D The children disturbing. is

II. TYPE 1

of in States. ~21 cases <10% the constitutes of United T1D million the diabetes known autoimmune an deficiency islet by pancreas. an is caused absolute the β of the by characterized disease cells of insulin The attack on activated In infiltrated to of called T1D, the insulitis. lymphocytes, leading with a become T condition Langerhans islets depletion a attack period years, autoimmune (Fig. cells β-cell the the β gradual population on leads to of of Over this 25.2). cells of been β abruptly destroyed. when the However, symptoms have 80%–90% appear restore At adequately respond to therapy ketoacidosis. control the point, insulin to prevent is required to this ingestion glucose, of and life-threatening and metabolic fails pancreas twins, causes [Note: requires twin the only a infection) β-Cell mistakenly a and a to cells disease. if genetic “nonself.” as that of the the one identified 50% viral (such developing other T1D, environment β chance both 30%– stimulus from (identical) be determinant destruction monozygotic Among a the sibling has as develops 341), the all T2D (see virtually disease eventually and, p. which genetic influence in in This stronger the monozygotic individuals.] contrasts develops twinships, with both in is

A. Diagnosis

of during suddenly. T1D childhood typically puberty, The and or is symptoms develop onset such urination), usually can (excessive by be as appearance stress the an triggered often and polyuria (frequent Individuals T1D of recognized physiologic by (excessive with polyphagia infection. abrupt polydipsia hunger), thirst), usually fatigue and weight are accompanied loss. symptoms These by confirmed diagnosis The 70–99). mg/dl (normal by FBG is a is ≥126 no for 8 least [Note: defined caloric at hours.] as intake is Fasting FBG as mg/dl impaired of A categorized an is FBG. 100–125 FBG increased are are at impaired for T2D. risk and prediabetic Individuals with considered developing hyperglycemia. a an ≥6.5 mg/dl concentration can p. (normal 340) with nonfasting the mg/dl be in (see glycated basis blood >200 is Diagnosis level (random) of or a symptoms glucose on <5.7) of individual also hemoglobin made g measured test, after of ingestion used tolerance [Note: of 2 glucose convenient. glucose is also oral a blood less is in solution hours glucose, is The containing which but 75 for It screen p. pregnant women to typically diabetes gestational is (see most used 342).]

glucose reclaim impaired, is blood transporters sodium-dependent glucose to When and renal (SGLT) of ability urine. mg/dl, the is glucose into >180 “spills” glucose the accompanied glucose by of of diabetes. dehydration) characteristic of polydipsia resulting in polyuria (with water, loss and loss is the The

changes B. Metabolic

liver, white metabolic affects skeletal profoundly of three abnormalities that deficiency of from T1D a muscle, adipose tissues: metabolism and insulin The in (Fig. result 25.3).

1.

Elevated and Hyperglycemia of are hallmarks T1D bodies blood Fig. and ketonemia: (see glucose the ketone of levels untreated 25.3). p. 97). insulin-regulated hepatic (muscle caused diminished transporter is have via gluconeogenesis, the increased by glucose and see utilization peripheral Hyperglycemia with glucose of combined production GLUT-4; tissue adipose (TAG) results triacylglycerol tissue, from β-oxidation increased acids of accelerated (ketone with acetoacetate Ketonemia (FA) fatty bodies; mobilization 3hydroxybutyrate and combined of adipose 196). synthesis and in p. hepatic see FA from gluconeogenic the and enzyme.] from β-oxidation [Note: activator coenzyme allosteric of the for Acetyl A carboxylase, substrate a pyruvate ketogenesis is imbalance of recur therapy. those if 25%–40% between patient type ketoacidosis an by in metabolic acidosis a commonly body not the (DKA), occurs and ill with production infection) may caused becomes an use, comply T1D newly with does or and Diabetic (most ketone diagnosed of with by administering is gradually replacing fluid insulin without treated short-acting correct precipitating hyperglycemia hypoglycemia. and and electrolytes to DKA

2.

flooding FA Not of the all of Hypertriacylglycerolemia: synthesis. body liver and disposed the ketone can through be oxidation ([VLDL] see 230). TAG, to are which These FA lipoproteins secreted packaged p. are and in excess converted very-lowdensity rich p. the Chylomicrons mucosal dietary intestinal by (see in cells are a meal following TAG secreted 227). plasma is of low), TAG in hypertriacylglycerolemia Because the elevated, levels are p. VLDL levels and degradation the capillary 228) enzyme are (see lipoprotein resulting insulin diabetes low Fig. of lipase (synthesis lipoprotein in (see adipose decreased when is beds the tissue by in chylomicron catalyzed 25.3).

C. Treatment

must periodic T1D by on delivered continuous subcutaneously by injection with infusion exogenous control or Individuals to either hyperglycemia pump-assisted rely (subq) and insulin the ketonemia. currently regimens injection used, Two intensive. of are and therapeutic types standard therapy.] delivery intensive Pump [Note: also considered is 1. treatment: human Standard of typically daily recombinant treatment insulin. intensive injections two versus Standard is three to of the Mean arrow (see 225–275 Fig. obtained glycated level blood levels 33) mg/dl, glucose (blue in p. a of 8%–9% (HbA1c) hemoglobin typically total hemoglobin with are 25.4). is average [Note: formation of The 3 over proportional glucose to previous the HbA1c concentration blood months. of rate the measure patient how well has a Thus, a time in with normalized of over HbA1c diabetes.] provides that blood treatment glucose and times monitoring a intensive subsequent In standard normalize day. seeks more frequent through insulin, contrast glucose to injections typically ≥4 blood more therapy, closely of treatment to of levels blood ~7% in mg/dl red be 150 (see achieved, of glucose total Fig. can hemoglobin Mean with HbA1c the arrow 25.4). Fig. blood black (see glucose ≤6% [Note: Normal ~100 and is arrow is mean mg/dl, in HbA1c 25.4).] not even in Therefore, is glucose of values patients. (euglycemia) intensively normalization treated achieved with therapy patients nephropathy, the a reduction (that standard neuropathy) intensive ≥50% patients of retinopathy, show care. microvascular and in receiving Nonetheless, compared complications is, diabetes long-term on plasma of the related diabetes confirms an complications to This are glucose. that of elevation

therapy. comparison.] included Nondiabetic are for individuals [Note: 2. a complications the therapeutic development to diabetes). diabetes glucose goals Hypoglycemia: disease to of of in the effort long-term levels chronic of 345 (see is One in minimize for decrease of the blood of of complications an the cases p. discussion achieve. appropriate of is dosage to However, insulin difficult by Hypoglycemia common >90% is the in occurring of of most caused insulin insulin excess patients. complication therapy, tight achieve high coma of intensive (Fig. treatment seizures, frequency glucose designed blood with control hypoglycemic to episodes, of is and regimens particularly The 25.5). compensatory normal individuals, most notably counterregulatory (see hormones, promote and hepatic In 315). of which glucagon glucose triggers epinephrine, secretion a of production p. hypoglycemia secretion. of also with However, patients T1D deficiency glucagon develop a after almost early present is universally the diagnosis. years defect This occurs disease 4 and in these epinephrine prevent Therefore, to on severe secretion rely hypoglycemia. patients T1D to the secrete neuropathy impaired response hypoglycemia. show to ability However, in disease autonomic epinephrine and as diabetic progresses, patients with T1D long-standing epinephrine combined and patients secretion deficiency of a called glucagon sometimes creates symptom-free condition Thus, are vulnerable unawareness.” “hypoglycemia hypoglycemia. to particularly The caused strenuous Hypoglycemia by be also can exercise. into need uptake glucose prevent intensive are after Because insulin, and muscle for or patients before glucose decreases hypoglycemia. levels the blood exercise check to or promotes exogenous exercise advised to abort

3. glucose brain hypoglycemia of because control of put are blood not tight on that adversely episodes the years Contraindications may development. of of control: program age risk Children before tight for affect 8 a population. heart control not go hypoglycemia Elderly cause this tight typically because in do can people and strokes on attacks tight is of control the complications later. prevent years to goal many Also, major Tight 10 at people then, is more healthy otherwise most control, for to expect who least years. worthwhile can live diabetes, the and comorbid of duration adults nonpregnant goals [Note: on and the conditions.] based known are For with individual age/life diabetes, treatment strategies most expectancy,

III. TYPE 2

of common U.S. form population disease, of the >90% T2D with the afflicting diabetes. is the most highest African prevalence.] Hispanic and [Note: and have Indians, Americans Asian the American Americans, Latino Americans, Natives, Alaskan gradually without symptoms. T2D develops Typically, obvious tests. screening disease is routine detected often by The many polyuria have T2D with of and symptoms duration. several individuals polydipsia of However, weeks’ Polyphagia is but present less be common. may insulin of Patients resistance dysfunctional and combination cells (Fig. a β with T2D have

require do 25.6) sustain to not insulin but life. these keep required be control eventually of >90% hyperglycemia <7%. HbA1c will in to insulin However, and patients, in in the inadequate, for observed blunts does because alterations in insulin those metabolic restrain part 1, of T2D, than type DKA. development ketogenesis T2D milder although described are secretion and The the (see [Note: glucagon suppresses release of p. Insulin 314).] on as is the Diagnosis of hyperglycemia above. based presence described and completely not is understood. antibodies or pathogenesis involve viruses does The not autoimmune T2D hyperglycemic hyperosmolar altered complication status.] severe the elderly [Note: hyperglycemia characterized dehydration mental state and acute in and is by An of a

β-cell by ultimately, hyperglycemia, resistance, impaired is secretion, and, T2D insulin insulin failure. characterized non–insulin-dependent eventual the need diabetes. The of therapy designation has T2D eliminated as insulin for

resistance A. Insulin

resistance tissues, decreased respond (or skeletal the target normal the properly adipose, of such circulating muscle, to as elevated) to is concentrations and liver, Insulin white insulin. ability of decreased muscle resistance and lipolysis example, increased is of by tissue, insulin acids hepatic For by glucose fatty glucose characterized and production, adipose adipose increased free (FFA). with uptake production

1. resistance the Insulin resistance cause with T2D, common increases of and resistance most develop obesity of and insulin diabetes. and not is obesity most Although do insulin obesity: the risk people obese individuals insulin β-cell for In insulin. resistance of a can with the function, in compensate absence levels of elevated defect example, three Figure in higher two insulin secretion times to is For than is individuals. shows obese subjects lean that it 25.7A in observed of insulin those a to higher compensates result and effect in the insulin resistance) levels glucose (Fig. of blood individuals diminished hormone similar This (as the for lean produces concentration 25.7B).

2.

not will resistance alone lead and T2D. 2 Insulin to diabetes: type Insulin resistance impaired function. who Rather, individuals in β-cell show develops insulin-resistant T2D also and of develop diabetes. in T2D of inactive, 3%–5% the obese, Insulin and risk individuals physically who subsequent who is commonly are the observed pregnant women for development or resistance gestational elderly in sufficiently for release. unable compensate to insulin are resistance These insulin with increased patients the function. 25.8 time β-cell Figure loss the hyperglycemia of of and for course development shows the

3.

of decreases insulin resistance: with with the gain resistance Causes in weight of weight the adipose resistance. increases insulin excess key is in loss, and tissue and Insulin abdomen) development (particularly energy not tissue, an tissue. is but a also simply secretory Adipose storage changes insulin adipose there resistance (Fig. result in that With are secretions in obesity, 25.9). (see a a tumor These such activated leptin, protein of and of proinflammatory p. effects. decreased adiponectin factor-α additional secretion for with 353 include as associated secretion and macrophages with is synthesis anti-inflammatory by with proinflammatory 6 cytokines interleukin increased effects (see necrosis leptin); of protein effects 350), p. insulin (inflammation resistance); of inflammation. chronic, net low-grade result is The lipolysis of and of One FFA effect (see insulin resistance Fig. production is increased 25.9). FFA decreases and steatosis). use TAG of deposition availability increases liver to (hepatic contributing in ectopic glucose, of hyperglycemia, results fatty [Note: disease liver in Steatosis (NAFLD). nonalcoholic more (NASH), accompanied condition, nonalcoholic a If can serious steatohepatitis by inflammation, develop.] have a FFA also effect. proinflammatory FFA signaling. term, impair the insulin long In (see FA [Note: β-oxidation 349). increases Adiponectin p. to in decrease this a protein contributes FFA availability.] adipocyte Consequently,

β cells Dysfunctional B.

resulting vary T2D, insulin pancreas capacity, that initially above In the from below in β-cell to normal. retains normal levels cell correct time, insulin with hyperglycemia. to and dysfunctional the β the to prevailing secrete fails becomes increasingly enough However, typical, For insulin as have in are diabetes. in who patients example, obese, T2D as but obese individuals similarly not high levels not high do control ability disease progression hyperglycemia declining insulin secretion natural to with the in a Thus, of the endogenous results of (Fig. 25.10). effects hyperglycemia sustained of Deterioration and of proinflammatory function accelerated β-cell elevated by FFA may the be toxic and a environment.

Metabolic changes C.

resistance of in skeletal T2D and TAG muscle, (Fig. are The primarily the of abnormalities glucose metabolism in expressed liver, adipose and tissue white result insulin 25.11).

1.

Hyperglycemia by glucose caused and by hepatic diminished muscle tissues. of production Hyperglycemia: use of combined with is adipose increased glucose, hepatic in restrains the of absent insulin or the ketogenesis. patients is with presence resistance, Ketonemia minimal presence usually T2D in insulin, of because even

2.

Dyslipidemia: the in which TAG, liver, In are to packaged VLDL. secreted FFA and converted are a intestinal and following chylomicrons the by meal. secreted synthesized Dietary mucosal are TAG–rich cells the are hypertriacylglycerolemia lipoprotein resulting levels in in in Fig. adipose (see degradation catalyzed Because and tissue TAG plasma VLDL is by low elevated, diabetes, lipoprotein chylomicron lipase 25.10). are lipoproteins increased also with levels degradation. of associated of likely a T2D, high-density as Low result

Treatment D.

and prevent to in the long-term is glucose concentrations normal goal within maintain to development limits blood treating complications. T2D of The (dietary the nutrition newly diagnosed often reduction, hyperglycemia correct medical Weight of T2D. exercise, and modifications) therapy absorption therapy be insulin subq and sulfonylureas increase as inhibitors see satisfactory Oral renal metformin FFA hypoglycemic may glucose thiazolidinediones p. secretion; insulin plasma glucose), α-glucosidase achieve peripheral dietary levels. levels (decrease of of insulin gluconeogenesis), required 310), agents, (decreases carbohydrate), (decrease or hepatic and reabsorption inhibitors to such (decrease SGLT (increase sensitivity), in morbidly result disease shown surgery in to Bariatric individuals most with obese [Note: remission has T2D in patients. been be permanent.] not Remission may

IV. CHRONIC EFFECTS PREVENTION AND

completely fail therapies noted As normalize diabetes but metabolism. hyperglycemia available previously, to of moderate the and the as (microvascular). disease of nephropathy, associated (macrovascular complications) elevation as (CVD) with of vascular retinopathy, blood The and including neuropathy is long-standing stroke complications cardiovascular chronic diabetes glucose well delays insulin 340) some the long-term the onset (see p. treatment Intensive progression complications. of slows and For blood HbA1c levels of (Fig. retinopathy the example, decrease control as and incidence of glucose decreases improves 25.12). Data the on clear.] tight of CVD concerning control are effect less [Note: in T2D hypoglycemia of blood outweigh risk control glucose in benefits increased patients. tight of The severe most of the complications hyperglycemia causes How is unclear. diabetes of the chronic glucose blood glucose insulin, uptake to its not In and glucose is in cells on elevated dependent which leads intracellular metabolites. increased in (see cataract 140) to For intracellular contributes diabetes. example, p. sorbitol formation increased proteins of to hyperglycemia of HbA1c. Additionally, in the reaction glycation analogous a cellular formation promotes These reduce proteins can of and and mediate changes end undergo the some microvascular wound glycation diabetes advanced become (AGE) glycated healing. reactions additional products early of that AGE Some release receptor a causing (RAGE), of the proinflammatory molecules. membrane bind to There no T1D. is for currently treatment preventative combined therapy, loss, and exercise, T2D significantly aggressive nutrition of and The risk for be a can weight decreased medical by hypertension of dyslipidemias. control regimen For example, with of of overweight degrees incidence Figure the varying individuals 25.13 in exercise. normal disease shows and

V. SUMMARY CHAPTER

mellitus that by is Diabetes absolute a group an is relative syndromes of fasting heterogeneous characterized of (Fig. caused blood elevation or by deficiency of glucose a insulin 25.14). the leading heart a and attacks, nerve and failure, and of cause Diabetes amputation renal of stroke. adult major blindness cause is damage, type two type (T1D) classified 2 groups, can 1 be (T2D). Diabetes and into in of diabetes cases the million constitutes >29 of ~10% United States. T1D on pancreatic the attack by disease is an autoimmune an by cells. caused characterized of β deficiency The absolute insulin and hyperglycemia, mistakenly infection) insulin. T1D and destruction environmental include (such as of hypertriacylglycerolemia be that a as viral result an stimulus diabetic The a a genetic (DKA), from requires This the metabolic of that cell identified deficiency causes “nonself.” to abnormalities ketoacidosis determinant β T1D delivered to insulin and with ketoacidosis. must control exogenous subcutaneously on hyperglycemia rely Those component. genetic has T2D a strong results combination resistance It cells. of insulin β a from and dysfunctional skeletal resistance as of concentrations ability such circulating to target the properly to liver, tissues, elevated) is insulin. Insulin (or white muscle, respond of and normal decreased adipose, the most of Obesity insulin is common resistance. cause with do resistance not people insulin develop However, obesity and diabetes. most a individuals resistance compensate levels obese function, insulin. insulin with can for without of diabetes absence In the elevated defect of in β-cell lead alone not T2D. will to Insulin resistance Rather, who in T2D show develops insulin-resistant also function. individuals β-cell impaired in The although alterations because restrain the the and described does in are blunts disease, form insulin part ketogenesis the of milder DKA. than T2D, in inadequate, acute of metabolic secretion development observed for insulin-dependent T2D those treatments normalize but completely Available moderate the diabetes to for hyperglycemia metabolism. fail cardiovascular diabetes including as is blood stroke The retinopathy, well chronic of neuropathy the (microvascular). and (macrovascular) long-standing and with associated as nephropathy, complications elevation glucose disease of

best ONE the Choose answer.

5.1. evaluated diabetes being test. are gestational Three tolerance given oral patients glucose an for is which below, Based shown the data patient prediabetic? on

A. Patient #1 B. Patient Patient C. #2 #3

None D.

B. = answer Correct blood reflected as glucose #2 is normal and, has described blood in (GT) as glucose but Patient impaired fasting tolerance level glucose so, a her an at hours (FBG) prediabetic. 2 and Patient whereas normal diabetes. FBG patient GT, #3 #1 a has has

5.2. lack of result which in following the of or reactions in the Relative humans would insulin absolute liver? in one

A. lipase hormone-sensitive activity of Decreased

B. from gluconeogenesis Decreased lactate

C. glycogenolysis Decreased

D. 3-hydroxybutyrate formation Increased of

glycogenesis Increased E.

answer acids = D. fatty A by ketone favor by β-oxidation adipose liver bodies, of Correct the lipase acetyl producing in tissue coenzyme using hormone-sensitive (not levels liver). (HSL) the insulin Low generated provided activation and synthesis, Low decreased and glycogen insulin increased also HSL, gluconeogenesis causes glycogenolysis. of

5.3. Which one untreated the following the of is of regardless type? characteristic of diabetes

A. Hyperglycemia

B. Ketoacidosis

A1c Low hemoglobin of levels C.

Normal levels of D. C-peptide

E. Obesity

pattern F. Simple inheritance

a result in a (T1D) of insulin. Elevated as Correct A. of glucose type occurs 1 = answer diabetes lack blood a type insulin 2 diabetes and due in hyperglycemia is to In (T2D), defect function β-cell resistance. A1c levels. in elevated hemoglobin hyperglycemia The results is in T1D. whereas is T2D, obesity in rare rare Ketoacidosis of measure a synthesis. C is insulin (connecting)-peptide virtually would It decreased initially increased in then T1D absent T2D. be in and of disease forms show Both genetics. complex the

5.4. with An 2 typically: individual type diabetes obese

6 hours A. meal. after insulin from about benefits a receiving

plasma glucagon B. a individual. has of lower does normal than level a

lower early a than has level plasma of in a C. disease does insulin the process. normal individual

reduced. shows improvement body D. is in if tolerance weight glucose

onset symptoms. shows sudden E. of

type Many diabetes individuals = in D. weight answer all with improvement with and some almost blood are 2 glucose obese, show reduction. Correct Symptoms develop usually gradually. usually do disease. 6 insulin after meal) have in insulin a the elevated levels patients late not require until and (certainly These hours not levels typically Glucagon are normal.

visit materials For ancillary to this additional chapter, related thePoint. please

I. OVERVIEW

characterized is an accumulation a Obesity weight by of systems fat. body of regulatory excess body disorder may intermittently, a level available a in food life of high daily which physical had survival and activity as required have excess tendency fat a In storage societies, was calories only value. primitive favoring of genetic to variety contributed and abundance undoubtedly has societies industrialized the and wide of inexpensive in an obesity Today, epidemic. however, foods lifestyle palatable, sedentary developing and (CVD), risk such hypertension, diabetes increased, type has of cardiovascular (T2D), arthritis. 2 diseases, the so disease has cancer, as As adiposity associated threefold in of children decades. prevalence is four obesity has a explosion alarming over adolescents, last in increase Particularly which shown the and the of 17% years obese.] [Note: age 2–19 those Approximately are becoming the respectively. the is risk States, In overweight 25%, lifetime and United or obese of ~50% individuals than more are worldwide. there estimates, and, by increased has some undernourished globally, Obesity obese

II. ASSESSMENT

most usually been an body the is from to determined Because it directly, the shown is body which measure body index (BMI), the mass to fat amount with fat of measure, individuals. has difficult amount of correlate indirect in have large [Note: are lean mass.] athletes muscle Exceptions of who amounts this obesity, the the of the waist amount abdominal used to is measure measurement also Measuring tape screen area in with a central the of reflects because for body. fat size with for mortality, fat The morbidity risk independent is associated excess central presence of the an BMI. of and increased A waist size in in is ≥40 (women) factor.] (men) and considered [Note: risk a ≥35

A. mass index Body

measure for a m]2) in relative height. as of weight kg/[height The weight, adjusted in provides BMI (defined allows This and comparisons within populations. between for BMI range 24.9. and healthy the between 18.5 The is overweight, a a severely (morbidly) BMI and defined ≥30 is >40 BMI a with Individuals obese, are 25 between obese considered are with 29.9 those as (Fig. considered BMI and 26.1). death studies relationship similar in to women. men examining are the and are based of cutoffs These BMI on premature and than adults more and are overweight, Nearly are those obese. of one thirds third of U.S. two obese. the BMI-for-age are above Children 95th percentile with considered a

fat Anatomic deposition in B. differences

body influence on anatomic risks. has of The health distribution associated major a fat and with for waist/hip trunk deposition associated A (Fig. and is >0.8 >1.0 (WHR) apple-shaped, women android, fat obesity ratio as in the men for upper-body defined is or more 26.2A). a called hips WHR is pear-shaped, obesity. thighs of the and distributed lower-body gynoid, a In preponderance fat or and lower reflects contrast, in women <0.8 WHR of defined for a men. <1.0 is It and as for a studies disease, of pear that found commonly much risk some metabolic more be women, presents actually may shape, in and indicate it protective. lower The risk metabolic for to those can Thus, may who with use higher of obesity. associated diseases identify the simple clinician be at indices body shape

About (subq) (upper body regions. of in in 80%–90% the and fat stored body) abdominal human is gluteal-femoral (lower subcutaneous the depots body) The the deep located (Fig. depots visceral 10%–20% within abdominal in is remaining cavity 26.2B). in obesity. with subq visceral abdominal associated health stores and Excess increases fat risks

differences C. in depots fat regional Biochemical

types fat described The regional are of different. biochemically above more particularly body. very [TAG]) women, larger, deposition, from tend lower efficient acids Subq adipocytes and at (triacylglycerol than to the fatty (FA) are adipocytes subq mobilize in body, upper the from slowly fat most active. the adipocytes metabolically Visceral are have (FFA). contribute rates individuals, increased visceral lipolysis In availability abdominal of free fatty both subcutaneous depots and and obese high acids to of contribute metabolic body higher may obesity. risk in with upper found the These differences health (abdominal) individuals to proinflammatory are impair [Note: signaling FFA insulin p. (see and 343).] 1.

now once TAG, is White of passive function: in a be tissue, to active to regulatory adipose play Endocrine thought systems. known body weight role an reservoir an the number as is such leptin secretes adiponectin. cell the and regulators endocrine of (adipokines), protein adipocyte a that example, hormones For well regulates appetite 352). metabolism (see as as Leptin p. control, been blood improved reduced FFA patients with reduces in lipid Adiponectin the in associated insulin glycemic levels with oxidation better and resulting diabetes. profiles, increasing in and sensitivity (by increased FA in muscles) inflammation has levels [Note: increases, leptin whereas as Adiponectin weight body levels increase.] decrease 2.

circulation: as 6 (IL-6) tissue. With there from Importance release and obesity, factor-α of proinflammatory and secretion is portal FFA such necrosis adipose of cytokines, tumor interleukin (TNF-α), of increased [Note: proteins small system.] are Cytokines regulate that the immune abdominal the adipose large and such to and, therefore, have in access released FFA liver. is obesity One have dysfunction portal hypothesis enter from metabolic a these why depots for on the that cytokines influence direct vein the depots associated (see may liver, very-low-density lipoprotein which lead of hypertriacylglycerolemia In to hepatic and synthesis insulin TAG, the 343) with they resistance and particles increased contribute the obesity. of as p. components released to are FFA can enter general contrast, they the reach body By concentration. adipose from muscle oxidized where in subq liver in be circulation, depots therefore, and, lower the lower

D. Adipocyte number and size

(Fig. volume As their stored, can to times two average expand adipocytes are of to TAG three an normal 26.3). ability is However, expand to fat cells the of limited. increasing overnutrition, prolonged mature adipose and preadipocytes are adipocytes. stimulated differentiate into of proliferate within to With fat tissue the cells, number increased due (hypertrophy) Thus, fat number obesity of (hyperplasia). is a cell most to size and combination five number adipocytes. the of normal to individuals can Obese up have times continuous undergoes [Note: the tissues, other adipose remodeling. Like tissue to early Contrary can that now die. adipocytes we know dogma, adipocyte of 10 is an estimated average lifespan years.] The into and such adipose cannot muscle as over” accommodated the be calories FA other “spill within excess liver. If tissue, the excess tissues, of is this associated fat strongly ectopic amount with insulin The resistance. individual, number cells an loss weight affected. fat usually obese of not reduced, is but the size the With the is in a normal achieved body fat Thus, of is fat size the decreasing of normal. the by amount cell below fat fat, small very regain. weight and and at are appetite However, this may efficient cells reaccumulating drive

III. BODY WEIGHT REGULATION

tends over stable The body individuals weight time. to of most relatively be prompted weight. a hypothesis This individual biologically each point” that has the “set observation body for predetermined below stores adipose the to body above body to lose rises when adipose the weight weight point from the attempts stores when The point. falls the set body add to set and the set body defends the point. Thus, appetite with may example, energy falls whereas weight overfeeding, appetite For falls, slightly loss, expenditure and increases increase (Fig. energy with expenditure and 26.4). fail after of model the However, to strict a overeating some explains individuals their a period starting nor revert epidemic obesity. weight set point of why neither current to

A. contributions Genetic

determining play major now It a evident mechanisms weight. is role genetic body in that

1.

who importance Biologic indicated rather a observation obesity The adoptive that origin: is are determinant the show a as than with correlates their weight that adopted parents. biologic of usually body genetics of children by BMI twins similar identical Furthermore, very (Fig. have whether reared more are dizygotic or together of their twins. nonidentical, and 26.5), similar those BMI than apart,

2.

can human obesity. Mutations: Rare, gene mutations single cause the example, of consumption leptin For food) severe gene decreased mutations in result receptor and appetite for production) its (decreased function) or hyperphagia for (causing (increased and (Fig. in obesity in regulating 26.6), below). the human underscoring importance (see weight leptin IV of the system body obese levels to [Note: this the leptin hormone.] of humans elevated are Most but have effects resistant appetite-regulating

B. behavioral and contributions Environmental

decades in are several occurring stable by last The over explained simply scale. which short be changes the epidemic genetic obesity factors, this cannot of on time of as factors, the Clearly, ready palatable, availability energy-dense a play such role. environmental foods, the sedentary Furthermore, decrease tendency weight. activity and to gain physical lifestyles enhance the influence preferences, size, behaviors, such food consumption. an during as also present food and eating, foods of Eating number individual’s portion people variety of consumed, environment many note not this individuals that it become important in obese. However, is same to do individual’s regulatory by interaction and level his and that or her influenced as susceptibility in an factors least higher body such of additional defend obesity to an part, the genes under-or environment fat. lower at to “set” or systems appears be overnutrition explained, be to a by can maternal of The may body epigenetic (see p. Thus, changes

obesity. influence the likely 476) for risk

IV. INFLUENCES MOLECULAR

simple law intake can when a energy of summarized application of of first energy expenditure. deceptively the results The cause exceeds (caloric) obesity thermodynamics: be Obesity in a neurologic, imbalance and this of environmental, the complex psychologic mechanism interaction involves biochemical, underlying However, factors. appetite, neural week, expenditure, week for regulate The to body humoral involve to of short-term pathways that that the (day and to intake regulate day, signals (Fig. energy and to meal), food body systems weight basic (meal year year) weight and long-term regulation 26.7).

overnourished and (B) states. YY. = peptide CCK cholecystokinin; = PYY

A.

fat the of Long-term stores. reflect (TAG) status signals

1.

that size is made hormone is the Leptin in an stores. adipocyte fat peptide secreted proportion to of and Leptin: brain on the and food to regulate acts intake expenditure. energy It When by consume more adipocytes than increases, fat leptin production need, we and increases. we body calories decreasing appetite activity) increasing body by energy (increasing anorexigenic and effect). (an adapts The use fat decreases, effects body opposite the When occur. resistant, leptin preventing weight better loss individuals Unfortunately, at most weight system obese may the and leptin preventing be are than gain. arcuate in of through [Note: receptors mediated the to effects are binding hypothalamus.] nucleus Leptin’s the 2.

Obese Insulin: are also individuals hyperinsulinemic. Like dampen appetite. acts neurons hypothalamic insulin leptin, to on the for effects Chapter 23 of (See on insulin metabolism.) with p. resistance associated (see insulin [Note: Obesity is 342).]

B. signals Short-term

hours. affect and hunger and meals over time the size tract the control minutes signals Short-term from a gastrointestinal course of which number satiety, (GI) of to drives the In intake absence of the (appetite-stimulating) hormone orexigenic that ghrelin, produces an food meals), stomach hunger. (between signals thereby hormones, is neural peptide and terminating effect), emptying among actions to As induce cholecystokinin eating, on others, YY, food the and gastric (an GI anorexigenic including hypothalamus. through satiety consumed, are important Y (such serotonin α-melanocyte–stimulating [NPY] neuropeptide and [α-MSH]) (such as anorexigenic hypothalamus, as satiety. and in hormone neuropeptides anorexigenic hunger regulating neurotransmitters orexigenic and the and Within dopamine) secretion decreases of α-MSH interact, NPY. insofar of secretion and increases signals leptin Long-term and as short-term number stores. that relationship there control status loops in size meals complex of Thus, of regulatory the body the to many are and fat binds (MC4R). melanocortin-4 to product α-MSH, a receptor of the proopiomelanocortin, [Note: cleavage are to obesity.] MC4R early-onset Loss-of-function with associated mutations

METABOLIC V. EFFECTS

metabolic and glucose dyslipidemias, skeletal in The primarily effects intolerance, resistance include of obesity and insulin expressed tissue. adipose liver, muscle, the primary These Fig. molecular signals mass reflect of originating adipocytes (see metabolic abnormalities increased the from 25.9, Fig. and p. 343, 26.7). abnormalities.] show 30% do [Note: metabolic About individuals not of these obese

Metabolic syndrome A.

(Fig. is cluster the lipoprotein abnormalities elevated hypertension) (HDL) a of high-density dyslipidemia resistance, referred of syndrome insulin associated levels metabolic with hyperinsulinemia, Abdominal obesity TAG], as and [low to (hyperglycemia, is and that metabolic 26.8). factor risk a and T2D. for CVD is It contributes T2D low-grade, a the and obesity likely resistance inflammation systemic The role metabolic with seen of plays pathogenesis in chronic, insulin and syndrome. to In mediators release such as IL-6 obesity, and TNF-α. adipocytes proinflammatory are tissues levels adiponectin, of dampens and low. Additionally, sensitizes insulin, normally inflammation which to

B. disease Nonalcoholic liver

liver in with and risk disease (hepatic in ectopic 343). ([NAFLD], TAG nonalcoholic increased of steatosis) see p. is liver Obesity results the deposition fatty for associated

VI. OBESITY AND HEALTH

of with (Fig. risk increased an correlated is Obesity death including arthritis, and urinary example, T2D, gallstones, CVD, chronic of risk cancers, some number NAFLD, pelvic incontinence), is gout, a floor factor sleep hypertension, dyslipidemias, apnea. and for (for disorders 26.9) a conditions, associated between years. individuals <55 The relationship morbidities among age is and stronger obesity age 74 between and After BMI there increased years, longer no is an association mortality. [Note: consequences and stigmatization (for example, Obesity discrimination).] has also social and plasma TAG, blood obese leads levels. blood in loss individuals to Weight pressure, decreased glucose increase. HDL

VII. REDUCTION WEIGHT

help reduce Weight reduction complications of the can obesity. To energy must increase to achieve or weight reduction, contribute intake decrease although weight energy intake inducing more loss. expenditure, obese decreasing is thought the energy patient to physical plan increased food factors modifying modification, intake through meal behavioral and and food can reduction diaries, change; planning, recording which include relearning activity; education Typically, cues combines to for a dietary overeating, lead that to weight and nutrition satiety. recommended. may Medications or be surgery a they weight because stop after is of separate achieved, process weight-loss weight majority Once the regain efforts. maintenance weight their vigilance patients requires is that loss

restriction Caloric B.

the control. commonly approach is weight practiced Dieting to most effect of amount restriction corresponds tissue will 1 be the caloric estimated. adipose Because ~3,500 adipose the kcal, to on have tissue of lb that can is intake and determined Weight loss not diets caloric on calorie-restricted composition. nutrient primarily by lipid blood compositional aspects profile.] and glycemic control the However, can [Note: affect the individuals. over many Caloric for term is ineffective long restriction the Over attempt dietary weight weight who intervention regain is lost to people 90% when lose suspended. of with treatment, period their control over levels weight few although body losses of pressure often and will Nonetheless, of lipid and T2D. reach 6-month individuals 10% weight ideal enhance weight reduce blood a of

A. Physical activity

An physical deficit. can energy increase an in create activity regimen component may to a hypocaloric programs weight not at of loss. a exercise directed produce Although key is adding exercise maintaining loss weight initially, greater a addition, independent physical activity of reduces cardiopulmonary loss. CVD, weight In of increases risk the and fitness and Persons caloric a weight ~5%–10% over exercise may lose period restriction who behavioral combine with months. to 4–6 of expect initial of body treatment maintain regain weight show after individuals who exercise their loss. initial Studies their program that less weight

treatment Pharmacologic C.

has use in The Food several adults. U.S. approved Administration medications and weight-loss for Drug (decreases and by liraglutide in (promote orlistat the absorption receptor), satiety naltrexone signaling), with norepinephrine). serotonin with (increase by combination buproprion of include fat), in 1 combination They metabolism glucagon-like peptide dietary activating through topiramate phentermine appetite (decreases increasing lorcaserin and reduction to modest. weight effects Their be on tend being adipocytes of brown p. activation (see is 79) explored.] [Note: Pharmacologic

D. treatment Surgical

in loss restriction Gastric severely weight causing obese in and effective individuals. are bypass surgeries operations these diabetic remain in understood, control greatly Through improve glycemic that morbidly obese individuals. mechanisms poorly [Note: vagus approved.] food intake decrease that Implantation stimulates nerve to has the a of device electrically been

VIII. CHAPTER SUMMARY

(caloric) energy expenditure results intake fat, Obesity, body when (Fig. the of exceeds accumulation excess energy 26.10). increasing in in in daily the an increasing expenditure availability energy resulting foods. countries palatable, of increase reduction industrialized because is from and Obesity of energy a intake inexpensive highly to and easy body correlated determine is fat. The to index body mass (BMI) (BMI Nearly overweight ≥30). of this of and obese adults are group 69% >33% U.S. are (BMI ≥25), body influence on associated major risks. of The health anatomic has distribution fat a size, the waist to heart shape), as hypertension, located in pear shape). risk associated compared in located as hips in greater is (upper resistance, Excess disease abdomen fat and thighs and reflected for insulin apple dyslipidemia, the with body, fat body, coronary diabetes, (lower person’s determined is A factors. and genetic environmental weight by the as Appetite signals circulating such hormones are leptin, by hypothalamus. incoming, integrated or afferent, signals, is, by and neural metabolites) (that is that influenced outgoing, hormone) Y and diverse activate signals. peptides prompt These signals of α-melanocyte– neural as efferent hypothalamic release neuropeptide (such and stimulating with risk and death chronic also a of risk increased correlated is for of number conditions. an Obesity a is factor increasing by physical negative best is, activity. intake achieved that and energy is decreasing reduction with Weight caloric balance, foods diets weight Virtually that limit all groups or lead of macronutrients particular short-term to loss. to achieve. difficult Long-term is maintenance of loss weight reduction treatment. pharmacologic occurs intake food with Modest in designed gastric intake as obese bypass, the to Surgical has patient for responded food are treatments. who option procedures, severely to other an such limit not

answer. best the Choose ONE 26.1 For use following 26.2, scenario. the Questions and

to kg), (155 1 on 5 advice 188 weighing ft, weight. how (85.5 lb A and 40-year-old tall your cm) woman, lose in seeks Her 39 in hips 41 in. waist her and measured the The normal and physical the blood all within the data range. remainder laboratory examination were of child of both her sister, (who and parents is Her years), overweight. 14 only are her age patient being throughout The her childhood overweight and adolescence. recalls 5 for 2 periods different months, Over each diets 15 lb time. years, 25 3 weeks been to she from to losing the past seven on of had of she 185–190 diets, to regained returning lb. the On discontinuation weight,

6.1. and index body Calculate the the mass for interpret patient.

= index kg/(height = Body in m)2 (BMI) mass = 35.6. in 85.5/1.552 weight is Because is patient as her BMI >30, the classified obese.

6.2. of the describes patient? Which best the one statements following

A. but She larger. approximately each as adipocyte of individual has number an normal adipocytes of is same weight, the

B. an shows pattern apple of distribution. fat She

higher-than-normal She levels to of show be adiponectin. would C. expected

would She show levels be D. lower-than-normal leptin. of circulating expected to

She lower-than-normal to of expected be levels E. triacylglycerols. show circulating would

Correct B. answer = 1.05 is waist/hip (41/39). (WHR) ratio Her >1.0 women for >0.8 Apple defined for a and WHR as shape is of men. apple she in Therefore, an has fat seen commonly distribution, more pattern males. of Compared risk and her a fat other places heart android (pear-shaped) weight dyslipidemia, body gynoid at with of who coronary diabetes, fat same greater the hypertension, for pattern, disease. women have her pattern up Individuals and triacylglycerol many dating have early loaded (TAG). childhood marked adipocytes, too made depot of a with with each a to obesity fat history fully fat levels its to to occurs that suggesting proportional leptin, deficiency, obesity. mass, human in Plasma resistance are than leptin rather decrease increasing with Adiponectin levels fat mass. liver elevated characteristic obesity of fatty are free TAG. to The circulating to and the acids carried converted released TAG The in of in levels, are lipoproteins, components liver, very-low-density in hepatic are TAG the or plasma resulting stored elevated resulting steatosis. as

Nutrition: Overview and Macronutrients

visit For to additional thePoint. please related chapter, ancillary materials this

OVERVIEW I.

normal necessary sustain of constituents are the functions food the the Nutrients to body. of energy of and carbohydrates, All is by nutrients: three provided (Fig. fats, (calories) classes protein 27.1). nutrients, molecules called these are intake larger the other of (g is they the macronutrients. Because dietary than of amounts) energy-rich that This needed kinds are disease. chapter focuses health the amounts on of chronic maintain to macronutrients and and optimal that prevent and in in are considered Those micronutrients needed lesser Chapters 29. vitamins and and nutrients or µg), minerals, (mg amounts are called 28

II. DIETARY REFERENCE INTAKES

Reference and Medicine to organized U.S. and estimates of nutrients the experts prevent the National Intakes Food have Board optimal Canadian of by Academy Nutrition compiled Committees are Institute of the and of Sciences maintain deficiencies the which (DRI), health of required growth. and Dietary of of amounts Allowances Recommended (RDA), the Dietary periodic since on been with expands published revisions DRI have which The 1941. lifelong in consumption of nutrients on nutrients health, some incorporates diseases. going Unlike upper DRI deficiency role limits the of RDA, the the the establishes beyond and and RDA every Both average it DRI consume RDA is daily the to refer long-term the intakes, full because day. necessary to not nutrient the

A. Definition

for standards intake life of physiologic designated of consists four dietary specific DRI for gender nutrients and stage states, the (Fig. The (age) groups, reference 27.2).

1.

stage (EAR). the gender in average estimated the the of intake The half group meet nutrient Estimated Requirement level requirement average one requirement: and particular daily healthy is life to individuals of Estimated a Average useful and in groups is It the estimating in requirements actual individuals.

2.

to and is daily allowance: Recommended a dietary sufficient in life that level RDA the nearly intake nutrient average meet (97%– the requirements all of individuals is group. 98%) The particular gender stage RDA is a set most of provide but the for safety margin to individuals. is requirement The individuals, intentionally it for minimal healthy not the serves RDA. EAR as setting the foundation The for EAR is, set EAR above the RDA the is 2 distributed, (SD) at 2 of (that standard If nutrient SD SDEAR). + RDA and the = available for EAR the deviation the normally the requirement is is

3.

Adequate if Adequate intake: RDA. (AI) EAR not sufficient Intake of calculate set an or to an instead is scientific available RDA An evidence is of AI (or estimates nutrient groups) a healthy The based people. intake of by apparently is group on is example, for exclusively who for is infants, 6 human full-term nutrient AI the milk mean the human are by for on for healthy, of food young recommended intake source based infants first breast-fed. For estimated supplied months, the daily milk sole the whom

4.

in daily almost Tolerable health Level the average likely TUL). Tolerable no highest nutrient risk (UL, pose upper intake intake effects Intake level: population Upper that the is is of adverse all general to The to or level individuals adverse risk may UL, above As increase. of increases the effects intake the potential of because is of The fortified the increased of supplements. increased dietary availability foods the use and useful UL on may data to which insufficient some For UL. a be there nutrients, develop

B. Using the intakes dietary reference

DRI nutrients of (Fig. have set a Most 27.3). RDA. and nutrient EAR Usually has an corresponding a a by by gender age factors, 372). such influenced be lactation and as pregnancy p. special may set women and are Most (see and in an When designated. RDA), are not to (or an is estimate sufficient the an EAR AI data adequacy Intakes probability improved below the to (Fig. ≤50% the because need EAR of is be 27.4). and or likely RDA intakes RDA be be the above EAR the probability adequate. of adequacy <98%, because can considered and is need the improved at Intakes to between adequate. can Intakes AI the be above considered risk the Intakes for between adverse and no the UL be to can have considered effects. RDA to of not designed [Note: the DRI Because sick.] the needs is meet special does it the any the needs nutritional include of healthy,

III. ENERGY HUMANS REQUIREMENT IN

to defined good are healthy level a whose with intake the predicted dietary calories of Requirement energy activity (EER) is, health. of height expended) the weight consumed is a age, are Energy average Estimated maintain (that adult the in to gender, and equal energy and balance an energy physical The consistent Differences metabolism, and requirements. to body it genetics, person’s a composition, the accurately difficult behavior predict caloric make of individuals in provide simple useful estimates. can However, approximations some kcal/kg/day, 35 body moderately For maintain active adults to very sedentary weight, ~30 active 40 require example, require kcal/kg/day kcal/kg/day. adults adults and require

A. food content of Energy

the a combustion The released calculated food total energy in from by food of is content of calorimeter. heat the expressed is (kcal, or in It kilocalories Cal). in caloric are and conversion the The factors fat, Figure carbohydrate value protein, shown 27.5. of standard for metabolic determining the of Note of fat is is energy carbohydrate. fat carbohydrate those intermediate of the than between or energy that whereas content protein, more of and that ethanol content twice unit countries United energy the (J) a other widely [Note: used of States. is The than joule in kJ. = calorie) Cal, One = (1 1 food 1 kcal cal 4.2 4.2 J; uniformity, United scientists are rather than the the in use calories States. promoting of For many joules predominates this text.] and However, is kcal used still throughout

Figure27.5Averageenergyavailablefromthemacronutrientsandalcohol.

B. the body Use of energy food in

for the resting activity, three and of that by the metabolism generated food. metabolic effect (RMR), of macronutrients used body: is energy-requiring energy thermic occur rate The the in physical processes period energy 24-hour these of processes in expended kcal The a expenditure the is (TEE). by number total

1. individual in an expended the resting, energy metabolic state. RMR rate: Resting postabsorptive a is by ion It as normal and the required blood carry represents respiration, the such energy flow, transport. to out body functions, measuring (O2) be RMR calorimetry). oxygen produced consumed dioxide by carbon or (indirect (CO2) determined can is the [Note: of The quotient to ratio (RQ). respiratory CO2 O2 substrate oxidized being for It (Fig. the reflects energy 27.6).] as and that is can as highest in the weight. sex be mass, young) using equations height reflects men also and estimated and RMR include which well muscle (RMR age lean 1 kcal/kg/hour is commonly and kcal/kg/hour 0.9 for rough for men estimate A used women. determined it not are done. can basal if environmental [Note: be routinely rate conditions is A metabolic stringent more used, but (BMR) the ~10% RMR than BMR.] is higher kg) 1,300 women kg). kcal and for is In as an adult, the for energy resting RMR, (REE), known (50 ~1,800 men expenditure 24-hour (70 the kcal individuals of the REE (Fig. 60%–75% From attributable sedentary TEE the in to is 27.7). from commonly 2.0 by calculating factor hypercatabolic, individuals their [Note: (mild to burns) in that RMR 1.0 TEE.] (severe multiplied is are ranges the Hospitalized injury an infection) and 2.

activity provides the greatest Physical TEE. the variation Muscular in activity: The the of energy depends exercise. amount and intensity duration of on consumed the 1.1 the the is the or cost metabolic ratio to the equivalent energy that multiple as physical expressed This RMR (range (PAR) to (MET). activity referred of is of as task >8.0) a is general, than active person requires In lightly RMR a calories ~30%–50% (see Fig. more the a RMR. active highly 27.7), above whereas individual ≥100% the may calories require

3.

food: resting by the The increases of and digestion production level as much of of food. effect during body 30% Thermic above absorption the heat the as or effect the food, called thermic This thermogenesis. is diet-induced of of TEE. the 5%– 10% amount to intake thermic food to response may The

IV. MACRONUTRIENT ACCEPTABLE DISTRIBUTION RANGES

of of disease Distribution (AMDR) Ranges nutrients. while for risk providing a associated defined as particular reduced Acceptable is with range that of are Macronutrient amounts macronutrient a adequate essential intakes chronic and total AMDR (Fig. of 10%–35% is fat, 20%– from The adults their from calories for carbohydrates, protein 45%–65% 35% from 27.8). protein of biologic below. described fat, carbohydrate, properties are The and dietary

V. DIETARY FATS

kinds of significantly number and diseases chronic The by is amounts influenced consumed the of incidence a of (Fig. nutrients 27.9). fat risk evidence heart and (CHD), or cancer but weaker. obesity much coronary disease most linking Dietary fats dietary for of incidence the strongly is the influence

decreasing dietary amount total emphasized fat. recommendations Earlier the of added grains consumption resulted this and Unfortunately, sugars. increased in refined of of is risk Data fat fat. now more type amount show of a factor the the than that total important

A. heart and lipids coronary Plasma disease

may Plasma from arise or from the cholesterol diet endogenous biosynthesis. either transported combination is in as tissues with between phospholipids In and protein lipoproteins. cholesterol the case,

1. is regulated level rather, varies to but, and plasma diet. of in not high-density lipoproteins: cholesterol Low-density precisely response The Elevated increased (hypercholesterolemia) levels (Fig. risk CHD in an for of cholesterol result total 27.10). and CHD in A lipoproteins p. stronger between the ([LDL-C] see 234). of level correlation cholesterol low-density exists much increases, increases. CHD As LDL-C of high-density lipoprotein In elevated levels cholesterol (HDL contrast,

associated 235). a p. (see been for heart with risk disease C) have decreased a but causative plasma is be [Note: to Elevated relationship associated has CHD, (TAG) yet demonstrated.] with triacylglycerol Abnormal resistance, lipids levels of act sedentary with smoking, plasma risk risk factors of CHD. the and other in (dyslipidemias) obesity, insulin increase combination lifestyle, to

2. be Dietary LDLC, of shown events. effective cardiovascular treatment increasing HDL-C, been for to has the lowering Benefits and cholesterol: in plasma decreasing drug or of reducing risk hypercholesterolemia treatment cholesterol diet-induced decreases plasma drugs typically The 30%–60% concentrations 10%–20%, are plasma by modest, changes whereas p. statin (see cholesterol 224). in with and lower Dietary drug treatment also [Note: TAG.] can

Dietary and lipids B. fats plasma

important TAG most are class quantitatively fats. of the dietary blood chemical of nature TAG on by of influence their fatty the is lipids acids. determined constituent The of (ω-6 mono-and polyunsaturated), of blood and configuration double trans the number features The important or unsaturated of are double cis the that and most presence bonds ω-3), structural versus versus bonds absence fatty lipids. acids the location the (saturated influence the versus

1. fatty double bonds composed whose as are chains of fats. not fats: referred Saturated hydrocarbon contain any primarily do to acids TAG saturated positively LDL-C with of cholesterol of increased saturated and high Consumption levels total plasma fats of and an risk is associated CHD. as acids products some and dairy in of States). palm fat oils, Latin not United America source meat saturated fatty are oils although main major the and coconut vegetable such in The sources and (a and Asia, of unsaturated (and limiting total advise whole <10% fats saturated Many and intake replacing to of grains). experts fats intake strongly with them caloric of

Saturated 14 in lengths 16 cholesterol (palmitic) (myristic) of the increasing are chain fatty plasma with level. potent and acids most carbon (18 Stearic blood on in many acid including effect chocolate) found carbons, little foods has cholesterol.

2. acids to double fatty as Monounsaturated containing with fats. referred monounsaturated bond fats: primarily are one TAG obtained acids generally Monounsaturated plant-based (MUFA) are fatty from oils. in the LDL-C both or increase When fatty for MUFA plasma acids and saturated substituted and total lower maintain HDL-C. diet, cholesterol a diets show Mediterranean part, monounsaturated olive with to cultures, explain, low This that in rich acid), incidence oleic MUFA levels lipoprotein of favorably in modify in ability oil observation of (high the may CHD. recommendation [Note: caloric AMDR of a for 10%–20% common there MUFA, Although is no is intake.] a. of in Mediterranean diet saturated olive fish (from an example low some rich acids PUFA diet The oils, (from polyunsaturated or but fat. is a and and The MUFA diet: nuts) in oil) plant fatty Mediterranean oils, the 27.11 typical composition in Figure that low-fat in diet. diet both consumed United similar a Western comparison Mediterranean with the For States a of to diet and example, the shows amounts fat. food, the diet with of of olive Mediterranean oil seasonally low red fresh The meat, an abundance principal source and material, contains plant of as is saturated TAG, HDL-C total diet diet higher fats. with in Western LDL-C, when and decreased The Mediterranean a associated increased decreased typical plasma cholesterol with compared and

3. to fatty containing primarily as fats. fats: referred TAG more are bond with polyunsaturated than double acids one Polyunsaturated influenced double the within the of disease effects by bonds The of PUFA location cardiovascular on the molecule. are

double of a. sixth the long-chain Fatty acids: are PUFA, with methyl molecule. position bond starting the ω-6 acid end from the fatty the at when beginning (ω) These bond first p. also (see [Note: called n-6 acids fatty are They 182).] cholesterol when Consumption acid substituted containing PUFA, saturated vegetable fats. obtained principally fats of from for linoleic oils, [9,12]), ω-6 plasma (18:2 lowers partially which also lowering lowered, Plasma of LDL-C. offsetting HDL-C, protects lowered, LDL-C but is against benefits the CHD, is various oil, sources soybeans, common acids. are oils, Nuts, sunflower olives, of corn fatty these and and avocados, including AMDR for is 5%–10%. linoleic The acid to deleterious The that free may relative lower intake radical– because mediated PUFA of MUFA PUFA oxidation to concern recommendation of (peroxidation) is lead products.] [Note: of for double methyl at b. bond first (ω) are acids: third ω-3 beginning These bond Fatty position the the end. from long-chain with the PUFA, mortality TAG, and arrhythmias, risk decrease pressure, of blood cardiovascular Dietary PUFA cardiac tendency reduce reduce the plasma for suppress lower ω-3 substantially thrombosis, (Fig. or HDL-C 27.12), they effect LDL-C little have levels. but on Evidence they suggests have effects. that anti-inflammatory The and are such as 18:3(9,12,15), in principally nuts, ω-3 and acid, as walnuts. some canola, plant oils, flaxseed α-linolenic such found PUFA, for The AMDR 0.6%–1.2%. αlinolenic is acid (DHA, acid acid the contains oil 22:6) 20:5). and long-chain Fish docosahexaenoic ω-3 (EPA, eicosapentaenoic Two (for are example, salmon) recommended. per fatty meals week fish g/day documented is while fish 1 recommended, with is of For 2–4 patients prescribed CHD, g/day oils lower TAG. to promote [Note: DHA is in to formulas brain development.] included infant acids Linoleic are for and fatty eicosanoids membrane acids (see and p. fluidity of essential (EFA) required 213). synthesis α-linolenic dermatitis of 206). malabsorption, depletion by result as a of primarily the acids skin (see long-chain scaly characterized caused deficiency, by fat p. is ceramides with fatty EFA

docosahexaenoic DHA = (20:5); acid eicosapentaenoic acid = (22:6).

4. Trans acids: (Fig. acids Trans fatty fatty acids acids the as fatty and of HDL-C, the CHD. are 27.13) chemically unsaturated in like elevate increasing LDL-C they but behave risk thereby lower saturated more body because classified fatty animals. in not Trans occur in acids small naturally in occur fatty amounts do plants but hydrogenated of (for manufacture oil). partially formed vegetable are fatty during and margarine hydrogenation trans oils of vegetable However, the the example, acids in most as commercial are a component many goods, Trans major of fatty such baked acids deep-fried and foods. cookies, be products to of their reformulated trans Many free manufacturers have fats. In Facts (see 2006, U.S. Administration required Food and the that Nutrition p. Drug labels

portray food. trans packaged fat 370) the content of fatty in virtually food. By trans acids 2018, industrial be will permitted no

5. Dietary cholesterol: products. in found only is Cholesterol animal of (Fig. cholesterol plasma cholesterol The dietary effect on types the of consumed. 27.14) fatty less and amount important is than acids experts Many recommend ≤300 mg/day. having has become upper controversial. an However, limit

dietary in an cholesterol to increase intake. concentrations

disease factors coronary affecting C. dietary Other heart

alcohol between of of moderate (up a positive the Moderate drinks/day drink/day for for to up 1 because alcohol risk the (ethanol) to and decreases women CHD, plasma 2 is correlation consumption consumption there concentration and men) HDL-C. of to potential However, of the dangers recommend alcohol health abuse, of increased patients. to alcohol are their because consumption professionals reluctant provide Red phenolic that oxidation; cardioprotective contains inhibit addition red to from compounds see in those content 235). wine p. benefits resulting example, may alcohol wine lipoprotein its (for in also grape [Note: These and raisins antioxidants juice.] present are 27.15 of dietary effects summarizes fats. the Figure prevention in the studies raised concerning Recent have fat the dietary questions guidelines CHD.] of (including for [Note: current meta-analyses)

VI. DIETARY CARBOHYDRATES

dietary of provide is energy. to carbohydrates primary role The United States incidence 349). dramatically increased obesity 2003 the is the now self-reported in p. intake declining, peaked caloric and has in of (see Although (as observers consumption decreased), with leading has some consumption. During link this period, significantly fat increased to carbohydrate consumption same carbohydrate obesity obesity related portion to in and also foods been size. However, to calorie-dense served has expanded lifestyles inactive increasingly are inherently fattening. not Carbohydrates

A. Classification

sugars (monosaccharides fiber. are as (polysaccharides), and disaccharides), and carbohydrates simple complex Dietary classified sugars

1. the are found principal food. and Glucose Monosaccharides: monosaccharides fructose in in syrup, abundant sweet honey. and is fruits, corn corn, Glucose free is apples). found Free and glucose example, with fruits honey fructose in together (for

syrup with enzymatic been corn a to and syrups corn are High-fructose desired glucose syrups undergone pure that glucose) (HFCS) corn mixed corn then have to a. syrup: produce processing into (100% convert sweetness. their High-fructose fructose have beverages, in fructose 42 drinks, HFCS 55% substitute a glucose) commonly 55 including 42% United In used sucrose is HFCS processed States, foods. the (containing as for soft used and in with of of monosaccharides sucrose major that HFCS and difference is ingested a similar, (Fig. mixture metabolism are the being as HFCS and composition The 27.16). significant HFCS postprandial or have meals no insulin between glucose Most shown in difference responses. and either sucrose studies obesity, relationship not demonstrated.] causal has rise parallels use the HFCS The rise but the in been [Note: in a of to of leads glucose absorption plus fructose. (B)

2.

The most are and (glucose (glucose Disaccharides: (glucose lactose + disaccharides + galactose), fructose), abundant glucose). maltose + sucrose sugar abundant is syrup. ordinary is in Sucrose molasses maple and table and sugar milk. Lactose the principal in is found product enzymic polysaccharides. of of is a Maltose digestion and in liquors. significant malt also found beer in It is quantities to term The and monosaccharides disaccharides. “sugar” refers those are and preparation. processing sugars or (such during syrups HFCS) sugars” foods “Added added to as

3.

are a taste. of do polymers have carbohydrates Polysaccharides: often not polysaccharides that (most Complex glucose) sweet a carbohydrate abundance of in is is complex an Starch in example plants. found that wheat vegetables. peas beans and dried and other grains, sources include and (legumes), potatoes, Common

4.

alcohols) nondigestible, aromatic defined noncarbohydrate Fiber: intact (a plants. of carbohydrates in Dietary fiber is nonstarch the and lignin polymer present as short-chain the absorption is fatty partially bacteria plants Soluble in by part that completely of human is the the in small intestine to and or to resistant fiber acids digestion is but large fermented intestine. edible through passes the fiber Insoluble digestive unchanged. largely track provides has Dietary beneficial but fiber several little effects. energy (Fig. diet to adds bulk the First, it 27.17). times into motility increasing of the bowel own promoting (laxation). its and absorb lumen drawing and bowel can fluid the movements weight water, in intestine 10–15 Fiber a in sensation fullness Soluble fiber gastric and delays (satiety). emptying of can result delayed following also results blood glucose meal. a in This reduced emptying spikes in consumption by Second, soluble excretion with levels interfering reabsorption bile (see shown of p. acid fecal been and bile to LDL-C acid has 225). lower fiber increasing significant, total levels. fiber in For soluble for LDL-C with diets (25–50 lowering rich g/day) the are a risk by bran in CHD oat modest, cholesterol example, and reduction associated but hemorrhoids, diets constipation, decrease for and risk diverticulosis. Also, fiber-rich the 25 is dietary 38 for and women g/day for for fiber g/day AI men. The lower in are diets American fiber ~15 However, at most g/day. far term supplements.] the such for commercially “Functional fiber available [Note: isolated benefits fiber” as proven fiber is has used health that

blood Dietary glucose and B. carbohydrate

rise blood Some concentration, in followed decline (Fig. others by glucose fall a in a rapid slow rise whereas steep followed carbohydrate-containing result produce a gradual by foods a 27.18). in response they glycemic Thus, differ (GR). their GR.] Fiber the blunts [Note: the of ranks amount g) eaten based caused of white to by The of the (50 GR carbohydrate index on same GR 0–100 form relative a foods the scale cause glucose. glycemic or carbohydrate-rich they (GI) bread on in the low a whereas is GI <55, high ≥70. is GI A a in control individuals. low-GI glycemic suggests diabetic improves diet that Evidence sense over longer of Food to with and time a of helpful intake. limiting low in tends satiety a caloric a create may GI be period as food size [Note: How typical blood a serving the glycemic load of raises much a is glucose (GL). referred to GI GL.] a carrots) a example, (for high low can and food A have

C. requirements Carbohydrate

most nutrients, the into carbon converted be of essential glucose p. skeletons because (see Carbohydrates acids are not can amino 261). acids p. and for constituent absence (see body leads of carbon gluconeogenesis 195) the p. dietary (see However, whose of protein ketogenesis degradation provide 118). to skeletons amino carbohydrate as for 130 amount for on and the such The set adults of used RDA based g/day glucose by is brain erythrocytes. and children, carbohydrate the carbohydrate-dependent tissues, at usually this However, is intake level exceeded. of calories should Adults of carbohydrates. from 45%–65% total their consume energy of than may no they the diet. of more added represent from that It nutrient-rich total 10% now that sugars concerns displace intake is because recommended foods with 2 and increased type weight are diabetes.] [Note: body sugars Added associated

disease D. Simple sugars and

in consumption harmful. There naturally evidence food of direct the present is is simple sugars that no in sucrose do or Contrary diets hypoglycemia. to diabetes high to folklore, lead not belief, inherently popular contrary not are Also fattening. to carbohydrates of than see fat; that half 4 and protein same kcal/g (the They as yield one Fig. less in when only synthesis excess result of consumed energy the 27.5) body’s fat and in needs. association the However, of absence treatment between dental fluoride (see sucrose is particularly an consumption 405). p. and caries, in there

VII. DIETARY PROTEIN

The AMDR protein for 10%–35%. is protein (see amino essential provides Dietary Fig. the acids 20.2, 262). p. synthesized of needed of the is, humans). in amino synthesis be cannot proteins Nine the they essential acids 20 body (that are for

A. quality Protein

maintenance. of dietary to ability protein tissue amino required acids essential a for quality its measure is of (EAA) provide The the a adopted Score Protein the protein Amino have by Acid evaluate government which Digestibility–Corrected to the as (PDCAAS) quality. Most standard agencies for protein. EAA profile digestibility after the the based of PDCAAS is correcting the on of 1.00. highest score these guidelines under is possible The amino balance high-quality proteins. to with of This proteins intakes a provides method score poorer-quality dietary acid

1.

Proteins because the sources: (meat, to for those poultry, animal proteins high synthesis contain in proportions EAA Proteins (Fig. from and similar from animal all they fish) human required sources have quality tissue milk, a of readily they 27.19), digested. are more and from exception. prepared animal is Gelatin [Note: an collagen has EAA.] several value low of as a in deficiencies biologic result a It 2.

sources: lower quality than Plant from proteins proteins. do a have Proteins plant animal that result animal the value equivalent such a from combined may nutritional way However, is in different plant in proteins sources to protein. be with wheat the produce poor kidney be either to component of value rich) beans may deficient For lysine (methionine but a proteins but combined example, higher (lysine than biologic rich) (Fig. methionine 27.20). the of Animal can complement [Note: proteins.] also value biologic proteins plant

Nitrogen balance B.

urine urea when amount UUN), equals the consumed feces. sweat, as nitrogen nitrogen the urinary balance in occurs of excreted that Nitrogen and (primarily of the nitrogen, or Most in are healthy adults balance. nitrogen normally in on 1 is, There g average, nitrogen [Note: g protein.] 6.25 1.

occurs when This Positive intake balance: nitrogen excretion. nitrogen exceeds nitrogen situations observed occurs, from for emaciating or an childhood, during illness. recovery growth during in is It which tissue pregnancy, example, in

2.

occurs nitrogen This Negative nitrogen intake. than greater is loss balance: when nitrogen or protein; with such stresses, during or as trauma, amino essential burns, is of inadequate illness, physiologic It dietary surgery. associated an acid; lack

g Nout) by than in = in other loss accounts period can Nin g), in for formula, + determined protein feces. balance 4 plus 24-hour be – (UUN g balance a 4 UUN (g and N forms in skin intake urinary loss Nitrogen g/6.25 (N) the – where

requirements Protein C.

required value. its dietary of amount varies The protein with diet in the biologic protein in is The animal the less of greater the proportion the diet, required. protein for weight for 0.8 ~56 RDA or of is computed proteins The g/kg biologic 70-kg value adults, for at for of of g mixed protein individual. a body protein mass, muscle of exercise athletes. benefit extra People a and basis may recommended g/kg daily been on protein from a maintain ~1 for intake regular who to strenuously has Women basal their require pregnant lactating are 30 who g/day or requirements. addition in up to to 2 support should To growth, g/kg/day. consume infants [Note: influence states needs. Disease protein burns require be disease, restriction intake.] increased whereas may kidney protein needed Protein in 1.

advantage than the is the RDA. Consumption no to protein consumption of of physiologic protein: excess There more is excess body’s resulting synthesis. provide needs fatty Protein of to metabolized and carbon the the are acid energy for A skeletons coenzyme or consumed deaminated, in acetyl often nephrolithiasis (kidney is as When by nitrogen, from accompanied excess is and it urinary protein the thereby body eliminated increasing of calcium, increased stones) the osteoporosis. risk urinary

2.

dietary influenced protein-sparing by the diet. protein content requirement carbohydrates: The of the of carbohydrate effect The is acids glucose amino are When nervous fuel synthesis to carbohydrates is the carbon deaminated a system. the central of needed intake low, of that skeletons for is provide the by as for If carbohydrate precursors of <130 are metabolized intake provide amounts g/day, gluconeogenesis. substantial protein to is rather and than of because is maintenance tissue to considered be acids amino allows used “protein-sparing,” Therefore, carbohydrate to it for for repair gluconeogenesis. protein be

Protein-energy D. (calorie) malnutrition

(PEU), how alter undernutrition protein-energy in medical countries, trauma infections. malnutrition decrease patients known digested appetite commonly or or are with developed nutrients most absorbed patients protein-energy hospitalized or In in that seen (PEM), or with conditions is major as also of catabolic parenteral) nutrients.] require Such tube-based [Note: patients (IV, frequently highly intravenous (enteral) or or administration may also malnourished. elderly the are children who PEM be or seen in calories countries, and/or developing is the In PEM. primary cause of inadequate of protein an intake immune reduced system individuals including symptoms, a to a of ability depressed resist show variety Affected infection. with a infection is Death secondary common. from degrees extreme of forms marasmus PEM of and a malnutrition, spectrum (Fig. are is kwashiorkor and two 27.21). Marasmic forms.] features kwashiorkor of has both [Note: 1.

in than total when is the Kwashiorkor deprivation calories. greater reduction Kwashiorkor: relatively occurs protein decreased of deprivation synthesis severely is visceral Protein associated protein. with at in weaning after children about 1 seen in consists carbohydrates. diet Kwashiorkor age when predominantly commonly of developing is countries year, their edema, and include hair, skin depigmented albumin liver, decreased lesions, symptoms fatty pitting bilateral concentration. serum anorexia, stunted growth, Typical lack water proteins, to albumin, Edema the primarily blood of adequate results from distribution and between the maintain of blood tissues. loss. mask may It fat and muscle reflected the is chronic in albumin. Therefore, level malnutrition serum of [Note: adequate, intake may from and carbohydrates levels proteolysis. be caloric insulin suppress lipolysis Because therefore, is, Kwashiorkor nonadapted malnutrition.] 2.

is the greater deprivation calorie occurs Marasmus: when relatively protein. than Marasmus reduction in occurs both or is supplemented replaced children of milk native age are usually year countries with in than that deficient usually when breast in It younger protein watery calories. 1 gruels developing and cereals in arrested muscle (emaciation), include weakness, anemia and symptoms subcutaneous Typical of and extreme (Fig. fat growth, wasting depletion 27.22). show edema Individuals in do marasmus with observed not the kwashiorkor. phosphate because intermediates. malnourished in phosphorylate 400), p. is (see hypophosphatemia can carbohydrate to [Note: used individuals Refeeding result any available severely it rich is phosphate.] Milk in because is given frequently

a (with number loss that disease. is be chronic by diseases, cancer and support, such of by conventional chronic without lipolysis) muscle disorder atrophy seen renal nutritional wasting a and pulmonary or Cachexia, with increased of characterized and reversed as appetite cannot decreased It time. is decreased treatment and with survival associated tolerance response and

VIII. NUTRITION TOOLS

they should the been do they information what eat. as as set consumers about how developed tools the much) (and nutritional content foods gives has eat of well that of A met. the assess whether professionals not allow needs an tools are individual of Additional or medical to being nutritional

A. MyPlate

graphically of Department by what U.S. illustrate groups daily. the MyPlate (USDA) of much how consumed food as should Agriculture to designed be recommendations its each to and was each amounts plate MyPlate, of size relative (vegetables, the fruit, by the grains, In of groups on (Fig. dairy) of section represented food the are protein, relative and their five 27.23). age sex. The of and that variables depends include servings on number replaced MyPlate 2011.] in MyPyramid [Note:

B. label facts Nutrition

Most to Nutrition goods “food of (Fig. have label, or packaged are Facts label” types required a single size the a and includes that of number 27.24), the servings provides, per Cal of it container. serving, the a value listed. In is shown addition, nutrients most daily percent for (%DV) The [Note: for diet based %DV adults.] 2,000-Cal a healthy on is 1.

in amount serving the a for intake recommended a %DV a the nutrient. daily compares value: nutrient that given The to of product of Percent single daily for %DV For the as are total daily and intake. the on example, their fiber, well carbohydrates recommended for minimum as listed, micronutrients based Thus, 20% 20% if minimum day. provides calcium, amount of for lists label the calcium serving of recommended the one each needed intake, a percentage maximum on their what reflects and maximum In the serving the %DV provides. sodium cholesterol, and based of this recommended fat, %DV saturated for contrast, daily are %DV no recommended protein for p. is 367). depends (see because There the body weight on intake [Note: mono-and disaccharides. represents “Sugars” (total oligo-and [fiber carbohydrate the the carbohydrate polysaccharides.] remainder The + is sugars]) of – 2.

are implementation to A following included; removed; the and to C, be be revisions: people USDA Proposed reflect be adjusted 2018: consuming. amounts to are the to total vitamin from D, by now for fat, and and sugars, is the 2014, changes label potassium Nutrition serving fat are Cal to vitamins Added size proposed In and the Facts highlight proposed to changes label design (Fig. Additionally, of key the parts were 27.25). based for of addition/removal on is [Note: The data newer risk micronutrients proposed underingestion.] on certain the

C. assessment Nutrition

clinical nutritional evaluates status information. based Nutrition assessment on history, to) measures, data. (but is It includes limited not and dietary laboratory anthropometric [tube] long-chain in through example, [IV] TAG (for and/or diet or may medical in replacement nutrition the disorders) the of result with which conditions feeding).] medical findings treatment of enteral example, [Note: therapy, malabsorption in of parenteral is Assessment intake method medium-chain changes (for TAG 1.

of food a a Dietary history: is of period This time. intake over record (as a eaten period for eating) recorded For the 3–7 a as in diary, specific are of possible and food days. food “real soon exact after types amounts of time” were in were amounts example, a 24 approaches eaten often recall a the week, food 24-hour the or eaten eaten the and typical specific include month) frequency of how (for and in Retrospective questionnaire a what foods hours. day, last they and fruits

2.

measures: the Anthropometric physical These are of measures body. and body p. of fat, 349). height, subcutaneous thickness indicator fat), p. of not to) of indicator limited indicator They (an index see waist 349), see mass abdominal are include obesity, (an (but weight, skin-fold (an circumference ft for large an lb frame 5 5 and males) Ideal height ft, + Hamwi [Note: for using over of first one.] + a or the method: females) 100 for can −10% 106 5 weight be with body a every adjustment lb calculated (for (for 10% of the lb inch small for 3.

on tissues, are obtained waste. tests performed fluids, and These by Laboratory data: body (for for can risk), transthyretin fecal fat as indices (for serum malabsorption), They deficiencies), (for vitamin protein–energy and (such balance N proteins and [prealbumin]) and plasma LDL-C include status. red albumin cell cardiovascular and made p. proteins through as liver transport acids These such are and thyroxine the (see [Note: blood. molecules fatty 406) in patients. with albumin mortality morbidity levels Low and in correlate increased hospitalized its in transthyretin use as days) half-life the monitoring has short patients.] of (2–3 to of (20 to progress of that hospitalized compared led days) albumin The

excretion, or Nutritional increased insufficiency intake loss the of inability absorption, inadequate or availability), (caused, requirements. of can to utilization, increased result eat, appetite, an nutrient decreased decreased by for example, inadequate be

IX. AND NUTRITION THE STAGES LIFE

EAA life sources, micronutrients, energy every EFA, are and required stage. at Macronutrient needs. Additionally, each specific nutrition has stage

A. childhood, adolescence and Infancy,

are required higher 1 The and subsequent and rapid childhood adolescence) year than development to in in relative necessitate (birth needs infancy 1 age to protein year) stages. growth (age size body life and to energy in height adolescence, increases In and weight the needs. marked increase nutritional that occur (Fig. charts Growth to for values expected and compare 27.26) weight years) used of the same and/or the age are stature (height) sex. an others to (≤20 individual’s from are normal individuals over on based time. large data They of numbers more expected percentile Deviations crossing lines, or as concern.] in reflected of the [Note: from growth curve, the raise two 1. on for it appropriate because infant. most Ideal micronutrients human Infants: the based infant amounts breast and in calories is milk nutrition human provides in Carbohydrates, 7:3:1 and protein, fat ratio. are present a addition nearly In human the milk to oligosaccharides. 200 disaccharide [Note: unique contains lactose, of enzymes all the which Bifidobacterium expresses type, breast-fed needed the to infant’s About sugars. represented microbiota one is infantis, by the microbes) these complex population degrade 90% intestine (the of in probiotic turn, support prebiotics that as (helpful B. in The of a bacteria).] sugars, act growth infantis, the require however, exclusively in milk D, D vitamin breast-fed and supplementation. vitamin low babies Breast is infection.] provides and the Human [Note: antibodies proteins other risk reduce that of milk

on to plus referred microbiota as body the The in human the genomes and their microbiome. are changes the environment at and with is It acquired life stages. from birth the nutrition influenced microbiome influences is The processing facilitating itself host gut by food. that and food by of consumed diabetes relationship Its under investigation. is obesity, with undernutrition, and

2.

with As for infants, increased Children: need nutrients. children have and calories this of deficiencies primary iron in however, calcium. stage, and The concerns are

3.

increase In phosphorus. need the years, height calcium, iron, increases and weight the in for protein, and Adolescents: the teen calories, of underconsumption and stage and sugar overconsumption can vitamin A, in sodium, acid. Eating this thiamine, of patterns and result in fat, folic age disorders [Note: and this in Eating are obesity concerns group.]

Adulthood B.

in in older concern young concern adults. whereas adults, is a a is malnutrition Overnutrition

1.

good on of maintenance adults Nutrition the prevention focuses young disease. Young in of health and the adults: and diet balanced fatty intake fat focus limited plant-based intake ω-6 goal ω-3 of on of in and a foods whole and grains), rich acids, and PUFA. (with saturated The a trans fiber is

2.

virtually micronutrients The in Pregnant protein, or requirements lactation. women: and all for calories, and lactating pregnancy increase vitamin (to defects folic acid p. DHA prevent D, [see iron, calcium, iodine, recommended. and tube neural is with 379]), typically Supplementation

3.

Older malnutrition. adults: the risk increases Aging of (dysgeusia) a intake. Decreased smell of sense taste decreases and from appetite reduced nutrient resulting (hyposmia) isolation, such limitations, in reduced also play may and a Physical including [Note: dentition, psychosocial role factors, as problems intake.] with calcium, of D Inadequate intake B12 and common. is vitamins protein, and result decreased absorption 381). by deficiency stomach p. B12 (reduced achlorhydria can from see caused acid, resulting in mass muscle increases, In aging, RMR. lean decreases decreased and fat occur of [Note: stage Drug–nutrient as medications can the number common as but more are interactions life at any in increases aging.]

(see inhibitors depression Monoamine used oxidase treat (MAOI), to p.

can with disease, 287) Parkinson early and foods. tyramine-containing interact during the (Fig. tyrosine of from a Tyramine decarboxylation food is aging, or the monoamine of curing, derived fermentation 27.27). release It the and blood heart causes pressure norepinephrine, rate. increasing of an take for MAOI a at are foods consume and risk crisis. hypertensive such who Patients

X. CHAPTER SUMMARY

the and of deficiencies and The (DRI) Reference prevent estimates maintain to optimal nutrients provide of health growth. Intakes amounts Dietary required group; the risk instead highest nutrient individuals in all the in the the pose (EAR), nutrient 50% a nearly Recommended Tolerable the (age) sufficient intake adverse (UL), They average (RDA), level average all to intake evidence gender level effects meet of particular Requirement RDA; individuals which intake population. is requirement to Allowance Estimated and RDA daily daily that scientific Upper and the estimated level Dietary the of the of group; the life meet to average almost if stage healthy is requirements consist daily dietary likely is individuals Average to (97%–98%) a the sufficient calculate Intake of not nutrient no general stage available life is set the gender that of and Adequate to (AI), the Intake Level an of health in and of occur protein processes or in activity, three 4 is by the kcal/g the kcal/g thermic and metabolism body: rate, macronutrients that physical (9 food. generated the energy-requiring metabolic for the resting energy fat used of of of The carbohydrate) effect while of ranges amounts risk (AMDR) particular reduced adequate Ranges as the of disease associated chronic Acceptable Distribution that providing nutrients. essential with macronutrient are Macronutrient of for intake defined a are should calories consume from Adults 20%–35% protein total from fat, their and of 45%–65% (Fig. 10%–35% from carbohydrates, 27.28). of increased low-density (LDL-C) heart cholesterol in (CHD). lipoproteins in levels result disease Elevated risk for coronary In CHD. associated been (HDL-C) cholesterol risk decreased of elevated in with high-density a contrast, lipoproteins have for levels for effective the in LDL-C, is drug and of increasing or hypercholesterolemia Dietary CHD. risk reducing treatment HDLC, decreasing Consumption of with associated plasma total is of LDL-C. high saturated and fats levels strongly fats total increase lower cholesterol diet, both monounsaturated and HDL-C. acids saturated the or in When LDL-C maintain plasma but for substituted fatty containing also of protects acids HDL-C, LDL-C, polyunsaturated lowered. plasma is fatty lowers CHD, Consumption fats against which ω-6 but reduce arrhythmias suppress polyunsaturated reduce of substantially the for cardiac and decrease Dietary risk fats tendency ω-3 the thrombosis, plasma mortality. triacylglycerols, and cardiovascular fiber and provide diet. to energy the Carbohydrates When part are in to promote not intake equal is consumed as they do energy a of expenditure, obesity. which they diet caloric provides protein amino essential acids. Dietary is to acids its a tissue Protein the maintenance. of essential ability amino for measure required quality provide sources, plants. have a than Proteins from higher-quality animal general, in that derived protein from proteins in different to plant However, value that be may combined result equivalent a nutritional protein. such from way sources is the animal in N (N) balance exceeds when intake occurs N nitrogen Positive excretion. It observed in situations occurs, illness. in is an emaciating for growth during from recovery childhood, which in or example, tissue pregnancy, N Negative losses N intake. greater N balance occurs than when are or an burns, inadequate amino of or essential illness, with such physiologic stresses as surgery. protein; lack trauma, is dietary acid; associated during It in occurs deprivation the relatively is total Kwashiorkor protein greater calories. when reduction than by characterized It is edema. relatively deprivation greater than protein. the in Marasmus is calorie occurs when reduction edema is seen. No Both forms protein-energy malnutrition are (PEM). of extreme consumers give labels packaged information content foods. the Nutrition of Facts nutritional about nutritional includes and laboratory Medical dietary history, status anthropometric measures, assessment data. of life needs. Each nutrition specific stage has monitor through growth Growth from charts pattern individual to an birth used adolescence. are of the Drug–nutrient in are interactions of especially concern, older adults.

best ONE the Choose answer.

7.1. a which the statements would shown at support kwashiorkor? of diagnosis the right, child of For The child:

tissue. to A. adipose in deposition due of appears fat plump increased

edema. displays B. and abdominal peripheral

above albumin serum level has C. a normal.

weight height. D. markedly for has decreased

correct (calorie) fair answer in intake protein good to the presence = Kwashiorkor is intake. inadequate by energy B. caused The of and include belly a peripheral in serum edema legs) swollen decreased (note Typical a concentration. caused findings with the by largely and patient abdominal kwashiorkor albumin Body normal because height be fat edema. for of but stores weight depleted, can are diet in includes calories and a adequate Treatment protein.

7.2. following of is concerning the correct? dietary Which fat one statements

oil oil saturated is rich fats. and rich A. is olive in Coconut in monounsaturated fats,

isomers, B. Fatty raise cis naturally double bonds, high-density occurring levels. trans lipoprotein the containing acids cholesterol unlike

required linoleic acids polyunsaturated The components. C. linolenic acids fatty and are

from acids obtained those contain do than fatty generally Triacylglycerols D. less animals. unsaturated from plants

unable and = linoleic answer linolenic Correct C. fatty make acids. Humans to are essential the are these diet. Consequently, acids fatty in in rich Coconut fats. olive monounsaturated oil fats, is rich in and oil is saturated of lipoprotein Trans high-density raise plasma fatty low-density acids not cholesterol. lipoprotein cholesterol, levels acids fatty more from unsaturated plants Triacylglycerols generally animals. contain from than those obtained do

7.3. daily 65 carbohydrate, information reasonably the of that of average 275 protein, of following conclusions consuming and a a one 70-kg can Given g 75 which of g of be fat, is g drawn? the man

A. derived fats. from are About of calories 20%

B. diet The of contains amount sufficient fiber. a

is C. balance. individual The nitrogen in

current recommendations. and the conform to fat diet The of in proportions carbohydrate, protein, D.

The day is per kcal. E. intake energy 3,000 total about

= g + energy g (65 + 9 1,100 4 kcal/g) D. 300 = (75 fat = intake × carbohydrate kcal/g) g is (275 Correct 4 total kcal/day. + The protein answer total kcal/g) + × 1,985 585 × 585/1,985 percentage is = from carbohydrate calories 1,100/1,985 from 55, 300/1,985 is protein = fat The from = 30. is derived 15, and of to are recommendations. current These close very from or presented. deduced of fiber cannot amount the data The nitrogen balance be protein the of a value, is If balance low nitrogen is biologic possible. negative

7.6. dioxide (carbon and hypercapnia impaired in chronic obstruction expiration, results mucus hypoxemia (low causes bronchitis, In oxygen airway that level), retention). excessive blood production chronic a be chronic obstructive might a Why for diet high-fat, with caused low-carbohydrate patient pulmonary by bronchitis? disease recommended

A. relative atoms Fat do carbon than to carbohydrates. more hydrogen oxygen contains atoms or

B. dense calorically less than Fat carbohydrates. is

C. generates less Fat dioxide. metabolism carbon

respiratory than carbohydrates. is quotient higher for RQ the The D. (RQ) for fat

production (COPD) carbon to the consumed, pulmonary oxygen C. goal thereby acute bronchitis appropriate quotient chronic without which answer (CO2) respiratory the of treatment produced minimizing = to disease obstructive CO2. caused (RQ), for A dioxide the ratio nutrition is by is the Correct increasing of insure (RQ =1.0). (RQ catabolism CO2 than of the = fat of Less produced the from carbohydrate 0.7) is from metabolism atoms. oxygen Fat fewer contains is Fat than calorically is denser carbohydrate. indirect RQ determined by [Note: is calorimetry.] 7.7. over from was burns rescued man 45% with who burns). fire was a house hospital 32-year-old body his of admitted A to (severe the and man 72 is The lb (183 kg) in tall. (70 weighs 154 cm) best the one of of Which patient? is following needs the of daily estimate caloric rapid immediate the this

A. B. 1,345 kcal 2,690 D. kcal 1,680 C. kcal kcal 3,360

energy men D. Correct body used of expenditure total kg = for (TEE) kcal/1 answer A is rough the 1 weight/24 hours. estimate commonly women.] [Note: 0.8 kcal is It for this 70 × 24 (1 kg). value is patient, × kcal hours For that kcal/kg/hour 1,680 × 3,360 included kcal In of severe in an kcal. 2 injury must 2 addition, = the be calculation: factor for 1,680 burns

7.8. value) about Nutrition patient asks give on Which best label? the advice who notation “%DV” daily one the following to Facts a (percent of is the the

A. day. each Achieve daily 100% for each value nutrient

B. highest for daily that nutrients. all have foods Select value percent the

value Select a foods low percent C. with for the micronutrients. daily

daily low value Select for with saturated percent D. fat. a foods

of in a product for single the amount to that a daily a The daily compares = of serving the D. given intake value (%DV) percent recommended answer Correct nutrient. nutrient as recommended saturated are listed on maximum fat, on the minimum and their for as on for label, cholesterol, sodium their daily fiber, daily intake, micronutrients based The %DV %DV the carbohydrates for well total the intake. are based recommended and whereas

case. following the use 27.8, 27.7 Questions For and

176 sedentary kg) requests a lb weighing physical. 50-year-old man (80 A problems. health denies any He of for except 295 Routine total plasma blood analysis cholesterol is mg/dl. unremarkable his refuses <200 drug (Reference for therapy mg.) hypercholesterolemia. man value The is 1-day Analysis recall a following: showed the of dietary 7.4. have effect in following which cholesterol? greatest would plasma the components the the one Decreasing of dietary lowering patient’s

Carbohydrates A.

B. Cholesterol

Fiber C.

D. Monounsaturated fat

Polyunsaturated fat E.

Saturated F. fat

saturated fat this plasma = Correct strongly intake diet. of influences in cholesterol The most answer F. The is fat with a of as high-fat the saturated consuming high-calorie, 42% patient fat. diet and important are to lower dietary dietary fats most caloric substitute fiber. recommendations and monounsaturated intake, for increase saturated polyunsaturated total The fats, A dietary decrease is primary cholesterol in helpful but would not be objective. a

7.5. information to would patient’s the necessary What total expenditure? energy estimate be

based activity × variables. physical needed and rate/hour duration metabolic The resting physical expenditure and ratio on are (estimated type daily the a of activities energy basal (PAR) 24 hours) An thermic 10% of the to would for be account added effect additional food. an Note be would factor calculation, that if in modified. the patient and would (IF) PAR the injury included be the hospitalized, were are of PAR Tables available. and IF

Micronutrients: 28 Vitamins

please chapter, materials additional thePoint. this to For ancillary related visit

I. OVERVIEW

adequate that are chemically quantities the unrelated be by and, Vitamins cannot organic in synthesized humans be must therefore, by compounds supplied diet. acid, cobalamin, vitamins niacin, acid) water as and riboflavin, ascorbic soluble. are biotin, Nine pyridoxine, pantothenic (folic thiamine, acid, classified rare. the toxicity excreted Because they is in urine, readily are quickly. deficiencies can occur However, soluble (A, E) K, vitamins (Fig. and are Four fat D, termed 28.1). dietary absorbed, (in released, with p. fat. and chylomicrons, 227) transported see They are and adipose readily excreted, significant and are in the stored quantities not They tissue. liver are quantities lead A and consumption excess can fact, these (see accumulation D the of vitamins Intakes Dietary compounds. 27) In Chapter toxic of Reference to of in of specific Vitamins functions. are cellular to perform required water-soluble intermediary of many of of precursors For vitamins the example, coenzymes enzymes are metabolism. for the (vitamin contrast K) vitamins, coenzyme In function. a vitamin fat-soluble has one the to only water-soluble

II. (VITAMIN B9) FOLIC ACID

one-carbon in folate), (or, role biosynthesis plays several a which of for key the essential metabolism, Folic acid is compounds. most alcoholism. vitamin in is pregnant individuals acid deficiency among particularly deficiency the United States, probably common women the Folic and with vegetables of [Note: are folic acid.] dark-green source Leafy, a good

A. Function

of pyrimidine Tetrahydrofolate amino coenzyme reduced, thymidine incorporated and from (Fig. DNA in of transfers and glycine, a purine synthesis intermediates such nucleotides, to folate, monophosphate serine, form and the (THF), one-carbon histidine (TMP), the fragments donors as into receives them acids, nucleotide 28.2).

anemias B. Nutritional

a a condition lower normal reduced of transport has in oxygen Anemia to which which the (O2). blood in is a hemoglobin, results concentration than ability of blood observed size to inadequate by or classified the (Fig. corpuscular in red the (RBC), (that intake can mean volume according the cells nutrients) Nutritional anemias be or of one those essential more is, caused blood (MCV), 28.3). iron, of of most the anemia normal), is anemia. below common by lack form Microcytic nutritional caused (MCV normal), vitamin acid deficiency in results folic nutritional or category major (MCV anemia, a second of above from B12. macrocytic The accumulation precursors, [Note: marrow (Fig. (or are as known large, megaloblastic either called bone megaloblasts, immature the anemias commonly and macrocytic vitamin in both) causes of RBC deficiency a blood These because of the 28.4). neutrophils are seen.] also Hypersegmented 1.

or serum inhibitors Fig. example, of methotrexate) example, Folate alcoholism, of 372), the drugs folate that caused caused with see levels be (for demand anemia: can by small and (see by pathology absorption (for and p. intestine, increased lactation; pregnancy reductase are treatment Inadequate dihydrofolate poor 28.2). few deficiency cause a weeks. within folate-free a can diet A of is A acid folic deficiency anemia (see megaloblastic result Fig. primary to caused nucleotides therefore, leads an an of which 28.4), purine make divide. of (including inability synthesis to cells DNA to TMP, by diminished precursors) and inability RBC and,

2.

and tube States ~3,000 anencephaly, defects the neural pregnancies annually. tube and Folate most bifida affect in (NTD), Spina the common defects: United neural during and first been significantly has shown Folic trimester supplementation before acid to conception NTD. the reduce advised µg/day) folic consume are (400 that amount ten if the a affected by pregnancy pregnancy times and Therefore, of childbearing 0.4 women to a acid previous reduce to risk having NTD mg/day was all of affected. age of fetal folate pregnancy. of at time when folate-dependent because not life, yet women first the development many their at of of the are in weeks conception occur Adequate must aware nutrition occurs time critical a In wheat of authorized Administration products, and ~0.1 grain addition mg/day. and of 1998, dietary a Drug folic enriched the Food supplementation to flour resulting acid U.S. in the folate of reproductive-aged of allows mg This ~50% women all all from 0.4 sources. to receive supplementation

III. (VITAMIN COBALAMIN B12)

reactions: some (Fig. produced isomerization valine, odd of homocysteine and atoms required carbon and (FA) in threonine, B12 coenzyme Vitamin is acids of acids (Hcy) (CoA), enzymatic methionine) essential fatty for with numbers of the (isoleucine, amino methylmalonyl is the remethylation humans which A of degradation and methionine during to two the 28.5). into (branched) nervous unusual is become incorporated FA central membranes, cobalamin including system cell those (CNS). of the and deficient, When accumulate of some deficiency. account vitamin B12 of This manifestations neurologic may for the is [Note: in acid THF) also the N5-methyl Folic required of remethylation (as

Hcy. in Hcy B12 deficiency Therefore, results folate of or elevated levels.]

A. and Structure coenzyme forms

system p. two porphyrin linked a bridge. directly of pyrrole ring corrin that a heme than 279), in but rings resembles Cobalamin are rather differs through methene ring contains (see of the the that Cobalt the four in groups. corrin pyrrole the nitrogens coordination of p. held center with is the 407) the of (see bonds by ring nitrogen bonds 5,6-dimethylbenzimidazole The in cyanocobalamin remaining vitamin the are in with preparations form the cobalt with of the the and coordination commercial cyanide of of (Fig. of 28.6). with physiologic Fig. (see and coenzyme replaced or in is methyl 5′deoxyadenosylcobalamin forms cobalamin which a The cyanide group, methylcobalamin, of are 5′-deoxyadenosine respectively 28.6).

B. Distribution

not and it microorganisms, present in by plants. only is is Vitamin synthesized B12 microbiota from (see preformed other intestinal Animals their derived vitamin p. obtain by from or 371) eating foods animals. the in meat, cereals. products, fortified present appreciable amounts and fish, eggs, Cobalamin red liver, is dairy in

hypothesis trap C. Folate

the The of effects pronounced of most intestine. erythropoietic rapidly and such cobalamin the cells, bone the mucosal of deficiency are in marrow dividing cells as tissue Such of synthesis need tissues pp. the for N10-formyl nucleotides DNA for required N5,N10-methylene of and (see the forms both replication THF 303). 292 and utilization is in of B12 to of methylation N5-methyl B12 the impaired. the form methionine of dependent THF deficiency, vitamin in However, the Hcy accumulates. form cannot directly form, forms other the in trapped to the is Because converted folate N5-methyl methylated be of which THF, levels The the decrease. of forms other deficiency the Thus, THF a of cobalamin purine the in forms leads in and symptoms deficiency to of megaloblastic TMP needed resulting synthesis, anemia.

cobalamin Clinical for D. indications

In (2–5 the B12 are significant other body. vitamins, contrast in vitamin to mg) amounts of water-soluble stored As take B12 the the of of for it may develop clinical a years result a decreased intake vitamin. deficiency as result, of several symptoms to absorption more happens [Note: (in quickly months) much is if (see impaired below). Deficiency absorption.] The evaluates test B12 Schilling decreased the which in determined or of by vitamin. absorption in level intake is be can acid deficiency the individuals methylmalonic of blood, low elevated B12 with

1. Vitamin seen from in commonly B12 Pernicious deficiency most is the fail absorb anemia: patients (Fig. to vitamin who the intestine 28.7). in is stomach. the B12 released food the acidic of environment from [Note:

elderly gastric Malabsorption due (achlorhydria).] the secretion often most cobalamin to in acid reduced is of of then binds or haptocorrin), Free (R-protein the glycoprotein moves into and intestine. B12 a the complex another and intrinsic enzymes by glycoprotein, from R-protein the B12 binds is (IF). released pancreatic factor the and The a binds intestine travels the surface mucosal through of on complex cells the cobalamin–IF (cubilin) to in receptor ileum. where the it cobalamin is circulation, binding into transported and, general mucosal protein by The the (transcobalamin). subsequently, into carried is cell its liver, is B12 in and up primarily. the taken stored ileum. into efficiently in is and released bile reabsorbed the It Severe pernicious B12 anemia. malabsorption vitamin to of leads is responsible most a parietal an (lack absorption). that the This commonly are IF of cells of result IF disease destruction of the prevents autoimmune synthesis for B12 gastric of who gastrectomy had total deficient a and, become therefore, have deficient.] Patients IF B12 or partial [Note: and show cobalamin as deficiency anemic the Individuals disease recycling neuropsychiatric with (folate they usually impaired), develops. are is symptoms irreversible. The effects are CNS oral or Pernicious B12 high-dose intramuscular treatment of anemia cyanocobalamin. either injection with requires lifelong IF of is by the even works of B12 in [Note: absence diffusion.] IF-independent ~1% because Supplementation uptake

of supplementation reverse B12 deficiency. therefore, the cobalamin partially Folic can abnormalities acid can deficiency mask a hematologic and, acid the the Thus, anemia deficiency, folic of with is and determined. initiated B12 CNS of both vitamin therapy prevent effects until megaloblastic for the later B12 be can to cause anemia

IV. (VITAMIN ACID ASCORBIC C)

The (Fig. C ascorbic form of active acid is vitamin 28.8). Its a reducing function is as agent. main (Fe) of iron ferrous hydroxylation a prolyl (Fe+2) hydroxylases form. where residues hydroxylation in keep collagen; coenzyme reduced, lysyl role C the p. example, its and in (for to Vitamin in of is is reactions see 47), the maintenance tissue Thus, connective of for vitamin normal wound as for the healing. as is C required well of intestine reduction Vitamin iron Fe+2 the (see C p. of from ferric to nonheme 403). absorption the the form facilitates dietary by also (Fe+3)

A. Deficiency

teeth, Ascorbic loose acid in deficiency (Fig. swollen a sore results scurvy, and disease changes, joints, bone and by vessels, fragile blood characterized spongy fatigue hemorrhage, gums, 28.9). of resulting collagen, deficiency by can the connective Many tissue. in hydroxylation of decreased be the defective symptoms explained microcytic decreased A iron anemia by of seen. may absorption caused also be

B. Chronic prevention disease

E a Vitamin 395) includes (see C which is p. are of of β-carotene 386), p. and antioxidants. (see that nutrients as group one known vitamin of such cancers. a as rich incidence of of diseases, associated some reduced and vitamin chronic regenerates in these (CVD) compounds form Vitamin E.] disease C [Note: cardiovascular the is with certain Consumption functional, diets decreased effects. However, isolated trials have preventive any supplementation clinical convincing involving with failed the to demonstrate antioxidants

PYRIDOXINE B6) (VITAMIN V.

pyridine. all term for Vitamin pyridoxal, is a collective and derivatives B6 of pyridoxine, pyridoxamine, functional ring They group of the (Fig. attached the only differ nature to in the 28.10). primarily and in Pyridoxine obtained pyridoxamine found in whereas are occurs animals. pyridoxal foods plants, from serve the active All compounds phosphate biologically of coenzyme, three can (PLP). as pyridoxal precursors reactions (see a to those particularly transsulfuration the as in PLP involving large catalyze enzymes, 264). a amino p. functions example, acids, for coenzyme that for of of cysteine Hcy number glycogen required PLP [Note: is (see p. phosphorylase by also 128).]

A. for Clinical indications pyridoxine

forming B6 with used inactive treat PLP. Isoniazid, by vitamin derivative commonly tuberculosis, induce an can to deficiency a drug a treatment. adjunct dietary B6 to isoniazid an is with Thus, supplementation are those in but been observed and oral in in low in infants women alcoholism. have B6, taking formulas contraceptives, Otherwise, newborn deficiencies dietary with in fed pyridoxine rare

B. Toxicity

only the toxicity. Vitamin water-soluble B6 significant is with vitamin (sensory amount 400 Neurologic (RDA) over occur neuropathy) the upper symptoms above intakes times 500 mg/day, limit times at (UL). allowance and recommended the 5 dietary tolerable an nearly discussion 27 UL.) for and (See a Chapter of RDA improvement, vitamin but is when not discontinued. recovery, Substantial occurs complete the

VI. (VITAMIN THIAMINE B1)

pyrophosphate the to active the of form pyrophosphate (Fig. by (TPP) of biologically vitamin, transfer formed a is the group Thiamine thiamine ATP from

28.11). of a by formation in transketolase the serves degradation as α-ketols TPP coenzyme or (Fig. 28.12A) the of and α-keto decarboxylation in acids oxidative (Fig. 28.12B).

A. Clinical for indications thiamine

α-ketoglutarate, of CNS. a cells, role tissues energy particularly is key decarboxylation and of which oxidative most of in the in important The metabolism plays pyruvate therefore, impaired thiamine In decreased of function. of cellular is dehydrogenase-catalyzed ATP decreased, two activity resulting these production and, the reactions deficiency, in TPP required dehydrogenase of is acid α-keto muscle also (see 266). p. by branched-chain [Note: the these acid requires each dehydrogenase TPP.] that of decarboxylase α-keto complexes It of is multienzyme activity TPP. observed addition deficiency is erythrocyte with of Thiamine diagnosed an transketolase by in increase

1.

is the component diet. thiamine-deficiency severe areas This in syndrome the Beriberi: where polished found is of major rice (characterized dilated by by (characterized peripheral of as or neuropathy, cardiomyopathy). beriberi Adult in the especially classified is dry legs) wet edema because

2.

Wernicke-Korsakoff or alcoholism, with In intestinal dietary chronic due in to vitamin. seen the primarily which association impaired thiamine insufficiency deficiency, United the States, absorption of syndrome: is is mental confusion, problems alcoholism (a (weakness ophthalmoplegia gait individuals characterized state a thiamine-deficiency encephalopathy Wernicke-Korsakoff develop motion as eye with well Wernicke eyeballs), ataxia, of to-and-fro memory as of and by muscles) the Some Korsakoff and nystagmus with syndrome, with dementia. hallucinations incomplete. but supplementation, The recovery treatable syndrome memory with is typically is thiamine of

VII. (VITAMIN B3) NIACIN

derivative. a substituted or nicotinic pyridine Niacin, acid, is its derivative, adenine coenzyme nicotinamide 28.13. shown Figure dinucleotide biologically adenine active in phosphorylated (NADP+), and (NAD+) as phosphate forms dinucleotide nicotinamide are The acid the that of carboxyl a an contains in nicotinic Nicotinamide, a also group, of derivative occurs amide instead diet. readily the to is equivalent therefore, Nicotinamide body in nutritionally acid. deaminated is nicotinic and, reactions in Figure which in the the of two pyridine a oxidation–reduction NAD+ as 28.14. in reduction as serve from ion, shown coenzyme undergoes by ring NADP+ accepting and coenzymes hydride electrons NADH are and NADP+ NADPH, respectively. NAD+ reduced forms of The and [Note: tryptophan, of be quinolinate, NAD(P). can A to converted metabolite tryptophan 1 of = niacin.] comparison, In mg of 60 mg to NADH. an ion hydride a hydrogen (H) The electron.] plus atom consists [Note: of = phosphate.

A. Distribution

found lean Niacin and in milk, unrefined and is (especially meats cereal, grains enriched liver). and

B. niacin 1. for Clinical indications

gastrointestinal involving causes and CNS. of tract, niacin pellagra, A skin, Deficiency: deficiency a disease the Ds: three dementia. symptoms diarrhea, pellagra of the dermatitis and The progress through (photosensitive), untreated, D) occurs. death If (a fourth in symptoms. by absorption defective can of tryptophan, result pellagra-like disorder, characterized Hartnup and tryptophan. is niacin Corn [Note: both low in pellagra.] cause Corn-based diets can 2.

1.5 fatty in RDA, at circulating primary 100 producer g/day, (FFA). lipolysis treatment: of free the strongly or doses Hyperlipidemia tissue, inhibits Niacin acids times of the adipose The liver FFA synthesis. for uses a precursor normally (TAG) triacylglycerol as circulating major these required which for synthesis, decrease TAG very-low-density causes Thus, see is niacin lipoprotein 230) a in ([VLDL] production. p. liver plasma. in lipoprotein) cholesterol-rich is derived Low-density lipoprotein (LDL, the VLDL the from VLDL) plasma (in are lowered. and (in cholesterol LDL) Thus, TAG both particularly are elevated. and treatment useful of both in IIb Therefore, which VLDL in the type niacin is LDL hyperlipoproteinemia, cause prostaglandin-mediated niacin acute, of high required doses flushing. can The effect synthesis Aspirin p. this can reduce 214). by side prostaglandin (see inhibiting also may Itching occur. high-density Niacin lipoprotein raises lowers (see levels Lp(a) and p. [Note: 237).]

VIII. B2) (VITAMIN RIBOFLAVIN

B2 transfer an active monophosphate (Fig. formed adenine FMN of two biologically (FMN) flavin moiety forms flavin ATP (FAD), from adenosine mononucleotide dinucleotide The the of to by are and 28.15). two respectively. FADH2, hydrogen FMNH2 forming reversibly are and atoms, capable FMN or FAD each accepting of catalyze substrate. dehydrogenase succinate tightly, or flavoenzymes FAD covalently, of [FMN] NADH that a and are sometimes FMN reduction to bound [FAD]) example, the dehydrogenase and oxidation (for other accompanies human Riboflavin deficiencies. although it vitamin deficiency major not associated disease, a frequently is with mouth), Deficiency at the glossitis and dermatitis, dark). (the the symptoms tongue appearing smooth of corners (fissuring cheilosis include and supplementation (see require hyperbilirubinemia Because phototherapy 285) may for [Note: sensitive, p. the is riboflavin with light vitamin.]

IX. B7) BIOTIN (VITAMIN

serves which (see in coenzyme carrier in is as Fig. a a of Biotin reactions, dioxide activated (CO2) carbon carboxylation it biotin-dependent the 119, p. for mechanism carboxylations). of 10.3, in is ε-amino lysine bound residues to of enzymes group (Fig. biotin-dependent the covalently Biotin 28.16). Biotin naturally distributed widely is because in deficiency food. occur vitamin the does not bacteria. requirement of a Also, biotin the is large intestinal percentage supplied by humans in dermatitis, However, source and egg as symptoms loss, deficiency, protein the appetite, white a hair biotin can the of namely, of induce of addition of nausea. raw diet loss to and white avidin, egg the glycoprotein its which contains tightly from intestine. Raw binds the biotin absorption prevents a With 20 eggs/day has it to estimated would normal a been however, diet, that be induce deficiency required syndrome. raw Salmonella [Note: of possibility in eggs of with recommended the by caused the infection Inclusion of because not enterica.] diet salmonellosis is

to biotin from their during to during or their results it remove Multiple carboxylase decreased degradation. add synthesis deficiency to carboxylases ability Treatment supplementation. biotin is

ACID B5) X. (VITAMIN PANTOTHENIC

is of functions groups (Fig. the of acid transfer Pantothenic component a CoA, acyl in which 28.17). as CoA thiol compounds contains activated group carries acyl that a thiol esters. are Examples CoA, succinyl such acetyl structures and fatty CoA, of acyl CoA. is of Pantothenic acid acid domain the of fatty (see synthase also a carrier p. acyl protein component 184). widely distributed. although most and the Eggs, important liver, pantothenic of yeast sources vitamin the are is acid, been characterized in well has not established. acid RDA no is and humans, deficiency Pantothenic

XI. A VITAMIN

(preformed vitamin that a retinoid. a retinol from as primarily fat-soluble sources comes vitamin A), animal is Vitamin A family molecules, structurally tissues. epithelial are related essential vision, for The of growth, retinoids, of maintenance a reproduction, and They role function. a immune also in play of for depends from derived on retinal, retinol. of of retinoids, mediates vision, most actions the the which retinol, of Retinoic except derivative aldehyde acid, the oxidation

A. Structure

and retinol forms (Fig. its include retinoids A, the natural metabolites vitamin The of 28.18), forms and synthetic (drugs).

1.

with is retinol tissues in primary found as a long-chain chain, β-ionone containing ester with FA. Retinol: retinyl alcohol ring side unsaturated animal an a A It storage form A. the of vitamin is

2.

derived aldehyde retinol. is the from the This of Retinal: oxidation be can interconverted. retinol and Retinal readily

3.

of oxidation the the This Retinoic retinal. acid: derived is acid from either retinol. acid be body to Retinoic give the in retinal reduced or therefore, and, cannot rise cannot

4.

β-carotene β-Carotene: which to symmetrically two intestine molecules Plant contain be of retinal. and oxidatively A), in cleaved foods yield can (provitamin the is and vitamin conversion inefficient, that the of only In humans, about activity A is of 1/12 β-carotene the retinol.

B. to and the transport Absorption liver

intestinal and retinol hydrolyzed mucosa, from in (Fig. the Retinyl esters the are diet FFA releasing 28.19). a the system. reduction esters retinal Retinol from cleavage chylomicrons enterocytes the and is as within FA lymphatic from β-carotene to secreted of into component derived the and long-chain of from reesterified are stored by, esters in, and contained taken chylomicron remnants up in the Retinyl liver. in All vitamins chylomicrons.] fat-soluble [Note: are carried

Release C. liver the from

extrahepatic to needed, with tissues the retinol through and When released complexed transthyretin Fig. by (see transported is protein from retinol-binding blood liver the 28.19). protein a of cells binds tissues, peripheral the enter. of surface to to retinol transport The complex permitting on the ternary to retinol-binding a where the sites analogous in vitamin carries hormones. in to of retinol An transcription that protein intracellular manner the regulates nucleus steroid

of Retinoic action D. acid mechanism

oxidized Retinol is retinoic acid. to (retinoic (Fig. binds receptor epithelial nucleus cells Retinoic tissues in specific with such target acid affinity receptors high the to acid of [RAR]) as present proteins 28.20). acid–RAR retinoic retinoid-specific activators response control complex The on RNA functions. to synthesis, resulting regulate that binds activated proteins mediate to of production recruits physiologic several and DNA in the or elements specific of repressors epithelial body. the retinoids keratin expression the in of gene the of for most For tissues example, control regulators vitamin for The that [Note: (see superfamily RAR of p. a of of and function includes receptors similar in proteins which all the the steroid and are way hormones transcriptional thyroid part D, nuclear 240).]

1. E. Functions

visual Visual the and a Vitamin component cone of pigments cycle: rod cells. A of is visual the the opsin of cells retinal pigment the protein (see to in of the rod consists Rhodopsin, 11-cis bound Fig. retina, 28.19). exposed of the all-trans which in and receptor, opsin. retinal rhodopsin a release is of rhodopsin, and light, photochemical occurs, G series bleaching to of isomerizations protein–coupled When results a activates triggering protein by the transducin, nerve optic nerve transmitted G process a is that brain. to impulse the This the of isomerization all-trans retinal. to Regeneration retinal requires of rhodopsin back 11-cis All-trans to isomerized is to that esterified, retinol and retinal reduced oxidized 11-cis 11-cis to is retinol, retinal. all-trans form The to thus with cycle. rhodopsin, the opsin latter combines completing cone reactions Similar vision are color the responsible for cells. in

2.

maintenance: pathogens. mucus secretion tissues epithelial supports of thus, essential differentiation the normal is for body’s and barrier-based A and, Epithelial Vitamin cell against defense

3.

female. and supporting the Reproduction: and retinal reproduction, for preventing are Retinol resorption in spermatogenesis in normal fetal the male essential is of growth cycle inactive but Retinoic epithelial and acid cells. the visual maintaining and in promotes reproduction differentiation in

Distribution F.

good A. and carotenes egg cream, of vitamin dark-green are sources butter, and the of sources A). are vegetables Yellow, Liver, and (provitamin kidney, fruits yolk orange, good preformed

Requirement G.

The retinol adults RAE activity equivalents males 700 for is and 900 females. RDA for (RAE) for 1 µg of µg 1 24 of RAE comparison, µg 12 carotenoids. or carotene, retinol, β = of In other

indications Clinical vitamin H. A for

Although retinol different applications. acid chemically retinoic related, have and distinctly therapeutic used whereas retinoic in acid carotenoid supplements, useful various precursor Retinol forms dietary its as (Fig. are of are dermatology and 28.21).

1.

treat are A, used deficient esters, Deficiency: as retinol or is patients who administered in to retinyl Vitamin the vitamin. (nyctalopia) one is signs of deficiency. earliest A the Night of vitamin blindness visual The light. difficult to it threshold making is dim increased, in see to the cells. an irreversible in Prolonged of deficiency visual leads loss number dryness in of pathologic caused, cornea, increased the a part, leads synthesis. keratin conjunctiva by and to Severe deficiency xerophthalmia, of of If results in corneal blindness scar xerophthalmia formation tissue. the and, ultimately, opaque in untreated, ulceration because condition countries. The is seen commonly children in most developing in tropical by in 500,000 are A xerophthalmia worldwide blinded the diet. by Over caused year children each insufficient vitamin

2.

derivatives Fig. problems acne are such as effectively retinoic with conditions: its treated (see Dermatologic or acid Skin 28.21). cases retinoic of treated acne are Mild acid). aging tretinoin with skin (all-trans and is (oral) is treating administration to topical conditions Tretinoin application. for and in toxic skin confined systemic too is tretinoin treating [Note: in leukemia.] used acute Oral promyelocytic acne acid) patients to administered with isotretinoin is therapies, orally. retinoic (13-cis unresponsive In severe cystic conventional treat retinoid synthetic to psoriasis. An used oral is

Retinoid toxicity 1. I.

A syndrome Excessive called Vitamin toxic (but hypervitaminosis not carotene) A: vitamin a produces of A. intake retinol 7.5 avoided. should exceeding Amounts be of mg/day the dry of CNS, in signs a and rise skin, hypervitaminosis can mimic decreased enlarged chronic (because where pressure may intracranial the the of the in tumor. reflected becomes becomes become synthesis); in and are which A in keratin which brain of and liver, cirrhotic; a symptoms pruritic Early in fetus). (causing not in malformations ingest should potential developing particular, A vitamin teratogenesis of of Pregnant women, excessive its because for the quantities congenital vitamin µg UL preformed A/day. 3,000 is A promotes bone [Note: Vitamin growth. fractures.] with increased In and is risk density excess, associated it mineral decreased of however, bone 2.

acne Isotretinoin: severe, women disfiguring they standard drug, absolutely teratogenic therapies. to unresponsive and childbearing retinoic of isomer is contraindicated that with in have The an potential cystic unless acid, is before Pregnancy treatment birth control begins, used. be and must excluded must be increase treatment Prolonged with TAG of in result some isotretinoin can CVD. cholesterol, concern increased and an for risk in providing an

XII. D VITAMIN

vitamins a sterols The D that a have group of are hormone-like function. or binds proteins. calcitriol), ([1,25-diOH-D3], molecule, The active intracellular to receptor 1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol of manner in a to target response 1,25-diOH-D3–receptor similar Fig. the (see The in A nuclear interacts with cells elements vitamin DNA that of complex gene and selectively transcription. either represses 28.20) stimulates or the are and actions of calcitriol regulate to calcium phosphorus. of prominent most The serum levels

A. 1. Distribution

of and vitamin synthesis, and dermis sunlight in transported precursor: exposed intermediate liver to cholesterol D–binding to epidermis Endogenous humans cholecalciferol the converted to in vitamin 7-Dehydrocholesterol, an bound to is protein.

2.

cholecalciferol (vitamin (vitamin vitamin Ergocalciferol tissues, found D2), sources in are D3), in (Fig. of and found plants, D activity preformed animal Diet: 28.22). double-bond in D3 plant the methyl an differ the vitamin group D2 and and in only additional chemically of sterol. presence Vitamin into chylomicrons. D vitamin Dietary packaged is individuals D a limited dietary [Note: Preformed with sunlight.] vitamin in exposure is only requirement to

1. Metabolism B. by in the but reactions are Vitamins formation: sequential (Fig. are 1,25-Dihydroxycholecalciferol to calcitriol, converted hydroxylation vitamin, active not two active D form biologically of the D2 and vivo D3 28.23). catalyzed The at 25 liver. first by the and specific the in a occurs position is 25-hydroxylase hydroxylation form. 25hydroxycholecalciferol the vitamin storage major the in calcidiol), of form The ([25-OH-D3], and D predominant the reaction, serum the of product is at (calcitriol). the in 25-hydroxycholecalciferol primarily the 1 further resulting hydroxylated in hydroxylase formation of is by 25-OH-D3 kidney, position 1 1,25-diOH-D3 the found are p. Both [Note: P450 proteins hydroxylases (see cytochrome 149).] 2. D Calcitriol most regulation: the Hydroxylation vitamin potent metabolite. is tightly as calcium shown 28.24. the formation level (Ca2+) phosphate serum regulated of in and ions Its by is Figure (PO43−) 25

the which indirectly or by secretion the by from the parathyroid increased low gland. , (PTH) directly is of chief Ca2+ parathyroid serum cells triggers activity low Hydroxycholecalciferol hormone 1-hydroxylase of PO43− serum the upregulates 1-hydroxylase. PTH levels Thus, serum elevated results hypocalcemia in dietary caused by Ca2+ insufficient 1,25-diOH-D3. of loop. 1,25-diOH-D3 a inhibits expression PTH, of feedback forming negative [Note: activity of also the inhibits 1-hydroxylase.] It

C. Function

function is levels maintain . overall adequate serum The to of Ca2+ calcitriol of the increasing loss and by Fig. when of Ca2+ uptake Ca2+ kidney intestine, the minimizing low (see by is of Ca2+ It bone of (demineralization) stimulating reabsorption, by blood 2) by 1) function resorption increasing 3) performs this 28.23).

1.

cell first absorption to on intestinal cytosolic entering Calcitriol intestinal of and stimulates receptor. by intestine: Effect binding the Ca2+ the a on The elements moves it nucleus then 1,25-diOH-D3–receptor to complex with where response interacts the selectively DNA. the protein a of result, by Ca2+ As calbindin. increased enhanced the uptake expression is calcium-binding Thus, of 1,25-diOH-D3 240). p. (see the mechanism is hormones of of typical steroid action

2.

Effect bone: of Ca5(PO4)3OH composed collagen crystals is on Bone of (hydroxylapatite). and by low, 1,25-diOH-D3 process is Ca2+ that blood enhanced PTH. stimulates a is When by bone resorption The result serum in is Ca2+ an increase . Ca2+ Therefore, can that an mobilized bone of important be reservoir serum to is maintain levels. calcitriol to [Note: PTH also together of prevent Ca2+.] renal loss work and

requirement D. and Distribution

egg naturally fatty liver, Vitamin in D occurs yolk. and fish, artificially Milk, unless it a not good fortified, is source. is 1–70 years 20 for RDA and individuals µg/day The µg/day if over 70 ages 15 age is years. level optimal however, maintain of health. disagree, D needed the vitamin to Experts on 40 [Note: (IU).] = units vitamin 1 µg international D D, vitamin for poor babies. recommended milk breast Because breastfed a of source is is supplementation

D E. vitamin indications 1. Clinical for in Nutritional resulting net children demineralization of in D rickets causes bone, deficiency rickets: adults in and Vitamin osteomalacia a (Fig. 28.25). is the soft, by of Rickets but in the bones. matrix results formation mineralization continued of characterized collagen pliable incomplete bone, preexisting susceptibility demineralization fracture. of increases In to bones their osteomalacia, predominantly and to the daylight deficiencies and/or Insufficient occur elderly. in exposure infants in consumption D vitamin latitudes, vitamin in D ultraviolet as because is in a the Vitamin result less synthesis light. exposure more of northern the reduced skin D deficiency common occurs to [Note: deficient Loss-of-function vitamin D– rickets.] in hereditary D receptor the in result mutations vitamin 2.

osteodystrophy: ability Chronic disease to in retention causes active Renal kidney PO43− hypocalcemia. increased form as vitamin as resulting and of well decreased D , hyperphosphatemia bone The with PTH rise and in Ca2+ blood low and of PO43− associated release causes demineralization Ca2+ a . an effective Supplementation vitamin therapy. with D is

precipitation bone crystals. and further must by supplementation However, be prevent PO43− accompanied phosphate calcium to of loss therapy reduction

3.

PTH causes of Hypoparathyroidism: Lack hypocalcemia and hyperphosphatemia. phosphate [Note: PTH increases excretion.] be with supplementation. D may treated Patients calcium vitamin and

Toxicity F.

only body stored can all is vitamins, D Like in and fat-soluble slowly be vitamin the metabolized. nausea, and months) loss or weakness. doses can of appetite, cause weeks High thirst, for (100,000 IU which lead resorption in calcification). salts to Ca2+ results hypercalcemia, and bone calcium Enhanced in can deposition absorption tissue soft (metastatic of for for ages 9 The those lower with under 100 or a IU/day) years. level individuals years age older, µg/day is 9 (4,000 UL [Note: only is with of use seen supplements. Toxicity is D Excess in converted forms.] the produced to vitamin inactive skin

XIII. K VITAMIN

proteins is of in posttranslational glutamic blood which principal involved serves of role coenzyme the residues in K these with carboxylation are certain which clotting), acid of a number (most vitamin modification The in proteins. of the a as of it in in menaquinone several K2). active forms, K (or example, vitamin exists (or for in bacteria and plants Vitamin in vitamin as phylloquinone as intestinal K1), of vitamin synthetic be converted A to menadione, form K, able K2. is to

A. and is in K formation: clotting 1. synthesis the required γ-Carboxyglutamate prothrombin FX. (factor hepatic of and FVII, blood the [F]II) Function Vitamin proteins, FIX, Chapter (See online 35.) functional residues several to acid γ-carboxyglutamate carboxylation (Gla) clotting of Formation vitamin factors of (Fig. the requires residues glutamic K–dependent the 28.26). carboxylase, requires The reaction O2, γ-glutamyl carboxylation

hydroquinone form (which form). epoxide CO2, K of vitamin gets to and oxidized the the required functional K by hydroquinone a of reductase residues enzyme (VKOR), of formation is inhibition vitamin warfarin, the analog form K. Gla to The the inhibits to regenerate that of vitamin K epoxide vitamin synthetic sensitive

2.

groups. Prothrombin charged membranes: ions, interaction The carboxylate negatively positively because chelators of of their Gla residues good adjacent, charged with are calcium two surface of example, membrane the negatively is the endothelium damaged With for to to platelets. on phospholipids charged prothrombin–calcium and complex bind able prothrombin, thrombin rate at can which Attachment to occur (Fig. the prothrombin membrane proteolytic conversion increases of the to 28.27).

3.

a in in present other also residues blood are Gla forming those γ-Carboxyglutamate clot. than proteins: residues in involved other proteins matrix in Gla also C blood osteocalcin formation and For of S example, undergo the of limiting (involved protein and γcarboxylation. clots) bone proteins and

Figure28.27RoleofvitaminKinbloodcoagulation.CO2=carbondioxide.

B. and requirement Distribution

K is Vitamin spinach, and cabbage, liver. kale, in found yolk, egg µg/day 120 males The for for vitamin females. adequate µg adult is and intake adult K 90 for also of microbiota. gut vitamin There the synthesis is the by

C. Clinical 1. indications for K vitamin

obtained because vitamin diet by is Deficiency: adequate from K intestinal A deficiency and amounts the bacteria. true generally are produced unusual vitamin the hypoprothrombinemia by malnourished a lead the can decreased, amount (for is population of the formed in example, antibiotics), marginally debilitated gut this If the decreased in example, is geriatric bacterial endogenously individual (for patient). and to with This vitamin bleeding require correct supplementation the to K tendency. may condition mechanism that In a cause by VKOR. cefamandole) certain hypoprothrombinemia, (for inhibits example, addition, warfarin-like apparently cephalosporin antibiotics supplemented is use vitamin also can bone with health. usually Consequently, in Deficiency treatment affect K. their

2.

disease vitamin recommended initially newborns is Deficiency of single K. provides a intramuscular human of fifth receive all of dose newborn: daily it intestines, as for bacteria K the newborn. Because newborns sterile hemorrhagic prophylaxis only vitamin lack one K, requirement Because they the synthesize the that that the against about milk have vitamin in

Toxicity D.

doses of large jaundice anemia Prolonged in effects menadione administration membrane. because RBC and infant, the the can toxic hemolytic on of produce of no is to longer K it Therefore, vitamin used treat deficiency. for has natural set. No the form been UL

XIV. VITAMIN E

consist of the naturally tocopherols, αtocopherol most E The (Fig. which of is vitamins eight occurring active 28.28). nonenzymic E in of (see of antioxidant oxidation prevention functions example, (for an Vitamin as LDL p. oxidations

and polyunsaturated of 232) and by peroxidation free O2 radicals). FA C E.] vitamin active Vitamin [Note: regenerates

A. Distribution requirements and

contain rich liver sources moderate eggs amounts. vitamin whereas Vegetable are and E, of oils for for adults. The α-tocopherol mg/day 15 RDA is polyunsaturated FA increases the limit requirement of peroxidation. vitamin to as intake E increases The FA

B. Deficiency

formulas) the vitamin. (and E, milk vitamin of reserves low have breast Newborns contain but to retinopathy vitamin infants given the supplements Very-low-birth-weight with prevent hemolysis may be and deficiency. associated E observed usually defective When with adults, in lipid associated or is transport. absorption deficiency the results defect [Note: chylomicrons vitamin in formation of in p. caused Abetalipoproteinemia, by deficiency a E (and (see VLDL), 231).]

C. indications vitamin Clinical for E

such CVD or chronic of E not Vitamin prevention is for disease, the as recommended cancer. uniformly using trials Clinical been supplementation disappointing. have E vitamin Beta-Carotene benefit lacked stroke. Alpha-Tocopherol, vitamin had also only of E high who example, increased incidence Study trial not but subjects Prevention doses in the cardiovascular of received For an Cancer Vitamins of C are degeneration.] E [Note: to progression used the age-related slow macular and

Toxicity D.

1,000 fat-soluble is E and vitamins, the has toxicity Vitamin mg/day toxic least 300 been of at = mg/day). observed (UL of doses the no

chronic diseases. and some in incidence decreased consuming of show diets fruits Populations vegetables high have CVD. However, C, vitamins acid; or clinical trials benefit to combinations folic E; of for a show antioxidant cancer definitive failed of A, or prevention supplements or from the

XV. SUMMARY CHAPTER

are on Figure 28.29 pp. The summarized in vitamins 396–397.

best answer. Choose the ONE

deficiency vitamin the to clinical Questions For the 28.1–28.5, match consequence.

8.1. Bleeding 8.2. dermatitis Diarrhea and 8.3. defects 8.4. Neural tube Night 8.5. blindness (nyctalopia) teeth spongy gums and Sore, loose

E. = several is Vitamin B, H, proteins formation the K in clotting. for Correct blood of required γcarboxyglutamate A, residues C, answers for required bleed. Consequently, to vitamin a results tendency deficiency of in a K by dementia Ds: characterized (and death, dermatitis, if three is deficiency the diarrhea, untreated). D, a and Niacin fourth neural in fetus. tube result developing deficiency can acid in the defects Folic one A vitamin of the blindness is deficiency. of signs Night first Rod white in detect retina night. images at in light, cells the for work and and black low best example, to protein cells, rod opsin. the the bound pigment 11-cis of consists visual of Rhodopsin, retinal the of and proline for required synthesis. the is hydroxylation during collagen Vitamin lysine C

connective tissue, characterized teeth, and loose fatigue. gums, vitamin by results and sore (scurvy) defective Severe spongy deficiency in C anemia, capillary fragility,

8.6. woman months’ several 52-year-old with A duration. fatigue of presents anemia, normal of reveal methylmalonic of levels reduced elevated acid. of levels a hemoglobin, homocysteine, macrocytic Blood and studies levels likely this the woman? is most deficient Which following in of

Folic A. acid

and B12 vitamin Folic B. acid

C. Iron

Vitamin D. C

B12, deficiencies with folic acid, is of Correct = anemia seen or Macrocytic both. vitamin A. answer requires only reactions (Hcy) is coenzyme tetrahydrofolate utilized folic the homocysteine acid which to succinyl Vitamin [THF]), body: to A, A the and coenzyme in not which require methionine, of remethylation of does (as the also isomerization THF. methylmalonyl B12 two in acid of acid of reflect blood levels elevated folic a macrocytic methylmalonic the The and deficiency normal cause Hcy as in the anemia. the patient’s causes vitamin C as can deficiency. deficiency microcytic anemia, Iron

8.7. the is appearance of Virginia, her from bowed legs. located for African being evaluated recently Maine to whose girl, family American A 10-month-old baby and no parents that the being supplements. still report takes is The breastfed D deficiency. vitamin the caused studies suspicion Radiologic by rickets confirm of correct? D vitamin is statements the of Which one following concerning

A. of deficiency secretion results in an increased calbindin. A

B. (calcitriol). kidney in overproduction of results disease 1,25dihydroxycholecalciferol Chronic

of form active vitamin. the the 25-Hydroxycholecalciferol is C. (calcidiol)

diet individuals in the to with sunlight. required is It limited exposure of D.

receptors. E. Its through are G mediated binding to actions protein–coupled

It parathyroid effect F. of hormone. opposes the

as sunlight, like Vitamin = exposure individuals and latitudes such D is northern limited of D. answer Correct those with Maine at those in skin. to dark the diet with required living D, the low supplementation breast is a milk increases Note risk that lack in of the of deficiency. vitamin and synthesis Vitamin deficiency calbindin. decreased results in D of calcitriol the production (1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol), Chronic vitamin. active of of decreases kidney disease the form transcription. and D gene Vitamin alters binds receptors nuclear to effects with Its parathyroid are hormone. synergistic

8.8. in result deficiency a B6 hypoglycemia? fasting a of might Why vitamin also could hypoglycemia? Deficiency in vitamin other what of result

by phosphorylase. B6 for glycogen glycogen Vitamin degradation is required result in fasting deficiency A would hypoglycemia. hypoglycemia. of a also (required would in result Additionally, of gluconeogenesis) deficiency carboxylase pyruvate biotin fasting by

29 Micronutrients: Minerals

thePoint. visit to materials ancillary please For additional chapter, this related

OVERVIEW I.

small the amounts are inorganic (elements) required substances by in Minerals body. including a processes teeth, catalysis. number conduction, formation contraction, of fluid bones function muscle of They signaling, in balance, and nerve and [Note: Several essential are enzyme cofactors.] minerals in mg required vitamins µg (see micronutrients Like are organic 28), minerals Chapter the or amounts. adults largest by referred the (>100 are as the mg/day) macrominerals. amounts Those required to in microminerals are amounts minerals). (trace 1 Minerals between the mg/day required 100 in and minerals <1 (Fig. mg/day required in amounts Ultratrace are 29.1). these vary of among The can categories specific sources.] [Note: classification minerals into of the absorption influenced body their and excretion. are by rates in Mineral concentrations

II. MACROMINERALS

phosphorus chloride (Ca2+), (Na+), ([P] [Pi, phosphate or as (K+). calcium sodium macrominerals inorganic (Mg2+), PO43−]), potassium (Cl−), The and include magnesium [Note: forms free The are ionic electrolytes.]

A. and Calcium phosphorus

teeth. because makes bones and considered These up (Ca5[PO4]3OH), components are they which together of hydroxylapatite are macrominerals

1. in Ca2+ in mineral found most the being ~98% with the bones. is abundant body, Calcium: number of and is blood contraction, processes signaling, involved as such a remainder clotting. muscle in The p. kinase binds p. 205) (see protein 133), (see including Ca2+ variety A2 and p. to proteins (see their calmodulin alters phospholipase and a 213), activity. of C in the is D–induced Ca2+ a intestine Ca2+-binding absorption intracellular Calbindin (see p. in protein involved vitamin [Note: 392).] vegetables not orange and spinach), but broccoli, sources. green good example, products, dietary fortified are many (for juice Dairy syndromes Although United insufficient bone average deficiency are intake dietary States for unknown, optimal the is Ca2+ in health. 2,500 [UL] is only supplements adults). limit upper (tolerable Toxicity mg/day seen for = with from parathyroid hormone (elevated can Ca2+) serum Hypercalcemia (PTH). result overproduction of cause constipation This and kidney stones. may can Hypocalcemia to result a can from or D. It serum demineralization Ca2+) (resorption). (low deficiency vitamin of lead PTH bone 3. [Note: the The regulation of reviewed vitamin presented section levels was hormonal Chapter D 28 in is serum Ca2+ of in and below.]

increases years fracture. mass Bone risk infancy an the age-related then men increases the through from reproductive in and women that shows both and early loss for in greatest postmenopausal loss women. is Caucasian This studies shown supplementation risk. and with this that D Ca2+ have decreases Some vitamin

2. most the anion. abundant is intracellular Phosphorus: phosphate (Pi) Free most creatine as the phospholipids, is body’s the phosphorus 85% remainder intracellular organic of ATP, nucleic inorganic in such in acids, phosphate. of of hydroxylapatite, However, and form with compounds the (for p. 128). glycogen and as see example, phosphorylase, Pi Phosphate for is for kinases ATP phosphorylases supplied as Chapter enzymes regulation of of (see kinases) [Note: 24).] means covalent is phosphatases) Its (by removal (by an important or addition deficiency in is widely food a rare. dietary is good Phosphorus source), (milk is and distributed 369), increased loss patients overuse to see and syndrome, of refeeding carbohydrates below). production in (see of PTH increased Hypophosphatemia malnourished be Pi), by p. caused (aluminum chelates to (refeeding response urinary aluminum-containing can antacids symptom. common Muscle weakness a is is by Hyperphosphatemia primarily caused PTH levels. decreased Ca2+ (metastatic can that tissue combine form with excess in calcification). and Pi The soft deposit crystals bone (the important affect formation health.] bone is [Note: for are of is drinks by soft Ca2+-poor, bone), ratio experts some ~2/1 can in The replacement concerned milk Ca2+/Pi Ca2+-rich ratio and Pi-rich that 3. decrease (1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol, the respond and by in Ca2+ of Ca2+ regulation: Hormonal vitamin Pi . PTH, both active levels and are Serum of calcitriol serum which D) of primarily form to controlled a Ca2+ Pi reabsorption bone increasing and and Ca2+ and and (Fig. by kidneys, by Calcitriol, resorption the renal produced Pi serum of intestinal absorption increases 29.2). Ca2+ (see renal renal of activating p. calcidiol , by serum from increases increasing and 390) the PTH Ca2+ 1-hydroxylase parathyroid increasing resorption, produces the calcitriol bone that glands) (from (Fig. reabsorption 29.3). In serum contrast Pi. reabsorption the PTH Pi calcitriol, in kidneys, decreases to lowering Pi calcitriol.] [Note: PTH serum increases and decreases High responds third increasing levels Ca2+ bone mineralization (from thyroid the to Pi). Ca2+ (and gland), of A C and the hormone, serum excretion of by promoting renal elevated cells calcitonin

B. Magnesium

is it Mg2+ of in the but About body’s 60% of the bone just bone, for accounts mass. 1% phosphodiester binds enzymatic mineral of the including is by kinases by formation variety ATP a required bond phosphorylation reactions, (Mg2+ polymerases. and DNA RNA The cosubstrate) and by level. distributed below foods, United is the widely but average Mg2+ States is the in the in recommended intake decreased Hypomagnesemia or absorption increased excretion of result . from can Mg2+ muscles of hyperexcitability and cardiac arrhythmias. Symptoms nerves include and skeletal hypotension hypermagnesemia, seen. With is [Note: hypertensive preeclampsia, disorder the of sulfate used pregnancy.] in is treatment a Magnesium of

Sodium, chloride, C. and potassium

considered several they important are processes. These in play because roles together physiologic macrominerals potential) balance membranes (pH), maintain electrical example, cell essential the for For they water neurons balance, (membrane across osmotic are of acid–base equilibrium, functioning the and that and gradients myocytes. Reviews: Illustrated discussed processes Physiology.] These in Lippincott’s [Note: are 1. Sodium chloride: electrolytes. and Cl− primarily extracellular are and Na+ from processed They from salt readily foods much of are which (NaCl), comes foods. containing absorbed absorption is Na+-linked the transporters. by amino of renal free galactose (see for acids and required Na+ p. p. (and [Note: glucose 87) 249) (see intestinal and reabsorption) form digestion hydrochloric acid required for used to is Cl− p. (see 248).] the United (AI) is adequate 3.8 States, 1.5–3 of the In = NaCl (UL g/day). daily the 5.8 times of average mg/day intake consumption is Dietary rare. deficiency

a.

(BP). related Na+ to intake is pressure blood Hypertension: to Ingestion antidiuretic water thirst in leading from Na+ brain the hormone the retention. pituitary, centers of and stimulates of secretion increase results an increase volume in in plasma in an BP. and, consequently, This and the kidneys, blood hypertension can Chronic heart, damage vessels. to reductions shown Modest modest reductions in result in in been intake BP. have Na+ have (for larger and African populations sensitive” to responses [Note: Some “salt example, Americans) are Na+.] b.

excess can decreased by hyponatremia: severe typically to excrete result by hyponatremia, in Hypernatremia, ability typically and caused loss, brain water Hyper-and water, caused damage. Ca2+ and [Note: excretion hyponatremia can (low bone increases mass).] osteoporosis in Chronic result 2. intracellular to K+ Na+, is electrolyte. In contrast primarily Potassium: an is ATPase by the concentration Na+/K+ maintained of K+ differential and across the membrane Na+ cell (Fig. [Note: The 29.4).] contrast fruits are is sources, because its (like K+ Mg2+) diets Western to underingested. Na+ In in underingested vegetables, primary and Cl−, and K+ increasing Na+ [Note: BP decreases excretion.] by Increasing dietary down, changes narrow serum in resulting a or K+ muscle can (up There normal result skeletal range in for weakness. modest cardiac levels, arrhythmias even and is hypokalemia) and hyper-or Hypokalemia inappropriate use [Note: weight.] laxatives from to lose of the result can K+ has UL No for established. been

III. MICROMINERALS MINERALS) (TRACE

(Zn). and The (Fe), zinc manganese copper (Cu), trace include minerals iron (Mn), in between They and by amounts 1 required 100 adults mg/day. are

A. Copper

Cu (Fig. in the a component play enzymes body functions is several of key critical that 29.5). storage include ferrous These as (Fe2+) transport its ferroxidases B.1. ceruloplasmin required the or ferric (see involved oxidation of the that form blood and such hephaestin intracellular through to (Fe3+) for in the is iron below). sources Cu. nuts, of whole shellfish, good and dietary grains are Meat, Dietary is deficiency uncommon. Fe of may anemia the deficiency effect seen If on a does be develop, because metabolism. = 10 is dietary rare sources from Toxicity mg/day). (UL Cu genetic and syndrome are and Cu causes deficiency Wilson of overload, respectively. Menkes disease

1.

out Cu-transporting rare the by hair” efflux disorder, (ATP7A) syndrome: (1:140,000 dietary Menkes of a X-linked circulation Menkes intestinal In ATPase of disease), enterocytes (“kinky a into is impaired. males) syndrome Cu This results in systemic deficiency. Cu which circulation the Cu is Cu in 90% ceruloplasmin, the over low, as free carries Consequently, urinary (unbound) of and serum (Fig. the are concentration of 29.6). to and changes hair. Progressive are seen, disorders as tissue connective degeneration are neurologic has treatment administration Cu with of varying success. used a Parenteral as been syndrome.] Menkes of is horn occipital The syndrome called form [Note: mildest 2.

Wilson Cu efflux an by of excess disorder disease: Wilson disease, births, live 1:35,000 ATP7B In (AR) is affecting impaired. autosomal-recessive liver from the the liver; the the in accumulates kidneys, and Cu leaks in deposited blood; into and eyes, is brain, skin. Fig. urinary Cu In are syndrome, high (see and contrast to serum Menkes free 29.6). Hepatic neurologic psychiatric dysfunction and and are symptoms seen. deposits (corneal of present may be Cu) (Fig. rings Kayser-Fleischer 29.7). treatment. Life-long as use agents, is penicillamine, such the of Cu-chelating

(percent a other able to The be that absorbed) is influenced mineral be bioavailability can amount ingested of minerals. of by the Cu, the absorption example, For excess of needed Zn of is Cu decreases Fe. the for absorption and

B. Iron

3–4 typically contains g body adult of Fe. The as proteins, hydroxylases and 47) a hydroxylase, noncatalytic. (for such both is prolyl p. many see It example, component of catalytic as and such can sulfur transport the of of (see be all it seen the myoglobin, (~70% of 75), chain proteins as proteins Fe–S or p. be Iron can 25) hemoglobin p. prosthetic (see in to Fe), electron heme cytochromes. the the part in (S) linked group Free reactive is it because of (ROS).] hydroxyl species production cause Fe oxygen a [Note: radical, can ionic toxic the and as Fe3+ nonheme is in sources in Dietary Fe2+ sources) Fe (plants). heme (animal available is abundant, but Heme iron is absorbed. better less it Fe. shellfish, ready-toeat are good and molasses lentils, some cereals, poultry, Meat, of dietary sources About ingested is 10% Fe absorbed. of replace body Fe cells. ~1−2 of mg/day, by sufficient the lost primarily is amount, from the to sloughing This

1.

heme a (Fig. storage, by Absorption, transport: carrier of and protein uptake is Intestinal heme 29.8). 282). heme Fe2+ releases (see the from enterocytes, Within heme p. oxygenase (DMT-1). transporter-1 metal apical up membrane Fe is Nonheme protein taken ion via the divalent because b [Note: coenzyme to ferrireductase absorption cytochrome for that Fe2+.] it of is the reduces enhances duodenal Fe3+ nonheme Fe Vitamin C (Dcytb), a taken and of protein stored protein ferritin the the out Fe2+ fates: transport basolateral nonheme membrane 4,500 Absorbed membrane plasma hephaestin, heme to transferrin has 1) 29.8. 2) the Fe3+ as the two protein (2 Fe3+/transferrin), Figure and up possible (up Fe3+/ferritin) by oxidized protein It sources or the intracellular to from transported in can and by by by be enterocyte Cu-containing oxidized ferroportin, shown protein of ceruloplasmin use than hephaestin.] Cells in plasma enterocytes other the [Note: place Cu-containing (Tf) about Fe3+ saturated third individuals, . transferrin In with normal is one blood the and from hepatic known regulated induces only degradation peptide internalization hepcidin is of cells in of exporter Fe lysosomal that ferroportin. to Ferroportin, the by humans, the central is molecule in the homeostasis. hepcidin Fe Therefore, [Note: Transcription Fe is when of hepcidin is deficient.] suppressed 2.

by heme red transported oxidized by and/or and the blood out is cells damaged of phagocytose as cells Recycling: that (RBC), described Tf Fe via Macrophages ceruloplasmin, sent old ferroportin, above. freeing need, of erythropoiesis. recycled is for predominantly meets This Fe our which ~90% daily

3.

from on receptors Fe3+ Tf-bound Fe-requiring endocytosis. (TfR) is receptor-mediated taken macrophages other and enterocytes Uptake: to and by cells up erythroblasts binds and the TfR use Tf) The seen on (and similar receptor-mediated (or released and stored 231). from process to the recycled Fe3+ p. particles (see with is low-density lipoprotein endocytosis in a is Tf ferritin), for discussed translation p. and on the Regulation iron regulatory [Note: the the of iron-responsive RNA by and messenger of elements proteins for TfR ferritin is 474.] 4.

(Fig. Fe deficiency result can a hypochromic microcytic, Deficiency: anemia in hemoglobin of result 29.9), decreased the anemia and, synthesis United in a consequently, decreased the as States, common most

RBC size. administration is Treatment the of Fe.

5. ingestion. Fe overload Excess: accidental can with occur Fe common is cause age poisoning deaths [Note: for years adults).] (UL 45 of the = children 40 most mg/day Acute mg/day children, for of <6 poisoning Treatment Fe an use chelator. is of defects. Overload genetic with also occur can in hereditary example European An overload hemochromatosis (HH), disorder an ancestry. Fe AR of primarily of is Northern found those (high caused commonly mutations HFE gene. the most It iron) is to by may the (a be pancreas, storage (“bronze for with Fe), hyperglycemia major liver and Hyperpigmentation seen. site and diabetes”) to damage heart Tf elevated. serum In Fe saturation HH, and are or is chelators. phlebotomy Treatment use of Fe low in proteins [Note: with hepcidin. mutations inappropriately to seen levels of Fe of metabolism overload is Fe result that (the It of hemosiderosis intracellular, storage an Fe).] form hemosiderin, in deposition insoluble of result can

Manganese C.

for (Fig. several the is function enzymes of important Mn 29.10). good and and Whole are beans the sources mineral. legumes tea) nuts, grains, of tea (for example, peas), (especially green is humans rare. Consequently, deficiency Mn in Toxicity from adults). = mg/day is and/or foods also supplements (UL 11 for rare

Zinc D.

plays body. functions Zn important catalytic the structural in and are (motifs, factors) see transcription in proteins p. example, Zinc to supersecondary (for regulate 18) fingers expression DNA bind structures that gene and (Fig. 29.11). for require activity. of Zn Hundreds enzymes by important alcohol replaces to of anhydrase, oxidizes nonmitochondrial carbonic p. see (see 317); Examples is (SOD), and of buffer which ethanol p. also p. requires superoxide synthesis, which system include zinc; 279); inhibited in is bicarbonate isoform (see dehydrogenase, (see which dismutase 30); acetaldehyde Cu the (lead Fig. the porphobilinogen the heme which synthase lead 29.5). products. sources fish, Dietary meat, eggs, and Zn dairy of include plant Phytates the absorption, some molecules result deficiency. Zn bind intestine, and in decreasing storage irreversibly its (phosphate can in products) in a [Note: nonheme also bind Phytates and Fe.] may Ca2+ may example, Zn their penicillamine) Several (for cause chelate use drugs and deficiency. metals, malabsorption deficiency Severe defect that Zn with is for the in results the in [Note: acrodermatitis transporter intestinal a seen enteropathica. disorder rashes, immune development, slowed diarrhea, and growth include and Symptoms deficiencies. problems because vitamin Zn also occur may Vision in the metabolism needed is of A.]

the of pathogens. and can availability essential infected micronutrients Fe, to cells Eukaryotic bacteria Zn the Mn, restrict with decreases the as pathogen of the immunity.” “nutritional known This is and intracellular survival

Other E. microminerals

body. fluorine Chromium in also (F) the (Cr) and play roles by potentiates insulin Cr the action an unknown mechanism. of meat. vegetables, and found dairy fruits, in products, is It caries dental [F−]) incidence to F in the (Fig. parts (as world to of water is many reduce fluoride added the of 29.12). produced replaces hydroxylapatite, mouth the bacteria. is the of enamel-dissolving resistant more that forming by group fluoroapatite hydroxyl acid to F−

IV. MINERALS ULTRATRACE

The ultratrace iodine molybdenum (I), (Se), and minerals selenium include (Mo). mg/day. by <1 required in amounts They adults are

A. Iodine

and (T3) (T4) thyroxine in of thyroid utilized hormones the is synthesis I are the growth, metabolism. triiodothyronine required development, and for that the the concentrated taken in iodide (I−) (“trapped”) gland. is follicular epithelial thyroid up cells Circulating and of thyroperoxidase shown It is into (TPO), oxidized colloid the to then (I2) follicular iodine the lumen Figure sent where in as of it by is 29.13. (MIT) selected (DIT), 29.14. in I2 diiodinated residues monoiodinated (Tg), tyrosine iodinate and uses tyrosine shown in Figure tyrosine forming thyroglobulin TPO then as to follicular Tg synthesized colloid cells.] is by secreted and [Note: into whereas coupling DIT MIT T3. one on coupling of Tg and one T4, gives DIT two gives The in digested needed, until at iodinated is and which stored T3 proteolytically time are cells Tg release secreted which circulation T4, into Fig. and (see endocytosed to is the it follicular The 29.13).

that Under of conditions, secreted normal carried transthyretin. by thyroid T4 hormone ~90% is is tissues deiodinases. form) T3 brain), (the Se-containing converted by to and example, liver active T4 the (for is developing target more In as T3 elements thyroid factor. that and to DNA response binds transcription nuclear at receptor a binds a functions [Note:

production thyrotropin the pituitary. anterior hormone controlled ([TSH]) from by hormone is (thyroid-stimulating Thyroid the is controlled (TRH) thyrotropin-releasing TSH itself hypothalamus.] secretion from hormone by 1.

stimulation shown Figure goiter in to response the of in by as Hypothyroidism: 29.15. in excessive TSH), result Underingestion of can (enlargement I thyroid results severe metabolic gain, rate hypothyroidism thermogenesis, characterized More decreased 359). that in p. weight and fatigue, by decreased is (see deficiency loss, short (congenital can during development called irreversible “cretinism”), (formerly spasticity, fetal stature intellectual disability hormone infant and hypothyroidism), If and occurs hearing deficiency result. and of In seafood, primary meat States, sources United products, the are I. the dairy greatly reduced I use salt dietary of deficiency. iodized The has cause thyroiditis Autoimmune a (a primary Hashimoto [Note: of hypothyroidism).] destruction TPO of is 2.

is of thyroid result the overproduction of hormone. condition This Hyperthyroidism: adults), production can Graves most = supplements antibody in caused produced, overingestion hormone. disease, of cause dysregulated 1.1 which by Although common effect hyperthyroidism an for the TSH of is the thyroid mimics (UL that is be of of g/day it in I-containing resulting cause can Fig. eyes increased perspiration nervousness, heart loss, rate, weight and (exophthalmos, This protruding goiter. 29.16), and

Selenium B.

acid serine constituent (selenoproteins) from as 268). is human p. selenocysteine, is (see of a ~25 in present amino proteins Se which the derived deiodinases a reductase glutathione in ribonucleotide thyroid from reduces I oxidizes thioredoxin a that thioredoxin, the hormones. peroxide, include 148); (see reductase coenzyme and glutathione p. of (see that remove p. Selenoproteins water hydrogen to of that ROS, peroxidase reduction 297); important sources. grains are dietary dairy products, and Meat, a China, disease, caused foods cardiomyopathy from soil. identified first by in is Se-deficient eating Keshan produced and brittle by (selenosis) causes hair. caused nails Toxicity of supplements overingestion (UL 400 in adults). neurologic may be also = µg and Cutaneous effects seen

C. Molybdenum

a a oxidases Mo as number functions mammalian (Fig. for cofactor of small 29.17). important sources. Legumes are dietary dietary known. syndromes are No deficiency = adults). Mo low (UL has mg/day in toxicity 2 humans in

(CoA) of which is remethylation of adenosylcobalamin p. an isomerization in component in ultratrace coenzyme methylcobalamin as CoA mineral, p. p. of the or homocysteine (see (cobalamin, vitamin A is Cobalt B12 264) (see methylmalonyl 379), a 194). the methionine to required to (Co), see succinyl Recommended Reference or Daily p. been for Intake established No Allowance Dietary Co. (see has 358)

SUMMARY V. CHAPTER

are 29.18 on summarized in Figure 408. minerals The p.

the appropriate the 29.1–29.7, to match most mineral For Questions description.

Calcium A.

B. Chloride

C. Copper

Iodine D.

Iron E.

F. Magnesium

Manganese G.

H. Molybdenum

I. Phosphorus

J. Potassium

Selenium K.

Sodium L.

9.1. Zinc M. may which mineral in Elevated of certain result populations? in levels hypertension

9.2. mineral extracellular is anion? major Which the

9.3. is in overuse antacids? seen which mineral aluminum-containing decrease syndrome of and refeeding A of with

9.4. reactions? amino metabolism, defense, Which of acids antioxidant involved in redox thyroid found and constituent proteins mineral is a in some hormone

9.5. protein the mineral of required that supersecondary Which a formation to allows DNA? for structure is binding deficiency (Its result dermatitis.) can a in 9.6. cause tendency of sensation), (a muscle tetany an Deficiency bone needles” and (intermittent and spasms), increased paresthesia mineral can which bleed? “pins to pain,

9.7. in of a and decreased metabolic which goiter can mineral result rate? Deficiency

that D. of (elevation K, water answers A, L, hypertension can Correct serum (for Americans). in B, I, can sodium) lead African cause M, populations to example, retention Hypernatremia = salt-sensitive is major Chloride extracellular anion. the extracellular cation, intracellular the anion. phosphate Sodium the the major is and [Note: is cation, intracellular major is major potassium transport.] across is membrane The maintained concentration the by differential active involves generation metabolism the Carbohydrate intermediates. of phosphorylated malnourished in individuals severely hypophosphatemia. and phosphate Refeeding results traps a common Muscle symptom. is weakness amino acid and is an selenium, serine formed deiodinases, proteins as reductase. (selenoproteins) Selenocysteine, and found such peroxidase, thioredoxin glutathione in from structural type motif example, are factors) proteins to bind a DNA. transcription in fingers (for of that found Zinc characterized by and dermatitis, deficiency mutations its is Severe zinc as enteropathica, which alopecia. diarrhea, acrodermatitis result result of intestinal a to transporter of in can bone clotting. required nerve for blood mineralization, is contraction, Calcium and muscle conduction, processes. deficiency will these of all affect Its tyrosines released hormones of are thyroglobulin. iodinated proteolytic Thyroid by digestion iodine enlargement increase hormone an of thyroid of attempt the causes Underingestion in synthesis. to [Note: Goiter Hashimoto too in hormone is disease. much also disease, can as or made, as Graves in little too is result if made, if diseases.] autoimmune Both are the hormone metabolic increases Thyroid rate. resting

9.8. is anomalies structural DiGeorge the condition to develop. results and syndrome thymus glands a and congenital parathyroid that failure of in recurrent a consequence as a Clinical in infections T cells. deficiency include of manifestations of is consequence clinical Which one in the following parathyroid the expected deficiency an of hormone?

A. resorption Increased bone

B. reabsorption Increased kidney calcium the in

calcitriol serum C. Increased

Parathyroid D. and release in resorption phosphate. D. Increased hormone of calcium resulting = answer (demineralization) serum increases phosphate bone (PTH) the Correct also that calcitriol. of It reabsorption to calcium, converts calcidiol because the hydroxylase activates increases renal the PTH renal of renal phosphate. also PTH the increases excretion these are DiGeorge hypoparathyroidism all impaired. the of of PTH With of activities syndrome, are Consequently, hyperphosphatemia seen. and hypocalcemia

For match to and the 29.9 29.10, and symptoms signs the pathology. questions

disease A. Graves

B. Hereditary hemochromatosis

C. Hypercalcemia

D. Hyperphosphatemia

Keshan disease E.

syndrome Menkes F.

Selenosis G.

H. Wilson 9.9. disease pain. for seen male is upper-rightquadrant complaints of severe, recent, 28-year-old A tasks. He reports difficulty some also motor fine with on is observed No physical examination. jaundice and and and liver calcium alanine (serum were urinary Laboratory tests phosphate. function elevated aminotransferases) for aspartate tests remarkable elevated in consult Kayser-Fleischer rings Ophthalmology the revealed cornea. started The patient and penicillamine zinc. was on

copper hepatic copper the to Correct decreases ATP7B. patient = liver that answer because transport has autosomal-recessive mutations The efflux from protein disease, disorder the of H. an Wilson brain, into eyes, skin. Some leaks blood and deposited kidney, the copper the in is and caused damage, changes excess neurologic corneal This effects, and in copper. results liver kidney and by the treatment. chelator the the is of metal Administration penicillamine supplementation is chelated, [Note: Because is zinc with zinc common.] also Graves hyperthyroidism. in results disease disorder is overload. of a hemochromatosis iron Hereditary disease caused is selenosis the excess. selenium of by is deficiency, result Keshan selenium whereas Menkes copper a in ATP7A, mutations protein. deficiency of the is a systemic transport as intestinal to of syndrome result copper result an

9.10. seen changes a 52-year-old is that her pigmentation because unplanned of give tanned of A her the appearance. female in skin Physical icterus. mild and hyperpigmentation, examination shows hepatomegaly, scleral transaminases are function tests for blood (liver fasting remarkable serum glucose. and elevated tests) Laboratory pending. of Results other are tests

answer = Correct B. from levels (high low iron primarily results patient hemochromatosis, has caused to mutations iron) The disease hereditary gene. hepcidin of inappropriately by that HFE a the overload of protein degradation. only known ferroportin, by humans, its the increasing Hepcidin export iron regulates in iron increase and hyperglycemia with deficiency hyperpigmentation (“bronze diabetes”). in The causes hepcidin chelators use of Phlebotomy the treatment. iron or is show lab increase transferrin [Note: iron an and saturation.] tests Pending would in serum

UNIT Genetic Expression and Information of Storage VII

Replication, Repair Structure, DNA and

For additional please thePoint. this materials chapter, visit ancillary related to

OVERVIEW I.

for information. Nucleic genetic expression acids storage of and required the are are and deoxyribonucleic two Chapter see 31). ([RNA] ribonucleic acids: chemically acid There (DNA) acid distinct of nucleic types present chloroplasts genetic not eukaryotic also (or, chromosomes the in of only but genome), DNA, information in organisms, of the nucleus of mitochondria and is plants. in the repository also DNA nuclei, nonchromosomal the contain have form but which may chromosome in Prokaryotic plasmids. lack single of a cells, daughter in cells transmitted copied and genetic DNA through found is replication. The information to DNA fertilized the information egg encodes the an DNA of in contained a directs that development organism. The production involve This of development cells. may billions of the required perform the those for that Each are organism. its is only role maintaining expressing functions in it cell specialized, to information to replicate cell to precisely it Therefore, divides, a the but only able selectively be each expressed. must have not be time also DNA contains that the in (see is (RNA Transcription expression 31). synthesis) information Chapter first stage the of genetic Next, the messenger contained synthesis; molecules nucleotide Chapter translated 32), (protein in of RNA sequence completing expression. see is the code thus gene expression discussed of is 33. Chapter The regulation gene in

to information “central The to DNA (Fig. flow the dogma” of protein is from biology termed molecular RNA of with some exception 30.1) and all as is genetic of the RNA the information. repository that viruses of their organisms, descriptive of have

II. DNA STRUCTURE

linked (dNMP) 3′→5′-phosphodiester monophosphates bonds. deoxyribonucleoside of a is by covalently polymer DNA the (ssDNA), exists strands forming of that the viruses other, single-stranded two wind each double-stranded molecule With double a which a few DNA exception DNA contain around a (dsDNA), in as helix. structure.] The dNMP double linked is primary of helix structure, the whereas the [Note: is secondary sequence of region with (known the present nucleoid complex DNA the in eukaryotic whereas is nucleoprotein) collectively cells, in as a as known protein–DNA in non–membrane-bound various the In types found nucleus, is prokaryotes. associated present proteins

A. 3′→5′-Phosphodiester bonds

through to join nucleotide of nucleotide deoxypentose the bonds 3′-hydroxyl group the the an group of adjacent 5′-hydroxyl Phosphodiester deoxypentose of phosphoryl one of (Fig. group a the 30.2). 5′-end free other long, the 3′-end resulting and that attached polarity, with (the the free to The end nucleotides. phosphate) chain a a are unbranched end (the has hydroxyl) with with not both the in resulting located the are along backbone deoxyribose-phosphate of By 5′-end convention, sequence the bases the written chain always 3′-end. the to from read of sequence enzymatically Figure and linkages RNA, by or shown by in can nucleases, deoxyribonucleases cytosine, family example, hydrolyzed “thymine, bases between adenine, ribonucleases chemicals. the be guanine.” is a for in nucleotides the of For (5′-TACG-3′) cleaved DNA for Phosphodiester 30.2D hydrolytically DNA is Only by RNA [Note: alkali.] cleaved

B. Double helix

the chains called helix, In the axis. are a two the coiled around common axis helical double an 5′-end of the are with is paired of Figure shown the one in in is, strand), 30.3. manner chains The paired other (that the strand 3′-end antiparallel as whereas each the hydrophobic molecule, the are In deoxyribose-phosphate the of stacked on helix, chain inside. bases outside DNA the the hydrophilic of backbone is a structure twisted The resembles overall ladder. groove minor helix The and a a the groove. strands spatial relationship (narrow) two major between creates (wide) the in These chain. binding recognition regulatory of provide the grooves their along sequences DNA the to access specific for proteins narrow into helix, groove such [Note: DNA drugs, exert dactinomycin their Certain by the with double (actinomycin of RNA) anticancer interfering as DNA synthesis.] the thereby cytotoxic D), intercalating (and effect 1. of with always thymine with adenine with is that so is a DNA always one strand of an are a the (C) and cytosine paired (T), guanine paired second bases (A) the strand, (G). Base-pairing: The of bases a paired perpendicular to The (see Fig. axis base helical the [Note: pairs are 30.3).] complement double helix polynucleotide the of DNA the Therefore, the other. always one chain of is one the sequence chain, be determined on the of on (Fig. chain bases the complementary bases Given of sequence can 30.4). sample the of G) + of dsDNA, of (A equals of of the any equals pyrimidines and amount amount C, to equals Chargaff total [Note: that amount the states C).] the A base-pairing the purines which amount amount of G (T + in leads amount the specific the T, The DNA rule, in total of and C (Fig. together held and The between by are between bonds: G T base two hydrogen three A pairs and 30.5). between bonds, the helix. structure plus hydrophobic bases, the the stacked interactions the hydrogen double of stabilize These

2. the the of strands are hydrogen between helix two The bases strand disrupted. when paired separation: DNA double separate bonds if altered the heated. so occur the if the the laboratory is pH solution in of that can bases ionize, or DNA Disruption is solution the nucleotide Covalent not broken phosphodiester by treatment.] bonds [Note: are such structure at is is DNA half (Tm). helical of heated, one lost temperature temperature When melting defined as which the the the is absorbance can structure helical 260 be of measuring monitored in denaturation, by loss at called DNA, The its nm. has this ssDNA [Note: at relative does absorbance a dsDNA.] wavelength than higher T, between are hydrogen high there and between A C G bonds lower does two that DNA T three (Fig. at than temperature and of DNA G-and a only concentrations Because contains A but and C-rich denatures 30.6). called appropriate strands the reform can the (or, complementary conditions, renaturation by process double Under helix DNA reannealing). two Separation RNA [Note: synthesis.] and during the short occurs both strands regions over DNA of 3. and DNA: in form. A major (described of form the structural There 1953), Z by the B Watson Structural the forms forms: and form, Crick three are axis. helix, the a is planes turn to pairs bases with 360° per 10 the and form (bp) twist) B right-handed of the helix with base the perpendicular of (or The helical DNA thought (Fig. consist is B-DNA Chromosomal of primarily to 30.7 model B-DNA). of shows a space-filling is by form The moderately form. A produced dehydrating B the the perpendicular 11 axis. there also but the of planes It helix, helical a from the are the turn, right-handed are base away bp 20° tilted to and is per pairs hybrids probably found the DNA–RNA p. in regions is or (see to conformation form. RNA–RNA double-stranded The close 418) very A bp a is (see left-handed that Z-DNA Fig. turn per 12 helix contains 30.7). the backbone name Z-DNA.] The hence, [Note: zigzags, deoxyribose-phosphate regions Z-DNA example, naturally poly (for occur pyrimidines have sequence of alternating purines Stretches that of DNA and of a GC). can in B may between the in DNA helical expression. forms a and role Transitions gene regulating Z of play

circular Linear molecules C. DNA and

of linear in one see p. to Each of (histone chromosome nucleus long, molecule bound consists is by mixture dsDNA, a 425) which of the of and a complex form nonhistone, eukaryote chromatin. proteins mitochondria, do plant have circular, dsDNA closed, Eukaryotes as their in molecules chloroplasts. A organism molecule. dsDNA prokaryotic contains circular, a typically single, the is more DNA that one double times. Circular “supercoiled,” helix or on is, itself crosses [Note: over in Supercoiling underwinding of overwinding result supercoiling) or (positive (negative supercoiling) DNA. can compacts a Supercoiling, tertiary type DNA.] structure, of that form associated nucleoid. nonhistone with chromosome Each to the compact DNA help is prokaryotic proteins a of also addition, small, extrachromosomal In molecules DNA circular, species called contain bacteria most plasmids. replication that synchronized or carries may genetic not and to Plasmid DNA be division. chromosomal may information undergoes vectors as recombinant DNA The 34.] use described [Note: plasmids in in of Chapter technology is

of convey carry resistance host information one and from the antibiotic transfer to the another. may that Plasmids genetic bacterium genes may facilitate bacterium to

III. PROKARYOTIC REPLICATION IN STEPS DNA

complementary a new separated, of strands the are each as serve dsDNA two the When replication can for a (synthesis) strand. of template DNA one daughter This molecules, produces strands contains two each orientation Fig. in old, antiparallel two of an (one which (see new) 30.3). of is intact of although (Fig. parental called strands in replication as the is separated halves an remains two one into new duplex This conserved because, not two process therefore, the duplexes each the semiconservative parental (and, is entity), 30.8). involved each can synthesize of The complementary polymerases extraordinary fidelity. in strand that replication enzymes are the template-directed, sequence magnesium with (Mg2+)requiring DNA of process coli), were coli prokaryotes. The to the this known section below in (E. and description the bacterium given in Escherichia described the studies reactions refers first from organisms complex synthesis DNA but of same involves the is higher types more in mechanisms. cell has case, genome entire been replicated. the of replication until continue the either to the process DNA initiation commits In

separation A. strand Complementary

dsDNA parental two complementary separate template. (or “melt”) order the In only they replicated, use for a be as first must over the the polymerases of a strands because to ssDNA small region, at In site shown in single, (oriC organisms, the unique a origin as or coli), a Figure ori DNA 30.9A. replication, prokaryotic replication of nucleotide in called E. begins sequence, [Note: sequence order is at a each the This sequence, essentially consensus to because nucleotides referred is of as site.] same the short, facilitate The that includes AT-rich ori segments melting. begins (Fig. sites DNA the along In eukaryotes, replication at helix multiple 30.9B). Having origins replication the eukaryotic molecules. mechanism replicating for multiple great length DNA rapidly of a of provides

Replication fork formation B.

(bidirectionally), two that move strands opposite origin away two in the (see As separate, the synthesis at directions replication and generating occurs replication unwind bubble Fig. a forks from 30.9). in structure separated “replication the of the derives represent term from fork fork” The which strands (Fig. Y-shaped the tines the [Note: 30.10).] 1. Required origin the group of the prepriming complex. of DNA form (start replication the a of site) requires by that proteins Initiation recognition proteins: at strands, unwinding are and These the responsible advancing helix maintaining melting ori, separation replication of proteins of parental for the the the double fork. ahead the these the proteins include coli, E. following. In

a.

DnaA DnaA by protein to specific within (DnaA oriC. initiates protein: replication nucleotide sequences binding boxes) in unwinding (the Binding DNA AT-rich an element) to melt. region the causes origin separation) in results of ssDNA. localized short, (strand Melting a region

b.

strands the move unwinding forcing double the apart and ssDNA to neighboring the double-stranded replication fork These helix). then near the region, enzymes into (in effect, helicases: DNA bind by provided hydrolysis Fig. require (see Helicases ATP energy 30.10). the Unwinding in at regions supercoiling of the causes other molecule. DNA replication fork helicase the E. is of principal DnaB replication in [Note: coli. this of Binding requires DnaC.] protein to hexameric DNA c.

protein (see by generated the binds Fig. protein: ssDNA DNA–binding to helicases This Single-stranded 30.10). for strand). additional cooperative is of one of to binding molecule makes bind molecules is, it (that protein to easier the of tightly Binding binding SSB protein DNA the [SSB] single-stranded to and SSB equilibrium The serve but in are the enzymes, the single-stranded not rather between ssDNA shift direction proteins of dsDNA forms. the separated replication degrade origin, ssDNA. single-stranded the the keep These DNA area nucleases also but in required from template two the protect DNA strands proteins of that providing of only polymerases, thus the by the not

2. of the region the problem (Fig. of As fork replication double a helix as namely, in is of problem the supercoils: separated, are the DNA two of the supercoils positive strands the of of a Solving encountered, result overwinding ahead appearance 30.11) fork. in and region negative the supercoils behind the with the positive helix. accumulating double supercoils The interfere of further unwinding tightly one be of demonstrated cord can a the Supercoiling helical [Note: by other twisting end while grasping telephone end. is positive the will tightening cord twisted wrap to the cord in space supercoils. itself direction in coils, around If of the the form cord of around the form supercoils.] wrap in the cord to is If loosening the the opposite direction coils, negative the twisted in will direction itself strands. problem, removing of enzymes supercoils cleaving is or called solve a the transiently DNA are group both responsible in by DNA this To one which there helix for the topoisomerases, of

a.

These helix. DNA one strand Type cleave enzymes reversibly I the topoisomerases: of double and strand-cutting strand-resealing have both activities. They ATP, to reseal bond from (Fig. not do strand the rather the the store cleave, appear energy to They reusing energy the but require phosphodiester they 30.12). passed it nick in created is transient break Each accumulated relieving is the thus one before the strand intact through resealed, time strand, supercoils. DNA is (relaxing) a DNA in I turns helix relaxed is, does that the supercoils contain those than Type relax DNA) negative of (that fewer topoisomerases

those positive coli) turns prokaryotic and negative cells does than and cells. of E. the and in in E. contain eukaryotic supercoils relaxed fewer (but is, coli that many not more DNA) (that helix both or

b.

II DNA strands. breaks Type These enzymes to in and tightly helix the topoisomerases: DNA both make transient double bind The enzyme break stretch a through (Fig. break the finally, pass then and, double helix to causes reseals the the of second DNA 30.13). result, a and process. negative both this supercoils by can positive As ATP-requiring be relieved plants, negative hydrolysis to type able DNA II unusual property using energy has of supercoils in being circular topoisomerase gyrase, introduce ATP. DNA a and from bacteria the found the of into double negative This opening positive during supercoils facilitates helix. neutralize introduced replication of the the the of the supercoils DNA because transient also in separation p. (see 436). the during required transcription aids strand It

human type target I II camptothecins, etoposide whereas agents, the human such type Anticancer topoisomerases, targets as topoisomerases. example, unique gyrase antimicrobial fluoroquinolones DNA of Bacterial called (for target agents a a group of ciprofloxacin). is

Direction of replication C. DNA

polymerases the only the templates able the direction, (antiparallel) 3′→5′ only and DNA nucleotide in responsible are the strands new The DNA in parental pols) for (DNA they sequences copying read the DNA synthesize to 5′→3′ direction. direction fork grow direction beginning Therefore, opposite double toward of and (Fig. one fork in helix, away replication from in synthesized two with one the nucleotide the one directions, the stretches 5′→3′ chains replication 5′→3′ in newly parental the must the 30.14). on This is strand. different feat a by accomplished slightly mechanism each

1.

of copied strand the direction that the replication fork is continuously being strand. is strand: is Leading The the leading in and synthesized called advancing

2.

with from near The copied strand of replication Lagging DNA small is the fork. strand: the the away being is in replication direction synthesized discontinuously, that fork being copied fragments eventually of are to These ligase DNA, strand. discontinuous termed fragments, become stretches by Okazaki (ligated) a joined continuous single, short new DNA lagging termed strand. this of The produced strand is by the mechanism

D. primer RNA

single-stranded DNA initiate synthesis of a on template. a pols strand complementary cannot of DNA totally Rather, double-stranded is template, short hybrid. a base-paired thereby RNA the of DNA DNA–RNA forming piece a require they an RNA primer, to which (Fig. group The hydroxyl the deoxynucleotide primer 3′end a the the DNA free as of acceptor action on a of by RNA first of pol serves 30.15). that Recall a primer glycogen also (see requires [Note: synthase p. 126).] 1.

A long) of template. short (~10 specific are the RNA called that antiparallel primase the complementary and stretches nucleotides to DNA Primase: RNA polymerase, (DnaG), synthesizes with pairs DNA. the resulting the in U (uracil) A hybrid in duplex, In RNA sequence on short at the synthesized strand. the replication fork constantly 30.16, are only As on is sequences RNA of strand, shown replication at but lagging the in Figure origin RNA these one leading being the required and The pyrophosphate released monophosphate 3′→5′-phosphodiester ribonucleoside 5′-ribonucleoside is through of for formation are process bond. each a as added triphosphates, is substrates this F. RNA in The is as primer described [Note: removed, later below.] 2.

(see of converts to separation p. 415) complex The required primosome. DNA prepriming proteins strand for primase of Primosome: a the addition the primer and The in Okazaki formation leading-strand initiates synthesis. primosome RNA fragment discontinuous required synthesis for lagging-strand makes synthesis As synthesis, DNA with the is of of primer the direction 5′→3′.

Chain E. elongation

DNA (and deoxyribonucleotides, eukaryotic) Fig. the time, Prokaryotic of to new growing pols strand a a adding (see by one 3′-end the chain DNA elongate at 30.16). which that template the strand nucleotides nucleotides incoming with sequence The paired. are is the added the base of are sequence of dictated by

1. is pol enzyme, elongation III. multisubunit the III: DNA DNA DNA by chain catalyzed polymerase of nucleotides the begins of the the specifies RNA synthesized chain. newly primer bases DNA that III along pol the of group in Using first deoxyribonucleotide, 3′-hydroxyl add the the template acceptor the as to sequence single-stranded then enzyme before away new (that remains pol a it as does bound along processive moves diffuse III highly is to it DNA strand rebind and is, nucleotide). template not each adding the and encircles of as is the the subunits holoenzyme DNA III pol ring of serving clamp. of sliding β the the processivity The DNA, forming of strand thus along a result that DNA and moves template a the Clamp hydrolysis.] a facilitated complex, [Note: ATP protein by is formation and loader, clamp the direction, in parental to strand strand (see Fig. grows 5′→3′ the new the antiparallel The (daughter) 30.16). substrates are triphosphates. 5′deoxyribonucleoside nucleotide The 3′→5′-phosphodiester the released the growing group each when to is 3′hydroxyl added is monophosphate deoxynucleoside Pyrophosphate (see new chain (PPi) Fig. through a of free bond 30.15). two deoxynucleotide. total of PPi Pi by that pyrophosphatase used to drive Hydrolysis each high-energy the are bonds means of a 2 addition of to

Pi theme hydrolysis is a to 2 common The biochemistry. of PPi subsequent production with in of direction, making drives Removal irreversible. product in it forward essentially the reaction a the PPi

triphosphate [dATP], [dGTP]) triphosphate and deoxythymidine elongation occur. present triphosphate to [dTTP], substrates (deoxyadenosine must triphosphate DNA deoxycytidine All four [dCTP], be for deoxyguanosine of depleted. supply, that short synthesis If nucleotide one four is when the in DNA is stops

2. important as survival errors for DNA the Proofreading synthesized is as highly DNA: sequence It with the newly replicated of be few possible. that of organism an nucleotide template could lethal, result sequence deleterious, Misreading mutations. perhaps in of the pol a DNA insure Fig. exonuclease, III To proofreading replication activity (3′→5′ fidelity, has 30.17) to in its polymerase addition 5′→3′ activity. complement the As pol the the nucleotide to the base chain, make strand. each of base the in added is to certain checks III nucleotide fact, of added on the is, newly template DNA 3′→5′ direction is the to the exonuclease If removes the activity in not, polymerization. it error opposite paired the terminus, 3′hydroxy enzyme does nucleotide it Because base-paired sequences.] [Note: not an improperly requires degrade correctly a into new hydrolytically of For activity nucleotide. instead an C is inserts the 3′→5′ example, chain, the and the exonuclease if A the removes G template enzyme the misplaced base with activity the containing polymerase then G nucleotide Fig. The 5′→3′ it replaces correct (see 30.17). are domains located pol polymerase DNA subunits 5′→3′ of 3′→5′ The [Note: exonuclease III.] and on different

RNA and excision DNA primer by F. replacement

continues blocked RNA on pol DNA proximity III to primer. is DNA the strand synthesize it by lagging an to until is this the I. by filled RNA and pol DNA gap the occurs, When excised

1.

the primer. In able activity is monomeric activity: pol polymerase has 5′→3′ a DNA I to the synthesizes exonuclease the III, pol 3′→5′ also hydrolytically activity DNA that 5′→3′ addition having and the 5′→3′ newly DNA proofreads synthesized remove RNA exonuclease DNA Exonuclease like to activity that that the chain [Note: from than as DNA the Exonucleases rather chain, cleaving of end remove internally nucleotides (Fig. endonucleases the do 30.18).] the 3′-end the pol DNA pol of I space locates DNA 5′-end (nick) the III by the RNA the and primer. of adjacent between synthesized First, DNA newly 5′→3′ the RNA itself, exonuclease DNA I removes pol of the moving direction in activity). nucleotides Next, hydrolytically (5′→3′ ahead the with As deoxyribonucleotides, I synthesizing (5′→3′ 5′→3′ ribonucleotides, activity). DNA pol DNA polymerase direction it replaces in them removes it activity its proofreads synthesizes the DNA, remove 3′→5′ to also it using As exonuclease errors. is DNA is the the with gap degraded, primer until filled (Fig. continues This removal/synthesis/proofreading and RNA totally 30.19). p. polymerase most in [Note: DNA (see types generated I to uses activity repair fill pol of DNA gaps during its 5′→3′ 428).] 2.

allows ~10 or 5′→3′ nucleotide–long of of time the pol the activities: 5′-end and RNA 3′→5′ a exonuclease I exonuclease 5′→3′, remove to primer. 5′→3′ polymerase, activity more nucleotides of at moving from hydrolytically DNA the The one Comparison 3′-end error these a I polymerases, exonuclease contrast, the DNA pol one nucleotides. activity 3′→5′, time a 107 hydrolytically from allows and replication DNA at the the fidelity 3′→5′ one misplaced has such DNA nucleotide newly replicated growing that remove to moving of In of increasing of per pol strand, III

G. ligase DNA

final the by III the 3′-hydroxyl between linkage The on 5′-phosphate DNA made on pol synthesized group phosphodiester catalyzed (Fig. by DNA DNA the the and by ligase I is DNA group pol DNA 30.20). these in by organisms the requires to is of monophosphate PPi. The joining ATP + most provided cleavage DNA adenosine stretches two which of of energy,

Termination H.

DNA, binding stopping movement fork. termination of to replication replication Tus the sequence-specific the the protein termination utilization the coli on (terminus sites in mediated Replication by is (ter) of E. substance)

IV. EUKARYOTIC REPLICATION DNA

process of of DNA synthesis. closely The prokaryotic replication DNA follows that eukaryotic the in such replication as been of multiple of already differences, eukaryotic in Some versus have origins cells single origins noted. replication prokaryotes, functions been discussed. of recognition prokaryotic helicases the and ssDNA-binding those Eukaryotic to ATP-dependent identified, analogous origin are proteins, proteins, have previously their and DNA proteins RNase DNA RNA by and In (FEN1) rather endonuclease 1 are H primers a flap (Fig. pol contrast, by than removed 30.21).

A. cycle Eukaryotic cell

DNA and are produce The the (Fig. cell events eukaryotic cycle division cell replication (mitosis) to coordinated surrounding 30.22). replication period called the phase The is 1). preceding G1 (Gap replication phase. DNA the S during (synthesis) occurs phase Gap or another there 2) synthesis, is mitosis (G2, DNA Following before (M). have the cell cycle into out as T to said such of phase. dividing, gone mature Cells G0 lymphocytes, are that have stopped the G1 stimulated division. reenter phase cells be quiescent to can the resume to Such phase series is preceding of a cycle [Note: into prevent entry controlled phase completed. cell next The has cycle the at that the until the checkpoints of been cell of of cyclins kinases proteins the (Cdk).] cyclin-dependent are key cell through the a Two cycle the progress control that classes and

B. DNA Eukaryotic polymerases

basis sensitivity on high-fidelity inhibitors, on weight, five location, eukaryotic substrates and to act. have of been or templates and molecular pols identified the which At categorized they cellular DNA the least letters are (Fig. designated They numerals Roman by rather by Greek than 30.23).

1.

α: enzyme. α Pol Pol a is multisubunit subunit has activity, beginning the at fragment on the which of synthesis leading Okazaki the One initiates strand. strand lagging and strand on each primase synthesizes short generating a activity pol piece of that 5′→3′ α, polymerase the subunit short The extended of primase is by primer a RNA DNA. is Pol referred [Note: α as α/primase.] pol to also 2.

Pol whereas δ pol pol the the of proofread DNA recruited fragments elongates Pol newly Okazaki 3′→5′ using each complete DNA. exonuclease strand, leading ε the is to lagging the synthesis δ: activity synthesized strand, and ε to on processivity.] same DNA thus (PCNA), with do DNA that antigen pol III coli, a proliferating the of in the cell much in as [Note: nuclear subunits a insuring high sliding β serves E. DNA pol clamp protein associates way ε 3.

involved gap DNA β Pol and β is filling pol Pol repair. in γ: in mitochondrial DNA. replicates Pol γ

C. Telomeres

DNA chromosomes. complexes (collectively of plus as proteins are located known the of Telomeres ends linear at shelterin) preventing from attack repair the of chromosome, true maintain to distinguish break They nucleases, in a and systems the by allow end a integrity structural dsDNA. to hexameric and A. of containing a tandem AGGGTT, thousand repeats C noncoding several telomeric consists base-paired complementary region In of humans, sequence, a DNA its G-rich in than The leaving C-rich few ssDNA strand nucleotides a complement, the at length hundred 3′end. is longer that fold stabilized is by The to is a forming thought itself, loop single-stranded structure back protein. region on

1.

a special in DNA face cells molecules. the their Eukaryotic problem replicating ends Telomere of shortening: linear of there the the the in Following is DNA. RNA gap 5′-end extreme lagging remaining no fill strand, from the to primer with way removal of with most cell somatic division. shorten telomeres each cells, successive normal in human Consequently, to no divide is is to are and longer some said Once able shortened senescent. length, cell critical the be beyond telomeres senesce. well in and as as do the cancer do telomeres cells, cells, cells stem and not cells not In shorten germ telomeric maintains of which a the telomerase, result cells. in length This is ribonucleoprotein these

2.

of complex (Tert) that transcriptase piece a template. acts This protein contains reverse that a Telomerase: a (Terc) and as RNA a short as acts base-pairs DNA G-rich, with C-rich 3′end template RNA The the single-stranded telomeric (Fig. of 30.24). transcriptase 5′→3′ the extending already in uses direction, RNA reverse to the 3′-end. synthesize the usual template longer DNA The process translocates and end, the Telomerase is the synthesized repeated. then to newly G-rich pol primase has strand an α of been a can it template DNA the RNA use lengthened, as Once to primer. activity synthesize extended removed DNA The primer then is and nucleases. by by α pol

is number the cells to that Telomeres viewed most mitotic their be in clocks cells have inversely divided. the related may as in times of length normal of and premature The provides of the into cancer. diseases study of telomeres aging progerias), (the biology insight aging,

Reverse D. transcriptases

telomerase, are RNA-directed pols. transcriptases with seen reverse As DNA immunodeficiency is transcriptase the involved of A in as human retroviruses, such reverse replication (HIV). virus form molecules. carry in ssRNA These viruses their genome the of a infection becomes integrated as synthesis then uses Following of transcriptase for template RNA reverse of DNA, into which viral viral the viral enzyme a the chromosomes. host cell, 5′→3′ host the move transcriptase genome transposons, is activity DNA elements can 477). (see that Reverse seen the also about with p. transcribed the DNA RNA, inserted by is for reverse transcriptase is RNA transposon, synthesis genome. the to and DNA by a a encoded template randomly used most the the transposons eukaryotes, as into In are RNA that Transposons called retrotransposons retroposons.] involve [Note: are or an intermediate

replication E. nucleoside analogs by DNA inhibition

of the blocked modified sugar can portion incorporation been the certain (Fig. that be DNA have chain growth by on analogs nucleoside 30.25). also example, arabinose, known ([ddI] prevents For in the 3′-carbon sugar, didanosine), to as removal from or further 2′,3′-dideoxyinosine the hydroxyl of conversion as of deoxyribose the as another chain elongation. ring the deoxyribose of group such blocking cells division replication, the slow viruses. these DNA By growing of and compounds rapidly araC) in Cytosine (cytarabine, chemotherapy, agent. or an used adenine antiviral araA) has whereas or (vidarabine, is arabinoside been arabinoside anticancer in also DNA moiety, terminates seen azidothymidine also sugar elongation. the zidovudine (ZDV), Substitution (AZT), as chain called on These are then as [Note: drugs cellular nucleotides which kinases.] supplied by to are nucleosides, converted generally

DNA EUKARYOTIC V. ORGANIZATION

is ~2 46 human somatic (diploid) DNA chromosomes, m whose total cell typical contains long! A it how packaged cell genetic large be genetic size is material efficiently nucleus that be so can difficult a its to replicated expressed. and information into amount such can of It effectively the a imagine volume of a interaction molecules of packaging each number function a requires so which of DNA. of of large these DNA the performs To in with proteins, do of specific a long ordered the proteins, basic bound histones. DNA with called associated is Eukaryotic tightly units, called string. the These serve into which resemble to beads structural a order nucleosomes, fundamental on DNA into into arranged organize long can that that division. DNA more chromosomes cell structures the further molecules during Nucleosomes increasingly segregated condense be and complex are and called cells nuclei The the is DNA complex of found chromatin.] [Note: protein eukaryotic inside of

nucleosome formation A. Histones and

five H2A, H2B, There and histones, H3, designated H4. of classes are H1, at of content a proteins pH positively charged of physiologic conserved are arginine. as result small, evolutionally These high lysine and their of form negatively charge, their bonds ionic positive Because DNA. with charged they , groups. as negatively phosphate ions along the charged such Histones, Mg2+ with help DNA neutralize

1. “beads.” of nearly nucleosome form wound segment is H2A, of Around Two H2B, each and molecules twice octameric the Nucleosomes: structural of dsDNA core, core this the a individual H3, (Fig. H4 30.26). causing Winding negative helical eliminates supercoiling. a turn, The N-terminal be methylated, or of these histones phosphorylated. acetylated, [Note: can ends reversible DNA, tightly modifications to histones how thereby the of bind influence affecting the specific genes. These expression the covalent without caused or expression Histone heritable in an example nucleotide changes epigenetics, gene sequence.] is the of modification of alteration DNA ~50 bp nucleosomes Neighboring are linker joined long. by found instead chain beads. but in H1 DNA core, between the linker nucleosome is to nucleosome binds the the not the tissue specific H1 and species histones. specific is of most the of more the It nucleosomes structures. compact into facilitates packing

2. Nucleosomes levels packed of nucleofilament. a form Higher more organization: to tightly (stacked) can be often shape referred a of This as 30-nm coil, the fiber. to a structure assumes containing nuclear that into organized a fiber several is are proteins. by anchored The scaffold loops final lead the organization chromosomal of (Fig. levels Additional to structure 30.27).

Nucleosome DNA fate B. replication during

to during access allow DNA Parental are disassembled replication. to nucleosomes synthesized, Once form nucleosomes rapidly. DNA is proteins and from synthesis from novo both of the parental come histones. transfer Their de histone

VI. DNA REPAIR

proofreading Despite elaborate few incorrect nucleotides) errors base-pairing during extra can synthesis, insertion DNA (including employed to occur. the a one of or system that DNA cause removal alteration the to nucleotide addition, is being insults environmental subjected of or In constantly bases. can nonionizing chemicals example, double-strand acid, example, The (for which pyrimidines (for DNA, can radiation, the or bases) agents radiation, damaging which ionizing ultraviolet each which two breaks). other fuse be either in to high-energy and can nitrous can radiation deaminate [UV] adjacent cause a per from cell DNA lost at also Bases altered rate of many mammalian are day. spontaneously thousands per or any a leading cancer. the of the that to (mutation) of cell, a effects, in over repaired, of deleterious change loss proliferation damage number introduced is is control the not mutated result can including If of permanent to at damage their repairing DNA. are Luckily, done remarkably cells efficient the replacement the synthesis, sister of strand of repair DNA, filling (lesion) removal damage, DNA of recognition using excision Most or systems the gap left for the as or template damage on involve excision by ligation. the the and a systems excision to one of nucleotides. repair tens These remove outside [Note: Repair the can synthesis S of DNA occur phase.] of

repair Mismatch A.

errors DNA to Sometimes several replication of the mismatch one synthesis, a during bases. escape activity proofreading causing coli, as of E. mediated proteins group is a repair known (Fig. (MMR) In mismatch by Mut the proteins 30.28). present Homologous proteins are in humans. nucleotides.] from 107 of 1 within in in replication MMR rate to 109 1 occurs reduces of the and minutes replication [Note: error 1.

identification: must mismatch. to a occurs, the the the with be strand between strand able Mismatched proteins discriminate that When strand Mut and mismatch correct the identify nucleotide(s) mispaired the degree In is discrimination based prokaryotes, methylation. the on of adenine residue methylated once GATC the are sequences, adenine methylase on which DNA thousand every found (A) nucleotides, by (DAM). are is immediately not (that synthesis, This but hemimethylated methylated, the daughter parental is the is is, the done strand is not). DNA methylation so after strand daughter The and repaired. it parental assumed correct, strand is gets is the methylated be to strand that of strand is known, the yet recognition daughter not mechanism likely nicks synthesized which [Note: is eukaryotes identified involves strand.] exact The in by newly but in the 2.

When an procedure: mismatch is/are the removed identified, nicks exonuclease. the the mismatched nucleotide(s) endonuclease strand, strand and by the containing Repair is an the at of the nucleotides removed. also Additional are 5′-and 3′-ends mismatch typically DNA nucleotides of pol, III. the strand by template, pol is using removal sister the DNA as gap The filled, left a a by by remaining synthesized the DNA of 3′-hydroxyl of joined strand newly DNA the of the stretch DNA The ligase. 5′-phosphate original is the to

humans hereditary Mutation with to also known associated in the proteins Lynch colorectal involved cancer in syndrome. MMR as nonpolyposis (HNPCC), is for colon as risk cancer only 5% of MMR. result about mutations increased well developing in HNPCC Although of confers cancers), an all colon other is the (as cancer

B. Nucleotide excision repair

radiation result to the of dimer. pyrimidines cell covalent thymines), producing adjacent joining UV can of two a (usually Exposure in a These the beyond intrastrand of DNA strand dimer site replicating pol DNA cross-links formation. prevent the from Thymine as illustrated (NER), UvrABC excision in in as by bacteria a process Figure known in are repair nucleotide 30.29. excised dimers proteins present below). (see A related pathway is in 2. humans of encountered lesions a type [Note: synthesis.] fixes DNA Transcription-coupled RNA NER, repair, during 1.

dimers: 5′-side of UV-specific and damaged dimer strand Recognition UV-induced A recognizes (called lesion. excinuclease) the bulky 3′-side of the excision the endonuclease both uvrABC cleaves and and the on gap containing strand. the excised, the short is a DNA leaving oligonucleotide in dimer A This a pol ligase. DNA DNA in gap I and using is filled NER cell the cycle. throughout occurs

2.

the and of humans UV cells formed sunlight. radiation unfiltered Pyrimidine exposed in in dimers to be skin UV radiation can cancer: rare damaged in and, cells disease early accumulation numerous In DNA, repair (Fig. of resulting the xeroderma cancers genetic pigmentosum consequently, cannot the mutations skin the (XP), and extensive 30.30). proteins the UV caused in for of in code be NER any of that several required XP damage can humans. by the genes XP for defects

excision repair C. Base

cytosine, form by altered, the amino be (the is or DNA undergoes either case its alkylating of deamination to the as can which of bases uracil, deaminating compounds. spontaneously, loss action group) or with slowly example, nitrous adenine (to by the precursors from which and formed For the xanthine). nitrates, cell such guanine cytosine, hypoxanthine), (to acid, is deaminates as adenine. (methylate) can sulfate Dimethyl alkylate lost can Bases be also spontaneously. per bases lost example, day. are per this cell purine ~10,000 way For repair Lesions alterations base involving ([BER], corrected by or loss excision can Fig. base be 30.31).

1.

In deamination of specific by synthesis, of of such or backbone either that can the by them are strand. use DNA cleave bases, as hydrolytically instead improper BER, occur from base during abnormal deoxyribosephosphate Abnormal dTTP cytosine glycosylases in uracil, removal: dUTP DNA of the recognized DNA which apurinic was This if purine as site, an both removed, or leaves to referred AP a sites. apyrimidinic

2.

endonucleases just site. the process and filling site initiate of gap a AP making Specific the cut endonucleolytic and AP the 5′-side recognition and repair: to recognize by that AP an excision base missing is of base-free, single, phosphate the lyase removes sugar phosphate deoxyribose A residue. and DNA ligase process. complete I repair the pol DNA

Double-strand break D. repair

double-strand can as (see p. cause that and the lethal be breaks radiation, can doxorubicin, oxidative agents in cell. free chemotherapeutic radicals DNA to 148) such Ionizing also recombination.] Such occur naturally breaks [Note: during genetic previously strand corrected strand described as excising cannot dsDNA template on be missing strategy the and the one the damage undamaged of using replacing a by breaks the for nucleotide(s). repaired Instead, are systems. of one two by they the mediates proteins of which (NHEJ), ends processing, end two fragments. group ligation in DNA of of a joining and recognition, first The is nonhomologous the lost DNA the some is in However, process. Consequently, NHEJ error and is prone mutagenic. to a in cancer NHEJ immunodeficiency syndromes. and predisposition are with Defects associated meiosis. enzymes that genetic homologous (HR), recombination homologous chromosomes recombination normally uses system, the second repair The perform between during This any system prone template. NHEJ a much lost less as is DNA than is replaced homologous (“error-free”) that error using was DNA because cycle, G2 S the occur cell late can whereas anytime. and of NHEJ in HR occurs

breast proteins in or 1 risk cancer.] ovarian are increase which developing involved cancer BRCA2 for HR, Mutations to [Note: and (breast or 2), the the BRCA1

VII. CHAPTER SUMMARY

a bonds deoxynucleoside of (Fig. DNA 3′→5′-phosphodiester polymer linked by covalently monophosphates is 30.32). 5′-end phosphate) hydroxyl). (free polarity, long, with and resulting The both 3′end (free chain a has unbranched a of nucleotides is The 5′→3′. read sequence are the and a manner helix. antiparallel DNA each molecule, forming other, wind as double-stranded paired double a an in exists two which chains in around pairs cytosine and pairs thymine, guanine. with Adenine with double strand a complementary Each (semiconservative for helix of serves daughter a strand template constructing the as replication). origin occurs replication. an at begins of in of cell the replication S the phase and DNA cycle unwind origin two the separate, in that move strands from the opposite and away occurs synthesis replication forks (bidirectionally). directions at two As unwinds double Helicase helix. the negative DNA separated, the two of As of the are the and supercoils the replication the of produced region fork. double behind fork ahead helix are supercoils positive in strands and I supercoils. remove types DNA II topoisomerases DNA DNA in the synthesize only direction. strands polymerases new 5′→3′ (pols) one replication synthesized in (leading the the replication direction the strand). one fork grow away (lagging fork stretches must chains the in direction from newly 5′→3′ 5′→3′ of strand) nucleotide toward the Therefore, and of by a short pols synthesized RNA of DNA require a primer, stretch primase. Leading-strand synthesis primer needs (discontinuous fragments). synthesis), whereas Okazaki lagging (continuous the RNA needs one many involving only strand synthesis In pol is coli), DNA elongation 5′-deoxyribonucleoside III, (E. Escherichia triphosphates coli using DNA by chain substrates. as catalyzed 3′→5′ terminal the enzyme mismatched synthesized exonuclease DNA, with newly The activity. proofreads nucleotides its removing are primers removed activity. 5′→3′ I, DNA using RNA exonuclease its by pol proofreading with DNA, the gaps fills synthesizes. as it enzyme This is The DNA catalyzed ligase. by linkage phosphodiester final least eukaryotic at There are five high-fidelity pols. DNA primase. a a which multisubunit α subunit enzyme, one is Pol is of DNA of 5′→3′ a short piece α activity polymerase the adds Pol RNA to primer. each ε elongates on lagging Pol strand, synthesis leading completes whereas fragment. the DNA pol strand δ with Pol involved DNA γ and DNA. pol mitochondrial is repair, β replicates γ and ε, proofread. activity to exonuclease use Pols 3′→5′ δ, can used DNA be block growth. containing to sugars chain analogs modified Nucleoside antiviral chemotherapy. are useful and They in anticancer that are of the protein highly repetitive complexed with protect Telomeres of linear stretches DNA ends chromosomes. and contributing senescence. are to cells As shortened, sequences these age, divide most ribonucleoprotein its as template. cancer its the that employs to the telomeres, protein (for not telomerase germline RNA component transcriptase reverse component cells extend senesce a In example, cells), and using do charged classes positively five of proteins. are (H) There histone is nucleosome. of of H2B, which a and form H4 core H3, creating structural an wrapped, H2A, each Two histones around octameric DNA nucleosomes, to bound called DNA, connecting DNA The the is H1. linker Nucleosomes be form can more packed nucleofilament. tightly to a organization of Additional chromosome. create levels a the DNA and of pols be corrected can repair ligase. proteins, by repair followed involving by excision recognition by by Most joining removal replacement DNA damage damage and by cause recognized proteins excision coli nucleotide in thymine by dimers uvrABC are radiation and of Ultraviolet that removed repair. E. can in result excision for the of in dimers proteins in thymine needed nucleotide Defects xeroderma XP pigmentosum. humans repair by coli. a Mismatched of proteins repaired Mut and similar removal in are process by E. recognition bases in of is extent for The used strand methylation prokaryotes. identification Defective homologous nonpolyposis hereditary in cancer. repair humans mismatch by colorectal with proteins associated is N-glycosylases out. base site uracil) bases the apurinic are repair, cut is at by and (such or Abnormal the in sugar apyrimidinic as removed excision DNA phosphate are by (error joining Double-strand in prone) recombination end breaks homologous template-requiring DNA and nonhomologous (“error-free”). repaired

best answer. ONE Choose the

0.1. dermatologist. is brought 10-year-old girl the to A parents her by unusually freckles report she sunlight. on sensitive her neck, that face, to and is She has and the arms, hands, parents many her on carcinomas Two cell are identified basal face. is likely to defective of Based following most picture, clinical the the this be patient? which processes in on

A. double-strand recombination of breaks error-prone homologous by Repair

B. from fragments methyl-directed of of Removal mismatched the Okazaki 3′-end process a bases by

dimers Removal from nucleotide of repair excision DNA C. by pyrimidine

uracil by excision repair from Removal of base DNA D.

extensive indicate cancer of sensitivity parts sun, age of suffers patient at pigmentosum the to sunlight, most answer a skin the the = (XP). Correct xeroderma from likely freckling that The presence body and on young exposed to C. XP pyrimidine patients for in dimers in several are These any damaged one of of radiation– proteins ultraviolet deficient nucleotide repair excision required DNA. or repaired joining recombination are homologous (“error by end Double-strand nonhomologous breaks free”). prone) (error in eukaryotic for strand is discrimination not repair. mismatch Methylation used defect is repair, cause from glycosylase a excision does XP. DNA in removed Uracil specific by molecules not process a this but base in

0.2. the protect DNA of protein chromosomes. ends of complexes are Telomeres and that linear division. In with each most human somatic shorten normal telomeres cells, maintained. is in and telomeric however, cells stem length cells, In cancer telomeres: the of In synthesis

provides and synthesis. needed the ribonucleoprotein, telomerase, a RNA protein the both A. for

B. telomerase the a primer. serves of as RNA

a RNA the C. telomerase is of ribozyme.

of is a polymerase. the telomerase protein DNA D. DNA-directed

the 3′→5′ gets E. strand shorter extended.

direction is 3′→5′. F. of synthesis the

Correct particle = required Telomerase maintenance. answer is A. telomere ribonucleoprotein a for telomeric template, RNA telomerase. reverse the Telomerase the of DNA not that contains serves the the transcriptase as of an primer, for synthesis by Telomeric activity. has catalytic no RNA RNA telomerase RNA-directed and using transcriptase, synthesizes template polymerase. is an a reverse As its DNA so DNA the of strand is of it 5′→3′, The already all synthesis, gets 5′→3′ DNA synthesis, as direction that with extended. the 3′-end is and longer

0.3. in DNA small 22 a and of A, each strand base Project, investigator 20 the Human How was found 30 Genome of during G, notices of C, studying structure the is While sequenced that contains gene the complete an T. molecule 25 many molecule? one that double-stranded the

A. A=40,G =50,C =44 =60,T

E. =42 A=42,G =55,C =55,T

=50,T =60,C =40 B. A=44,G

C. =52,T =52 A=45,G =45,C

=47,C =47 A=50,G =50,T D.

= Correct B. answer paired would to so two first the second with G paired and 20 be with base-paired the on for T DNA The the the on A be So, with on 25 C T forth. strand, G the second complementary are 25 C. on with and each strands strand example, A would other, strand, strand the first base-paired 20 with in indicated B. these the correct choice base each numbers together, When are of all added are C. = answer, in T and the Notice G correct that, = A

0.4. replication. order the prokaryotic List participate the following in in which enzymes

A. Ligase

activity) exonuclease (3′→5′ I Polymerase B.

activity) (5′→3′ I C. Polymerase exonuclease

(5′→3′ I Polymerase activity) D. polymerase

Polymerase E. III

F. Primase

proofreads); F, removes answer: polymerase the pol the its with gap with 5′→3′ exonuclease DNA its extends 5′→3′-phosphodiester 3′→5′ B, the makes polymerase I and and (and primer that DNA with 5′→3′ activity; fills ligase bond primer; exonuclease by errors its C, Primase the activity, activity, Correct removes the III. with E, the RNA primer links I D, made in pols and makes (pol) III A.

0.5. 3′-hydroxyl lack group. a Dideoxynucleotides would of Why into DNA replication? stop dideoxynucleotide a incorporation

the prevents lack DNA. group links formation The 5′phosphate 3′-OH 3′-hydroxyl of in bond next → one of that the the nucleotide to

Synthesis, and Processing Structure, RNA 31

additional thePoint. this related ancillary to chapter, For please visit materials

I. OVERVIEW

an genetic in deoxyribonucleotides the contained master of is DNA. its plan of The sequence organism in is the ribonucleic (Fig. copies” However, the plan DNA, “working (RNA), acid of expressed is it that master through 31.1). The is for a strand during as serves transcription. synthesis template called the RNA, a copying of process, DNA which catalytic, additional RNA messenger RNA (rRNA), molecules transfer (tRNA), ribosomal perform translated. are that RNA not and into and acids produces which regulatory structural, and translated functions amino (proteins), are and Transcription specialized (mRNA), sequences RNA of are That RNA is, (ncRNA). noncoding they protein, Therefore, be product gene the the gene. or depending RNA can final upon expression of Only genome ~2% [Note: of proteins.] the encodes selective. that is highly feature A central is transcription it of transcripts some the For many made are of regions DNA. of example, made. or In regions, no transcripts other few are DNA. sequence selectivity is of due, embedded nucleotide least part, in the to the at in This signals to stop transcription. to where where start, the to often instruct These how start, RNA signals polymerase and are Several proteins involved process. also regulatory in selection this a The selectivity the of biochemical ultimately of differentiation process. organism’s result an the tissues of is transcription replication.] to transcription of in “all-or-none” is selectivity genomic This nature contrast the [Note: of modifications, DNA transcription and segment faithful important which base as such of primary is that two strands modifications, undergo initially transcript of transcripts the many that may terminal inactive into the RNA trimming, feature convert Another one of additions, molecule. copies various a internal functional are removal, set the transcriptome of a by genome. transcripts RNA is complete expressed The

II. RNA STRUCTURE

protein and that of three are There RNA types major synthesis: the in of mRNA. participate process tRNA, rRNA, molecules nucleoside (see joined by 3′→5′-phosphodiester composed DNA, of p. unbranched these RNA are 412). Like monophosphates together bonds polymeric several from However, in DNA differ they ways. ribose instead they and smaller that of For uracil than thymine, as instead of are and are folding strands complex structures. into DNA, example, deoxyribose of capable contain considerably exist single each major three modifications. differ of The special RNA structural size, types also function, other and in from (snoRNA), [miRNA]) the ncRNA pp. on additional [Note: molecules small (microRNA and eukaryotes, cytoplasm (snRNA), as in nucleus described functions perform specialized nucleolus found In and 475.] 441, 442,

the sites serve in with several that protein rRNA ribosomes, complex the Ribosomal as found (see are of components 451). as for synthesis structures A. proteins p. RNA association the determined particle), and 16S, that in (23S, for size sedimentation contain the rate three Prokaryotic 5S, shown unit of Svedberg the is size shape rRNA distinct is S by Figure cells and of as species 31.2. the where 5S). cells 5.8S, (28S, four 18S, Eukaryotic rRNA and species contain rRNA up ~80% cell. Together, RNA of the in total the make protein (see example, as 455). an Some RNA catalysts, for rRNA synthesis in [Note: function p. is RNA activity catalytic a termed ribozyme.] with

B. molecules. three the smallest Transfer are RNA of types tRNA (4S) the major of RNA 20 each for in is one of the molecule tRNA amino least specific found at type acids commonly proteins. There of in the Together, ~15% make up tRNA total RNA of the cell. tRNA percentage a for of (modified) example, (see Fig. dihydrouracil contain molecules unusual high bases, The extensive (Fig. base-pairing 22.2, have p. intrachain 292), and characteristic secondary leads structure. and tertiary to 31.3) that that amino its its synthesis. to covalently serves protein 3′-end, the acid, Each attached an molecule carries as tRNA specific adaptor of to site recognizes mRNA, code that it to chain acid of specifies the 447). growing (see sequence genetic on the an p. peptide which addition amino the There,

by is cell, Messenger the in comprises of a sequence. RNA most C. and the only mRNA yet RNA ~5% of RNA base type heterogeneous size far in RNA in is synthesis. that information genetic mRNA coding DNA in use protein it for carries from In out of eukaryotes, into cytosol. transport and of involves nucleus this the the mRNA is one more An carrying gene). gene mRNA from than = (cistron information polycistronic Polycistronic is of prokaryotes. characteristic mRNA of is and one information eukaryotes. monocistronic only carrying from An is characteristic gene mRNA its that addition mRNA be 3′-ends 5′-and to at the protein-coding contains (Fig. In regions can untranslated translated, regions 31.4). a of not triphosphate sequence mRNA the of structural linkage. adenine attached through molecule poly-A of RNA, Special tail) of a of eukaryotic prokaryotic) plus the include on 7-methylguanosine 5′-end 3′-end an a consisting long (but the on unusual (a nucleotides cap (5′→5′) characteristics create mRNA characteristics for to special on mechanisms The these modifying pp. structural are discussed 441–442.

III. TRANSCRIPTION PROKARYOTIC GENE

transcripts control that modification can RNA of varieties of and signals polymerase organisms, (RNA the eukaryotes. from transcription, RNA differ pol), the magnesium-requiring to structure that undergo particularly The among prokaryotes eukaryotic transcription are prokaryotic the of separately. and presented discussions Therefore,

polymerase RNA A. Prokaryotic

(see specialized, by DNA the primase monomeric synthesized one the [Note: synthesizes bacteria, p. primers RNA of except primers for In RNA are the short all enzyme replication of species RNA pol RNA for needed 418).] promoter beginning a sequence to the pol region) at RNA transcribed. (the is of multisubunit of be length a enzyme recognizes that a is nucleotide DNA that the RNA the template be then It of DNA DNA end next to copy and region). recognizes transcribed makes the complementary a sequence of (the strand termination p. its synthesized from its is to 5′-end (see template antiparallel its 415). strand 3′-end, to RNA DNA an thymine in (G) instead The the the (Fig. a is (U) of it T (T) (C) is on specifies uracil a a guanine a a an in C DNA specifies RNA, as adenine in DNA specifies which specifies G, a synthesis, A (A), a copied template cytosine but 31.5). then, the (sense, of template the as to The RNA, to strands strand Within for (antisense, complementary is with DNA molecule, the coding both serve plus) can regions minus) U and transcription. T. templates identical strand, DNA replacing template. For one strands gene, only can the be the DNA of two however, a given for the used by Which location the is strand that promoter of gene. is determined several RNA by pol core enzyme involves and Transcription auxiliary a proteins.

1.

of (β) Ω), Ω, the and are (β′), β, β′, and core 5′→3′ (α, assembly peptide together α, and subunits, the enzyme 1 required referred (Fig. enzyme enzyme: as for to Five 1 Core activity enzyme’s 2 1 the binding template polymerase are 31.6). specificity this However, the region promoter enzyme lacks is, it template). (that cannot recognize the DNA on

2.

regions to pol promoter (sigma enables on σ subunit factor) The recognize Holoenzyme: the DNA. RNA make the subunit The σ up plus enzyme core holoenzyme. the genes, Different [Note: groups predominating.] recognize σ with different σ70 factors of

B. in Steps RNA synthesis

of The initiation, can coli) Escherichia a and divided typical termination. three phases: (E. coli transcription be into of of gene process elongation, transcription unit promoter the extends transcription transcript. the termed from product the A is by pol the region, termination RNA and initial of primary to

1. to not begins RNA of is the holoenzyme pol which region transcribed. the as the Transcription a Initiation: promoter, known binding DNA the with of promoter contains characteristic (Fig. consensus sequences prokaryotic The 31.7). the always) encountered that position is each the [Note: frequently which in base (but sequences shown not most base position.] necessarily Consensus at idealized are at sequences are RNA pol σ recognized the Those that by following. factors include prokaryotic

a.

Fig. bases 35 A (see –35 left the Sequence: (5′-TTGACA-3′), of site to consensus the sequence transcription about centered start the closed is initial of formed. holoenzyme, the 31.7), complex a contact for point is and regulatory the on nucleotide coding 5′→3′ the designated By the transcription sequence convention, strand. sequences are by that control [Note: left “upstream” of) region toward a base if start (to of, occurs A of, prior assigned site. transcription in the number is promoter to the or negative the 5′-end it the is TTGACA Therefore, the sequence centered approximately at −35. base base assigned position The site +1. a first the of is transcription start at no is designated There base “0”.] b.

at (5′-TATAAT-3′), second a holoenzyme (see centered Pribnow The covers box: about consensus −10 moves and sequence Fig. is site DNA. pairs) a which (~14 base short of of (unwinding) melting of the 31.7), stretch complex to melting bubble. an initiation transcription a known complex initial as open This the closed converts the gene −10 the can mutation or the in affect mutant transcription A the promoter.] the controlled [Note: of −35 either by sequence 2.

DNA (Fig. bound been the holoenzyme, the and local recognized has unwinding Once the promoter of helix continues Elongation: by polymerase. by mediated the 31.8), DNA the Unwinding topoisomerases be by (see DNA that can p. generates supercoils [Note: relieved in 417).] begins made a synthesize discarded. of and of RNA pieces pol the and RNA DNA sequence, several transcript are short to starting 10 begins with exceeds nucleotides the phase when in transcript purine) The length. elongation a (typically clamp. in able enzyme the sliding is the as serving the to manner, then its is (clear) core template along promoter strand and a move own processive Sigma released, leave and Fig. During formed short a hybrid transcription, DNA–RNA (see helix is 31.8). pol pol, added uses to chain. as nucleoside Like a pyrophosphate monophosphate substrates RNA the nucleoside is each releases triphosphates growing and time DNA As always transcription in with replication, 5′→3′ is direction. the for domain pol, In proofreading. contrast require primer a pol does and not exonuclease not to DNA RNA does 3′→5′ have a transcript, backtrack, [Note: the restart. causes pol pause, of to cleave Misincorporation ribonucleotide and RNA a a does replication.] rate has higher Nonetheless, transcription error than 3.

chain the a The signal is continues until Termination: RNA reached. elongation of single-stranded termination be a upon can dependent (occur as factor. Termination or ρ protein of participation the known (rho) additional without the intrinsic proteins)

is a in prokaryotic nascent made) with sequence self-complementary most template genes, Seen the sequence that requires RNA in ρ-Independent: that DNA a. generates (Fig. a this (newly the 31.9). plus This RNA hydrogen allows (stabilized back to itself, fold bonds) a forming stem GC-rich on loop. the by a the at the of structure RNA beyond contains a a string just Additionally, as “hairpin.” 3′-end. the known hairpin, This transcript Us is As the weak. is bonding Us DNA of of to The template complementary the these from the synthesized up” double the DNA This “zips of behind the separation as its helix the RNA newly template, pol. facilitates RNA

the helicase participation b. which of with This a requires protein ATPase rho, additional the hexameric is activity. ρ-Dependent: moves it a nascent along paused Rho (rut) the RNA C-rich RNA activity, site. and, termination the reaches at site the ATPase RNA pol its 5′-end binds of the until near utilization rho using the RNA–DNA activity the helicase helix, causing of of hybrid RNA. separates the rho the release The ATP-dependent

4. bacterial inhibiting cell Antibiotics: Some prevent synthesis. antibiotics growth RNA by initiation growth preventing (rifampicin) example, inhibits beyond and rifampin to by subunit prokaryotic transcription chain For β three (Fig. of nucleotides the binding RNA pol 31.10). in is Rifampin tuberculosis. important treatment the of (actinomycin Dactinomycin

in was tumor to first D) application find therapeutic the antibiotic chemotherapy. transcription inserts DNA between (intercalates) the initiation It inhibits elongation. bases and and

IV. TRANSCRIPTION GENE EUKARYOTIC

a than transcription complicated prokaryotes. The eukaryotic in process more transcription genes of is far tRNA, separate and rRNA, Eukaryotic of transcription for the mRNA. polymerases involves synthesis a called transcription of addition, (TF) are proteins involved. large factors number In the core distance promoter DNA on the TF to bind or region, (distal). to away close it, some (proximal) distinct within sites are assembly are for genes the at They transcription a transcribed. initiation determination the to both be the promoter which of complex of and required has Each own eukaryotic promoters TF RNA promoter [Note: pol core and that sequences.] its bind access structure to region their the TF be to decondensed to recognize allow to that and (relaxed) the specific DNA chromatin must DNA. sequences, in For bind the Chapter expression of in is in regulation discussed transcription of The gene 33. role

gene Chromatin structure expression A. and

to ability machinery The affects access association of 425) form transcribed. DNA (see transcription of to nucleosomes histones p. DNA the the to the with be whereas highly decondensed of segments found a in in condensed most actively found form chromatin genes relatively euchromatin, heterochromatin. are transcribed are inactive Most of called DNA of The chromatin interconversion these is forms called remodeling. shown terminus Figure the of is proteins), chromatin A acetylation the major lysine covalent in of of as histone remodeling (for residues 31.11. component example, at of amino the histones modification on charge acetyltransferases negatively the histone Acetylation, with histone (HAT), charged of interaction positive DNA. mediated decreasing the thereby by eliminates the lysine, the the interactions Removal charge by histones (HDAC) between fosters group positive and the and DNA. of histone deacetylases the acetyl restores stronger also The is [Note: to ATP-dependent repositioning of DNA.] nucleosomes required access

B. polymerases RNA Nuclear

types distinct pol of in There RNA cells. nucleus of three eukaryotic the are enzymes are with All large subunits. multiple recognizes of genes. RNA type pol Each particular RNA pol enzyme.] that Mitochondria resembles a contain single the bacterial [Note: 1.

enzyme RNA synthesizes This in precursor I: the rRNA the the 5.8S of 28S, 18S, nucleolus. and polymerase

2.

mRNA processed This precursors enzyme RNA nuclear polymerase then II: that proteins. translated the to of and synthesizes are synthesizes small miRNA. RNA snRNA, pol certain snoRNA, ncRNA, as and such II also

a.

nucleotides centered transcription box upstream for the Pribnow site. RNA that identical nucleotides found is II, II: (TATAAA) of the a p. by RNA transcribed of some of that 436) nearly In is polymerase pol ~25 start to sequence Promoters (see genes core Hogness, box. is the sequence This called promoter consensus or TATA, the is of present. majority genes, In box TATA however, no promoter different Inr are Instead, core (downstream (initiator) promoter elements (Fig. as present DPE or element) such 31.12). sequence found No in consensus one all [Note: core promoters.] is these are the they gene as on sequences cis-acting. of are same Because being molecule DNA transcribed, the as pol sequences turn binding II. (GTF), with sites as general with for The known factors other each interact serve proteins transcription and RNA in which

b.

transcription II are GTF transcription General preinitiation promoter, a RNA requirements the recruitment at for formation of (Fig. promoter, factors: and the complex, of to recognition basal level the the minimal of of initiation pol 31.13A). are by to of sites diffuse so different (transit) GTF the are in and encoded their cytosol, and genes, synthesized trans-acting. action, [Note: eukaryotic not the II itself holoenzyme, In pol recognize to and does contrast promoter. prokaryotic the bind RNA other factors, Instead, a the recognizes containing box promoter GTF TATA elements). TATA-associated and (and core protein TFIID, and binds TATA-binding brings polymerase TFIIF, promoter. the GTF, another to the and The polymerase, helicase promoter.] it its activity activity allowing the TFIIH the phosphorylates kinase of melts DNA, to clear Fig. transcriptional and Additional Regulatory elements of the upstream sequences consensus lie (see core promoter c. activators: 31.12). boxes. nucleotides) regulatory Those (within such close ~200 GC CAAT core the elements, are promoter the the proximal to and as (see away the distal as regulatory enhancers below). elements are d. Those farther such transcriptional transcription Proteins (STF) as specific factors regulatory bind these activators elements. known or transcription in and to expressed signals regulate bind 472) to as proximal p. which to a response STF given to at frequency elements time. point the regulate are hormones promoter elements initiation the distal such (see of to and genes mediate factors. such sites has eukaryotic typical many for binding A gene protein-coding have STF domains. binding two GTF well coactivator to as in other activation DNA-binding domain, as the such enzymes is One proteins HAT that a promoter domain core the the a the involved modification. as is chromatin transcription recruits coactivator the binds RNA transcription transcription, the STF and pol II–catalyzed multisubunit initiation.] polymerase, a regulates Mediator, of [Note: and GTF, the

motifs, (see bind p. zinc Transcriptional the helix-loop-helix, activators as of variety and a leucine DNA finger, 18). zipper such through

that initiation transcription Role the DNA increase pol sequences special enhancers: d. of rate by Enhancers of RNA are of II. transcription the the as same stimulate gene chromosome typically are they whose (Fig. on Enhancers 31.13B). thousands upstream However, or 3′-side) be 5′-side) 2) site, or close promoter located from base (to of be 1) of to can the the (Fig. downstream the pairs away transcription start they (to the on 31.14), the DNA. strand occur 3) and of either response STF. elements called sequences contain that Enhancers bind DNA RNA STF stimulating to interact (see DNA, pol Fig. can with other or transcription and promoter bending looping thereby a the TF By II, bound with 31.13B). Mediator enhancers. binds also over expression.] that they can [Note: Although to reduce silencers also long similar act gene in enhancers distances, they are mushroom movement, inhibiting and slows mRNA e. binds produced II II cap”), its α-Amanitin, poisonous toxin polymerase potent RNA the thereby tightly the (sometimes called Amanita a inhibitor: RNA synthesis. by “death pol phalloides

3. polymerase This synthesizes rRNA, 5S tRNA, and and some RNA enzyme snRNA snoRNA. III:

OF V. POSTTRANSCRIPTIONAL RNA MODIFICATION

copy (the is A transcript and the of primary unit of linear, initial, RNA a specific DNA sequences). transcription segment initiation termination between transcripts by prokaryotic tRNA are ribonucleases. modified and of eukaryotic transcripts and by of The posttranscriptionally rRNA the primary cleavage original both to unique further tRNA help species each its modified give are identity. its both prokaryotic generally is mRNA eukaryotic extensively modified contrast, In mRNA transcript, identical to is primary posttranscriptionally. co-and whereas

A. and are both called pre-rRNA. RNA precursor from rRNA molecules Ribosomal cells generated long of eukaryotic prokaryotic and produced prokaryotes the The a 28S, of as rRNA 16S, molecule, eukaryotes are from are 23S, and of 5S (Fig. pre-rRNA single rRNA 5.8S 18S, 31.15). Eukaryotic RNA synthesized separately.] III rRNA [Note: and is modified by pol 5S bases produce and riboses) of rRNA, intermediate-sized prerRNA further modified to are exonucleases (trimmed pieces at and which The are by processed by to ribonucleases required yield RNA some the species. cleaved in tandem genes arrays. In rRNA are long, eukaryotes, [Note: found sugar rRNA with and synthesis base in occur facilitated by nucleolus, processing modifications the snoRNA.] and

B. Transfer RNA

be must and that are tRNA modified Both eukaryotic (Fig. also precursor from longer prokaryotic molecules made 31.16). ends if of the nucleases. present, by an removed, loop and, is intron removed anticodon the from at molecule both Sequences are specific p. tRNA positions include unusual of produce Other of and the a by characteristic bases end to (see at bases nucleotidyltransferase of modification sequence 3′terminal tRNA to of the modifications posttranscriptional 291). addition –CCA

C. Eukaryotic RNA messenger

by nucleus II pol as known all in primary of is the nuclear transcripts The (hnRNA). synthesized RNA RNA collection heterogeneous the nucleus undergo extensive in and modification premRNA The co-and hnRNA the of components mature mRNA. become posttranscriptional following. modifications usually These the include itself required modifications.] recruits the [Note: for the II proteins Pol 1.

the This processing Addition for premRNA of of (Fig. reactions is the first 5′-cap: a 31.17). cap attached end the an nucleases. resistant 5′terminal linkage is most 5′→5′-triphosphate a that the through to to of unusual 7-methylguanosine is The mRNA the addition requires nuclear by removal the of guanosine enzyme of cap from γ the followed triphosphate) phosphoryl premRNA, the the (from group of monophosphate guanylyltransferase. guanosine of 5′-triphosphate Creation by and guanine-7-methyltransferase. cytosol terminal the this in of catalyzed guanine Methylation is by occurs methyl the group the is S-Adenosylmethionine source (see 263). of p. may steps Additional occur. methylation of initiation p. and permits addition stabilize the helps cap 455). 7-methylguanosine this efficient (see The translation mRNA of

2.

Most Fig. for 40–250 (adenosine exceptions, the mRNA the tail: a a (with chain (see attached including 3′-poly-A those Addition monophosphates) adenylates eukaryotic of histones) have several 3′-end to of 31.17). enzyme, not from rather ATP tail the polymerase, as poly-A but the This substrate. added transcribed using is DNA the by nuclear is polyadenylate tail The the near RNA, called 3′-end the found the cleaved added is polyadenylation is and the sequence poly-A the signal new to (AAUAAA), 3′end. of consensus downstream pre-mRNA a of sequence, Tailing transcription. terminates eukaryotic and facilitate help translation. Tails nucleus, mRNA, the the stabilize from aid its in exit shortened. poly-A the mRNA gradually After the cytosol, tail enters the is

3.

removal intervening do from RNA mRNA sequences) of Splicing: protein. that usually involves code not eukaryotic primary transcript the for sequences or of Maturation (introns (expressed) mature joined are the exons, sequences, form together mRNA. The the remaining to coding is joining of and The removing exons called splicing. introns process The the complex accomplishes tasks molecular as that is these known spliceosome. transcripts few A those (for introns histone example, from no primary contain eukaryotic genes). >50 the must contain Others contain be chains that whereas collagen, some, removed. the as transcripts for few introns introns, such a of primary α

a. U6 small snRNA form or nuclear RNA: U5, that splicing. with association In mediate (snRNP, particles U4, ribonucleoprotein multiple and proteins, uracil-rich five of “snurp”) U2, Role U1, as small designated nuclear They intron each pairs with base consensus end (Fig. by forming the the of at sequences facilitate introns the removal of 31.18). snRNP.] [Note: antibodies an produce proteins disease, systemic own such nuclear In as their patients erythematosus, lupus autoimmune against b.

(catalyzed correct two reactions U2, exons of splicing, into to The allowing RNA neighboring the of transesterification by of U5, brings Mechanism: occur. for alignment U6) the sequences binding the snRNP and of adenine intron a of intron in the 5′-end nucleotide creating site), The the 2′-OH 2′→5′-phosphodiester branch and bond A) “lariat” (known group the unusual the site an structure at an the phosphate (splice-donor forming attacks Fig. as (see 31.18). freed newly at the attacks 2. 1 joins the that of bond site, and The 5′-phosphate forming exon 1 phosphodiester exons spliceacceptor 3′-OH a as for ncRNA snoRNA. is may precursor but which lariat, released be a as excised degraded such a is The typically intron GU AG at are beginning The the end, invariant. introns sequences respectively, and and [Note: of splice-site critical additional sequences However, for recognition.] are through the joined, have pores membrane. mature into in mRNA introns removed and the After molecules pass cytosol the been nuclear exons in (see introns [Note: tRNA Fig. The mechanism.] removed 31.16) different a are by c.

site Mutations and sites splice Effect lead can production of of improper mutations: splicing aberrant the at to proteins. splice of of mutations are a RNA least diseases estimated affect It 20% all splicing. result that genetic that is at For incorrect defective p. that example, mRNA β-thalassemia, disease in of are β-globin 38). cause (see cases is of which production responsible βglobin mutations for a of splicing protein some the the the retained. skipped can being result or in mutations introns site (removed) Splice exons 5′ but the also used. or 3′ are not can sites sites, are They splice contain normally cryptic which activate sequence consensus that

4. pre-mRNA alternative from >90% splicing: be molecules human of ways different can tissues. spliced in in The Alternative genes product its of Because mRNA multiple of this therefore, variations and, produces (Fig. protein the large, diverse a set 31.19), of set from a producing limited for genes. mechanism is a proteins it of mRNA of cells), muscle production For filament–binding with actin the (TM), isoforms of cytoskeleton example, the of (and of an TM in multiple contractile the protein. apparatus tropomyosin the extensive alternative for splicing tissue-specific undergoes protein

VI. CHAPTER SUMMARY

messenger of ribosomal of in shown Three in participate and (rRNA), RNA transfer major process types (tRNA), (mRNA), RNA Figure as synthesis: RNA 31.20. protein the RNA instead differ containing They DNA of instead polymers from unbranched thymine. are ribose uracil by nucleotides and of of deoxyribose but the rRNA is ribosomes. of component a that synthesis. acid of serves protein the to specific adaptor molecule site tRNA a as an amino carries in use mRNA DNA carries (coding information protein genetic from synthesis. RNA) for ribonucleoside of synthesis the is and transcription, substrates The called RNA process triphosphates. are enzyme RNA polymerase RNA pol). synthesizes that is The (RNA for α, polymerase activity prokaryotic In 1 1 Ω) five has and transcription. and 1 needed the 5′→3′ possesses β′, enzyme cells, β, (2 subunits core be to transcribed. the region) factor, an DNA the sequence additional sigma the of core to enzyme nucleotide (σ) The subunit, requires at recognize beginning (promoter region consensus −10 Pribnow contains and conserved include highly box This are the and sequence. sequences the −35 that is required of Another termination protein, (ρ), of rho for genes. transcription some pol of eukaryotic types three of cells. distinct nucleus the in are There RNA in pol synthesizes nucleolus. of I precursor the rRNA the RNA pol and precursors precursors synthesizes and mRNA for 5S nucleoplasm, the RNA, pol rRNA. tRNA of III and In the some noncoding RNA synthesizes RNA the II both primer. and not does pol require prokaryotes a RNA In eukaryotes, backtracking involves polymerase the Proofreading cleaving the transcript. and transcribed transacting box, cis-acting sites sequences, as as general genes consensus serve promoters II such TATA factors. contain transcription Core for pol for which (Hogness) by binding RNA the elements, and GC as such and elements, CAAT regulatory the boxes, are regulatory distal of these enhancers. proximal as Upstream such time. and as these genes to frequency factors initiation, (transcriptional transcription the response any expressed activators) such elements which regulate and are given transcription Mediator at complex and of bind signals the hormones, Specific a in chromatin as known chromatin requires Eukaryotic relaxed (decondensed) that process the be transcription remodeling. segment sequences. a copy transcription is linear and initiation of DNA a A the transcript between of specific termination unit, primary The eukaryotic primary rRNA are prokaryotic and modified. tRNA and posttranscriptionally of transcripts both synthesized from rRNA are pre-rRNA. called long precursor The molecules are rRNA, three largest These trimmed and cleaved by sugars producing ribonucleases, the are and precursors and bases modified. RNA rRNA and Eukaryotic III is is modified synthesized pol 5S separately. by tRNA eukaryotic precursor molecules made (pre-tRNA). longer are from also and Prokaryotic and intron by present, ends an nucleases, molecule is of ribonucleases. removed the both trimmed by are If modified. bases 3′-CCA is A and positions are specific at added, sequence posttranscriptionally. generally to whereas Prokaryotic transcript, primary pre-mRNA extensively its mRNA modified eukaryotic co-and is identical is of example, a mRNA 7-methylguanosine For a the the attached is cap to 5′→5′ 5′-end linkage. through to poly-A mRNA. from A not attached of tail, transcribed by the long DNA, polymerase the most 3′-end polyadenylate is functional. Most be intervening for removed eukaryotic be also (introns) mRNA that sequences to the contains must mRNA mediate as sequences particles of Their (exons), as joining the of composed small requires nuclear spliceosome process the a of removal, ribonucleoprotein expressed that well (“snurps”) splicing. one mRNA whereas is gene, polycistronic. monocistronic, from mRNA containing information just is Eukaryotic prokaryotic

answer. the best Choose ONE

1.1. with An male 8-month-old severe to is have β-thalassemia. found anemia that new normal shows intron. 19 the splice-acceptor of has one first creates genes analysis site mutation a his upstream the Genetic nucleotides splice-acceptor of β-globin that site of a that be describes from RNA gene? this mutant best produced can molecule Which following messenger the the new of

be short. too 1 Exon A. will

will long. be Exon 1 too B.

C. too 2 Exon short. be will

2 Exon D. be will too long.

be Exon 2 E. missing. will

found usually Because can splice-acceptor upstream are 3′-end) acceptor 1 of answer intron site exon = part remain 1, at creates mutation the intron 3′-end the D. that of behind the the 19 nucleotides additional as Correct normal of 2. (the the lariat of an site excised prevent of the coding messenger RNA presence ribosome translating molecule mutant of molecule. β-globin the from in these the into protein nucleotides extra region The normal will (mRNA) a the message to the β-globin for site will normal, remove normal intron is and splice the produce used Those protein. will translation which first their mRNA be normal

1.2. with is diagnosed and an who trouble muscular X-linked easily walking child 4-year-old A tires recessive has disorder. Duchenne dystrophy, its a the for contains Genetic dystrophin mutation in patient’s that region. protein muscle shows the promoter gene analysis the be of likely which most listed, effect would choices Of this mutation? the

transcription be dystrophin A. will defective. of Initiation

B. Termination defective. transcription be dystrophin of will

RNA be defective. of dystrophin Capping will C. messenger

RNA will messenger of dystrophin be D. defective. Splicing

messenger E. will be defective. of Tailing RNA dystrophin

typically polymerase (mRNA) the formation = resulting answer transcription a promoter the RNA in decrease initiation in complex, Mutations RNA initiation messenger the II of synthesis. prevent A. of Correct in deficiency deficiency a dystrophin of mRNA the result in dystrophin protein. in of the will A production not promoter a splicing, and tailing defects consequence Capping, are of mutations. defects) in or in however, and decreased been (splicing result defects). mRNA (lost) They tailing skipped (capping an which or exons stability with mRNA retained have introns can,

1.3. the eukaryotic the 3′-end will mRNA. the RNA in A to added affect polyadenylate (mRNA) by which sequence messenger to is (poly-A) mutation this process tail

AAUAAA A.

B. CAAT

C. CCA

A…AG GU… D.

E. TATAAA

= Correct answer A. downstream the which template-independent polymerase process. polyadenylate 3′-end new substrate polyadenylation ATP tail signal, adds cleaves in this poly-A a An the to creating using a endonuclease as just of mRNA in RNA found CAAT sequences are TATAAA promoters and polymerase II. for by 3′-end is nucleotidyltransferase. added to CCA pre-transfer of the RNA GU…A…AG eukaryotic an premRNA. in denotes intron

1.4. genes of identifies protein-coding protein the eukaryotes. factor promoter in This

A. box Pribnow

B. Rho

C. Sigma

U1 TFIID D. E.

the and answer eukaryotic in box recognizes genes. Correct elements binds such factor general promoter The as core D. transcription TFIID TATA-like = protein-coding RNA polymerase II. are These genes transcribed by The

promoters. Pribnow cis-acting prokaryotic a element in box is prokaryotic Rho of is transcription. the involved termination in is polymerase of the the subunit binds promoter. prokaryotic that and RNA Sigma recognizes prokaryotic splicing eukaryotic in ribonucleoprotein of U1 involved a is premRNA.

1.5. written? DNA GATCTAC, of template sequence the (conventionally also of sequence, product the What written) is RNA the conventionally

Correct = 5′-GUAGAUC-3′. answer to 3′. 5′ are sequences written acid Nucleic conventionally template used as is 3′CATCTAG-5′. (5′-GATCTAC-3′) strand The strand), with template the the RNA T. identical replacing to coding is to U complementary The (and product strand

For visit related additional thePoint. to chapter, ancillary please this materials

OVERVIEW I.

RNA is 32.1. through into through the information, messenger subsequent in to as Figure (polypeptides) case replication, transmitted in the expressed chromosomes cells proteins to translation (mRNA), DNA of shown and transcription Genetic daughter stored and, RNA in set in proteome [Note: complete expressed the is cell.] proteins a The of called amino because sequence of sequence. is the of the of language on The an the the “language” mRNA protein is synthesis nucleotide process acid into translated translation code, sequence. the information produce a nucleotide sequence amino genetic which expressed acid contained through is in Translation requires a the specific to nucleotide or in inserted the in even acid potentially result the disease into causing alteration incorrect of Any organism. an may the death amino sequence protein, being made proteins to their a functional (nascent) number immature achieve form. of processes undergo Newly They protein. must fold aggregation and can the degradation misfolding of result properly, in or modified covalently are Many proteins their activities. alter to proteins destinations present final proteins in signals to themselves. Lastly, by targeted the their intra-or extracellular are

II. CODE THE GENETIC

“dictionary” a is bases sequence a genetic of amino that code sequence identifies between the The nucleotide a of correspondence and acids. in Each code bases. individual the “word” is nucleotide of composed three genetic called words are codons. These

A. Codons

Codons and presented the of cytosine in (G), language uracil adenine guanine mRNA are (U). (A), (C), 5′-end sequences always Their the the are nucleotide written to 3′-end. from bases codons. used three-base The to nucleotide four the are produce triplet combinations time table Therefore, exist, 32.2. bases taken (a of a the in as shown Figure at in code), different 64 three

many shown as are acids common examples. amino

1.

be codon: This which determine translate and, to can are table sequence. for any used mRNA to acids a codon amino by coded an thus, to How translate AUG example, codes see codon for ([Met] For methionine Fig. the 32.2). initiation AUG is codon for the translation.] (start) [Note: acids of (see amino p. for 1). 64 the standard Sixty-one codons 20 the code

2.

or code nonsense) called rather, are UAA, the UGA, amino codons, codons: (also and Three UAG, codons. not do Termination acids termination of but, stop, for mRNA of appears that sequence, synthesis the by stops. polypeptide codons these mRNA for coded When an in one of

Characteristics B.

living remarkably genetic all code throughout Usage organisms. is consistent of the once in most, permanent not the of primitive sequences, genetic organisms, the caused resulting its It is standard alteration code all, mutation meaning altered change evolved in in lethality. that if (a that any have assumed would protein sequence) DNA genetic code the of following. the include Characteristics

1.

Specificity: codes amino is code same because codon a the genetic particular The for acid. specific (unambiguous), always

2.

universal The Universality: has virtually differences is its code only of insofar slight with is early translated. in evolution, manner as from genetic stages code which in the the conserved been specificity very exception meanings than occurs shown a codons Figure have different in 32.2. mitochondria, in those [Note: which in An few (Trp).] for UGA codes example, For tryptophan 3.

The called (sometimes degenerate Degeneracy: genetic code is redundant). amino triplet Although codon a each given amino for a acid than it. corresponds to may more acid, one single coding have For is Fig. (Arg) arginine example, codons six different (see by specified 32.2). Met triplet. coding just have and Trp Only one

4.

from code and point a commaless: fixed read without a of genetic time as is and starting The codons. three continuous is nonoverlapping meaning commaless, a punctuation sequence taken between code any that Nonoverlapping the bases, at example, read AGC For UGG AGCUGGAUACAU AUA CAU. as is

Consequences altering C. nucleotide sequence of the

mRNA nucleotide three point base of results (a an any the coding mutation) (Fig. lead in can Changing region one single of to a 32.3).

1.

the the base same acid. codon mutation: changed containing Silent may amino The for code the UCU, Ser. is changed and codon at (Ser) the UCA still codes example, becomes base for For serine if it third mutation. a This silent is termed

2.

may for code The changed codon the different Missense containing amino mutation: acid. base a Ser different for is [Pro]). becomes proline UCA codon CCA, will code For the amino changed (in this case, example, the first at acid it if a base and termed This is missense mutation. a

3.

changed termination become the Nonsense containing a The codon. codon mutation: base may at of of premature For the that codon termination protein. the and causes point a and (truncated) second at UAA, if new the base codon Ser changed shortened the becomes production UCA example, is translation nonsense a mutation. is termed This containing nonsense-mediated degrade mRNA can pathway The [Note: degradation stops.] premature 4.

Other produced These can translation. or mutations: the by amount structure the of alter protein

of that a. Occasionally, expansion: in of sequence copies tandem repeat repeated will in many so too that occur. number bases is the three triplet Trinucleotide a amplified become happens region many contain If will extra gene, this one of the amino of copies the coding acid. a protein within residues in leads Huntington gene neurodegenerative causing to exon example, of disease the for disorder the For of expansion huntingtin 1 insertion in protein the extra glutamine the of CAG the codon (Fig. protein, many 32.4). in an aggregate abnormally is that long glutamines in protein additional cleaved, that neurons. toxic producing fragments result The the region a seen can in expansion a of trinucleotide fragile myotonic X produced, gene, and an in the occurs repeat of decrease untranslated protein If in dystrophy. as syndrome be (UTR) amount the result 20 Over expansion are triplet diseases known. of (see hypermethylation the DNA males, syndrome, [Note: expansion p. disability gene In in X in intellectual common most through fragile results the silencing cause 476).] b.

443) (see introns proteins. p. removed sites in pre-mRNA alter from can at Mutations are Splice site molecules, mutations: the producing aberrant which way splice [Note: is triplet alterations silencing the due myotonic gene result expansion.] In of muscle dystrophy, to a disorder, splicing c.

nucleotides are reading mutations: to either or coding one the mRNA, from mutation two deleted region added frame. a frameshift occurs, Frameshift altering the or of If an codon acid sequence truncated radically in eventual amino a due to This the a product or can (Fig. a creation of result with different termination a product 32.5). added, is added are amino to nucleotides the acid a peptide. new If three are lost. is amino three If acid an deleted, maintains pathology. in serious nucleotides result can frame of the but three reading Loss loss CF the and see example, encoded commonly most at of fibrosis the chronic, For that inherited (CFTR) resulting or in that by systems, from nucleotides is conductance the (CF), p. a digestive in progressive, the by protein deletion of 5) of pulmonary affects coding a regulator gene, transmembrane F; region three caused (Phe, disease the position cystic primarily gene. 508th (∆F508) phenylalanine to folding of This prevents normal destruction 247). proteasome mutation leading ∆F508 p. (see CFTR, the by its its as in functions lung and the leading to damage normally lungs in sticky the a secretions 174). deficiencies and p. cells, in thick, pancreas, and (see results CFTR of production chloride epithelial digestive channel loss those highest origin. The incidence Northern CF (1 in in of 3,300) European of is In the >70% cause disease. mutation is with CF, individuals of ∆F508 the of the

= = uracil. U guanine;

III. TRANSLATION REQUIRED COMPONENTS FOR

number A required a of synthesis large components of protein. are for the well needed finished found for of ribosomes, termination are include chain initiation, each all the for energy the synthesis. product, protein translated, polypeptide that functional factors transfer amino mRNA noncatalytic (tRNA) acids, sources, as as and RNA acids of to enzymes in be amino steps elongation, the the and the These

acids Amino A.

protein finished All that amino must be at of the acids synthesis. time eventually the the present appear in protein at translation acid. amino codon the one missing, that acid stops If specifying is amino [Note: the demonstrates This p. all amino importance of acids essential (see the having

protein sufficient quantities 262) continued in in diet synthesis.] to the insure

B. Transfer RNA

specific type one amino each for required tRNA acid. of At least is whereas 30 In at tRNA, 50 bacteria least at humans, species contain species. are least of there acids different 20 only specific carried are by amino tRNA commonly acids Because some more than there amino tRNA, have molecule. one amino is codons. true acids This those by several coded that for particularly are of

1. (cognate) at has Each Amino its site: an molecule acid site 3′-end amino attachment for specific a tRNA attachment acid (Fig. 32.6). the –CCA the ribose sequence of group amino at portion in 3′-hydroxyl the The in of 3′-end is acid carboxyl the of linkage ester an tRNA. A nucleotide the the with of the with attached a is [Note: A covalently amino tRNA acid (activated) charged. uncharged.] it is acid, an amino Without attached 2. Anticodon: sequence, pairs a on three-base a which nucleotide the contains Each tRNA Fig. codon also mRNA the (see specific with anticodon, molecule 32.6). tRNA. insertion the specifies codon chain acid growing by into polypeptide that amino of the carried This the

synthetases C. Aminoacyl-tRNA

amino 20 their attachment required is This to different enzymes of for tRNA. acids family of corresponding acid a up recognizes of five the amino amino tRNA, acid all to family member (isoaccepting that to acid). this per amino specific that correspond Each and tRNA the amino group results of the catalyze an covalent A –CCA reaction of that at the synthetases the acid 3′-end in of tRNA. two-step corresponding its Aminoacyl-tRNA attachment in a the sequence to α-carboxyl The monophosphate requires pyrophosphate as ATP, which is adenosine cleaved (PPi), and to in inorganic overall 32.7. reaction Figure shown the to of in synthetases message. its and high genetic of specificity recognizing both contributes of the the acid tRNA The the fidelity cognate translation extreme amino the or tRNA remove have can to the a molecule. the synthetases incorrect activity editing synthetic addition their proofreading, enzyme aminoacyl-tRNA an activity, from that acid or In amino

an by aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase. (tRNA) RNA Pi monophosphate; PPi bond. ~ high-energy = = pyrophosphate; =

Messenger D. RNA

of the mRNA as required the specific The must desired template synthesis be polypeptide for a present. In use translation.] is circularized for in eukaryotes, mRNA [Note:

competent ribosomes E. Functionally

shown 32.8, RNA (rRNA), protein complexes ribosomes As are in ribosomal of in rRNA predominates. and Figure large which or of coefficients, small) values. two given S of relative and one sedimentation They (one whose large consist subunits are their (Svedberg) in terms sizes values numeric shape not by additive. S size, the values [Note: and are strictly Because are their both determined ribosomal 50S 70S For a form together ribosome. the and prokaryotic subunits example, 30S subunits 80S and an eukaryotic 40S ribosome.] form 60S The structure as function, macromolecular eukaryotic synthesis namely, Prokaryotic the in same in which occurs. the and the serve proteins complexes of ribosomes are similar and

subunit the The correct base-pairing by the and determines translation ribosomal between of mRNA accuracy and anticodon. small the tRNA mRNA binds codon insuring ribosomal acid the subunit The large bonds peptide residues in a that catalyzes protein. of amino link formation

1.

species eukaryotic p. rRNA, contain contain prokaryotic Ribosomal four discussed Fig. 434, of three (see size RNA: ribosomes whereas ribosomes As on 32.8). of by single bases rRNA some are are action The ribonucleases, and from and generated pre-rRNA riboses modified. the a

2.

proteins: ribosomes. numbers prokaryotic eukaryotic than proteins Ribosomal in in in present ribosomes Ribosomal are greater of in with These of and and a the the play components system. other structure translation proteins roles of ribosome function interactions the variety its

3.

P, E of sites over which sites, and for A, extends P, binding The sites: molecules: and tRNA three E the has ribosome subunits. A, both each three they Together, neighboring cover codons. site. an A the occupying by currently the directed as site During translation, this codon incoming aminoacyl-tRNA binds chain. the This amino be growing to to codon specifies peptide next added the acid P peptidyl-tRNA. site is The by occupied tRNA the has that amino already synthesized. carries acids chain of This been site to it empty is tRNA by about The the is as the ribosome. occupied exit E Fig. (See and the sites of illustration in P, 32.13 an role for translation.) A, E the of 4.

cytosol endoplasmic are then the in known endoplasmic are RER). the rough or In the Cellular free or eukaryotic cells, as the with association is (which location: reticulum, close ribosomes in reticulum either imported see 166) to the process). synthesizing are are 169 exported membranes, RER-associated (see p. ribosomes latter for cell, (including that incorporated into glycoproteins; for p. into of be lysosomes the an from proteins responsible or overview the required in the destined or synthesize peroxisomes. cytosol or nucleus, proteins Cytosolic itself for ribosomes mitochondria, DNA. (55S) unique, ribosomes Mitochondria own [Note: their and contain own their circular targeted mitochondria.] however, then DNA, Most synthesized mitochondrial to proteins, in are nuclear encoded completely cytosol, and by the

factors Protein F.

for Initiation, factors termination polypeptide are and release) required synthesis. (or, elongation, synthetic catalytic of to Some machinery. the others stabilize whereas function, these appear protein a perform factors of and triphosphate (GTP) active the (GDP). proteins and guanosine to when to cytosolic guanosine inactive small, diphosphate thus are A are G factors [Note: bound bound when number a for the of proteins.] See G membrane-associated 95 discussion p.

Energy sources G.

in two for acid two site the of subsequent A high-energy and step polypeptide removal Pi PPi ATP required one the Cleavage and two from to PPi, one reaction, of to (see the chain: in pyrophosphatase, one the to addition for amino is one binding the of hydrolysis in translocation four the GTP, by and aminoacyl-tRNA the from (see bonds p. the the aminoacyl-tRNA one 73) of for synthetase Fig. growing 32.13, 457). p. prokaryotes.] for ATP additional in Additional is an GTP molecules termination GTP eukaryotes required molecule and required whereas [Note: for both initiation are eukaryotes, and in Translation, of major then, is energy. a consumer

IV. RECOGNITION CODON RNA BY TRANSFER

with the in Fig. codon Correct for the the anticodon of mRNA translation (see of is accurate essential tRNA the pairing 32.6). (isoaccepting given acid. than tRNA recognize one more Most tRNA) a amino for codon

binding A. and codon between Antiparallel anticodon

and is anticodon in of (Fig. read binding, antiparallel the rules mRNA that is, orientation mRNA opposite Binding codon by the pairing the the complementary of codon tRNA the an (3′→5′) 5′→3′ anticodon follows to 32.9). [Note: sequences are noted. Nucleotide the written 5′ in always unless to direction otherwise 3′ sequences orient manner.] antiparallel Two in nucleotide an

hypothesis B. Wobble

mechanism wobble base. for last states codon a with traditional for pairs follows acid the be amino first but a pairs codon codon–anticodon with hypothesis, by which the pairing The the than is described Watson-Crick less and by A the more one tRNA the that (G bases U) can recognize specific can which of stringent two for rules C other defined at is of base spatially first anticodon base the as anticodon) bases. as the (the of the the The not two 5′-end that of last base-pairing codon the base of the with of Movement base first the allows 3′-base (the codon). nontraditional tRNA is more This called codon. wobble one and than single movement to a allows recognize Examples flexible of in shown are 32.9. these pairings Figure amino result code 61 for acids. are required the of species that to The wobble that tRNA codons is not read 61

STEPS V. IN TRANSLATION

sequences nucleotide 20-letter 3-letter on that of process into the constitute The proteins. acids protein translates of amino of mRNA alphabet alphabet synthesis the The synthesized its (C)-terminal its 5′-end translated to its producing a to (N)-terminal carboxyl from from mRNA amino end. protein end its is 3′-end, coding 434). mRNA is, Prokaryotic regions see p. polycistronic; have several (that they are often initiation a has Each and codon of separate species polypeptide. and termination own produces coding region its region each it (that is, eukaryotic coding has only contrast, mRNA one monocistronic). is In elongation, into of separate divided is The termination. and initiation, translation process steps: three of that most Eukaryotic prokaryotes translation in resembles aspects. differences Individual noted in the are text.

prokaryotes. linked completed a temporally in translation important starting difference are One and the nuclear a translation as transcription membrane in prokaryotes, consequence with lack of that before transcription is of is

A. Initiation

synthesis peptide-bond formation before of system of occurs. involves the the protein of the Initiation assembly components translation aminoacyl-tRNA the specified GTP, two message, the of by include and codon subunits, that (see in Fig. the ribosomal assembly this to the facilitate initiation factors components the complex be initiation the These first mRNA translated, 32.13). IF-3), and (designated prokaryotes, initiation eukaryotes, factors eIF many to origin). are IF-2, indicate three there [Note: are whereas eukaryotic (IF-1, In in known for require also initiation.] ATP Eukaryotes translation. are initiates two mechanisms The recognizes nucleotide which following the that the by sequence ribosome (AUG)

1. to Shine-Dalgarno 5′-end). sequence: In on initiating upstream six coli (that the is, bases, sequence ten the located sequence, as (SD) (E. its molecule a purine-rich Escherichia known bases is mRNA of nucleotide codon near the of coli), AUG Shine-Dalgarno (30S) that component part a to ribosomal small SD the subunit its sequence all near sequence. is of 16S the complementary The or nucleotide has of rRNA 3′-end pairs, base the 16S the the mRNA can initiating the mRNA in 30S codon the AUG proximity of to subunit close the the of on 3′-end and the of (Fig. facilitating 5′-end complementary positioning Therefore, form rRNA 32.10).

2.

Eukaryotic not mRNA SD have 5′-Cap: sequences. do 5′-end at the proteins) subunit of it moves (aided binds family by of along the to mRNA close until the and cap eukaryotes, encounters the AUG. ribosomal the 5′→3′ In initiator small structure (40S) of eIF-4 members the mRNA the process requires ATP. This scanning site ribosome internal subunit if the initiation occur close 40S can binds Cap-independent an to start entry to the codon. eIF-4 on cap-binding mRNA circularization incompletely proteins and processed prevent of the Interactions and the of tail–binding the mRNA [Note: translation.] likely proteins eukaryotic mRNA in use mediate between the poly-A 3.

(tRNAi). The a tRNA is recognized initiating codon: special AUG Initiation by initiator eIF-2-GTP in (plus prokaryotes facilitated IF-2-GTP eIF) and in is eukaryotes. by additional Recognition to only by charged only subunit. the is and tRNA tRNA the the the site tRNAi P (e)IF-2 The to recognized on go small directly distinguish modifications codons.] used the internal for from [Note: tRNAi AUG tRNA Base tRNAi 32.11. an carries mitochondria, methionine and as Figure shown N-formylated bacteria in (fMet), In After to is N10-formyl added is Met as uses tRNAi, enzyme by formyl p. 267) which tetrahydrofolate transformylase, (see the carbon the the donor. group attached Met not formylated. In a tRNAi carries that eukaryotes, is Met and In is translation both before prokaryotic eukaryotic cells, this usually is removed N-terminal completed. is in site. charged ribosome the formed large ribosomal P complex, then the with joins the a subunit The and functional tRNAi site A is The empty. the prevent as addition anti-association Specific (e)IF [Note: of large and factors function subunit.] premature The GTP GDP. (e)IF-2 gets hydrolyzed to on GTP. eIF-2-GDP by of of facilitates exchange nucleotide replacement the reactivation the through eukaryotes, factor guanine eIF-2B GDP In

B. Elongation

acids polypeptide the chain. growing end to the amino Elongation of carboxyl involves of addition of the the Delivery appears factors as mRNA requires site template the A of and process is on the elongation decoding) facilitated (a ribosomal hydrolysis. in aminoacyl-tRNA codon next and GTP EF-Tu-GTP EF-Ts the whose coli by known E. in EF-1α-GTP comparable In are EF-1βγ. and eukaryotes, [Note: factors elongation Both exchange.] and nucleotide in EF-1βγ guanine EF-Ts function the the Peptide-bond the of A formation intrinsic α-carboxyl in site αamino subunit the and the acid peptidyltransferase, (Fig. is by amino the to catalyzed large the acid of an of between site an in amino group P rRNA group activity 32.12). this Because catalyzes reaction, (see p. the ribozyme a rRNA it is [Note: 54).] on tRNA site, bond tRNA amino the has After is as transpeptidation. peptide been site known formed, peptide transferred A at on at acid P the process a the to the the the the three ribosome nucleotides toward then advances of The the mRNA. 3′-end the prokaryotes, process requires GTP as of and, translocation use EF-G-GTP hydrolysis. and known participation is EF-2-GTP) the This (eukaryotes in tRNA the P the release Translocation site. the movement A peptidyl-tRNA to for P E to and movement of the the from site uncharged the from of causes The process termination is a repeated is codon encountered. until more ribosome a [Note: of translate Because one most at length can than mRNA, time the message. of a Such ribosomes one is of or number and complex mRNA a a a polysome, polyribosome.] called of

C. Termination

A site. one termination occurs moves codons into of Termination when the the three UAA codons These coli in and are UAG, and factors: which UGA recognizes UAA. by release recognized E. recognizes RF-1, RF-2, which and ribosome. the linking hydrolysis P peptide the the of binding factors from to in be the bond tRNA the site, protein the these to released The causing release at of results nascent of GTP or (see RF-3-GTP, hydrolyzed as factor, release RF-2 causes A then the release Fig. third RF-1 is 32.13). single codons. a have eRF, recognizes release which Eukaryotes termination factor, [Note: all three factor, second the like RF-3. A functions prokaryotic eRF-3, summary used See factors the a 32.14 Figure in of translation.] for process, of 32.13. in as the synthesis, well inhibitors Figure prokaryotic in antibiotic summarized some as The protein steps are modification polypeptide. newly may synthesized described protein used and as ribosomal polypeptide be and another recycled factors below, tRNA, undergo the can to subunits, mRNA, synthesize further and The In ribosome [Note: recycling separation the factors of prokaryotes, subunits. mediate hydrolysis eRF eukaryotes, ATP and In required.] are

D. Translation regulation

expression is commonly but also at be the Gene level, transcriptional may most regulated. regulated translation mechanism is is by in important which eukaryotes eIF-2: covalent of Phosphorylated is achieved this 476). by (see eIF-2 inactive modification p. An regulation its by that eukaryotes also prokaryotes, both achieved through inhibit bind translation. use can and mRNA and blocking be In proteins

Protein folding E.

functional, native state. to assume their Proteins must fold can be (as of (see as primary result known by or facilitated Folding proteins chaperones a spontaneous the 20). p. structure)

targeting Protein F.

protein the eukaryotes Although of outside in the or subcellular within organelles their initiated functions most perform is in synthesis many proteins cell. cytoplasm, final proteins Such proteins that to locations. acid amino normally their contain the direct sequences are (cotranslational targeted presence hydrophobic RER N-terminal the by sequence. during secreted of For the signal to an synthesis example, proteins targeting) sequence recognition elongation, ribosome, that RER ribosome–peptide ribonucleoprotein channel and delivers translocon) is the the complex interaction recognized signal via The receptor. an with binds to (the (SRP), membrane particle halts the the a SRP by its the (Fig. lumen, cleaved protein RER and Translation resumes, sequence the signal enters is 32.15). RER vesicles, and secreted. moves Golgi, and into the packaged is through the protein The processed, nuclear proteins localization mitochondrial entry a amphipathic, that after matrix contain synthesis (posttranslational) peroxisomal signal; C-terminal contain proteins short, internal, tripeptide and proteins an that nuclear signal. mitochondrial an Proteins include sequence; N-terminal, targeted contain that basic α-helical

VI. POSTTRANSLATIONAL CO-AND MODIFICATIONS

they to Many (posttranslational). polypeptides are their either completed ribosome synthesis are modified, (cotranslational) or the covalently still after attached while has been one removal of the for more sequence These activity. of or chemical of covalent include modifications addition the groups part or translated may protein required

A. Trimming

molecules destined active. for initially large, proteins as are made secretion not are precursor functionally Many that of molecule. active the Portions be of the resulting endoproteases, must an protein in removed release specialized by cellular protein cleavage the on of reaction The site to depends modified. the be or in see vesicles (for are Some example, RER developing Fig. secretory cleaved others Golgi; proteins cleaved the are precursor insulin; the in after such collagen others, are 47), 309); secretion. 23.4, p. and p. still (see as cleaved

attachments B. Covalent

(Fig. variety by of function of the be affected can chemical covalent Protein groups a attachment 32.16). Examples the following. include

1.

in serine, occurs on residues protein. frequently, groups hydroxyl of less threonine, or, a the tyrosine Phosphorylation: Phosphorylation the a catalyzed phosphatases. kinases be of protein is and protein one action reversed may by of It of family by activity the phosphorylation of or protein. The functional may the increase decrease synthesis examples see of glycogen previously have Chapter for example, Several and p. been discussed 11, the regulation 132, degradation). reactions (for phosphorylation of

2.

carbohydrate membrane that to en hydroxyl have groups a of (O-linked). an to built nitrogen serine, the be a added hydroxylysine of bloc chains part a the to or Many threonine, Glycosylation: sequentially become (N-linked) proteins of are secreted on of the destined cell amide or asparagine from or the occurs RER Oglycosylation in and Golgi. in N-glycosylation the was (The on glycoproteins process p. producing of discussed such 165.) carbon at 6 p. lysosomes residues (see are hydrolases of 169). acid of targeted phosphorylation matrix the mannose to by N-glycosylated the

3.

α 47). C–dependent are of residues (see p. by RER hydroxylated the and of in the extensively Proline chains Hydroxylation: lysine vitamin collagen hydroxylases

4.

the may for activity modifications: covalent functional These Other of a protein. required be 393). can For (see residues carboxyl vitamin added example, additional carboxylation be K–dependent to glutamate groups by p. resulting are the the several of residues of blood-clotting (Gla) proteins. essential γ-carboxyglutamate for The activity 35.) Chapter online (See the of carboxylation groups catalyze to reactions Fig. as pyruvate is lysine bound carboxylase such ε-amino Biotin that biotin-dependent covalently enzymes of residues (see on 10.3 119). p. Attachment as farnesyl help lipids, groups, can to such (see anchor proteins of membranes 221). p. proteins acetylated cotranslationally Many are the at N-end. eukaryotic of (see Reversible acetylation [Note: p. histone gene proteins influences expression 476).]

degradation Protein C.

Proteins for attachment by misfolded) often called highly of (see destined that ubiquitin rapid conserved for covalent chains or a destruction turnover Fig. small, (for of protein marked are are the ubiquitination, defective example, 19.3 on 247). p. in the proteasome, are this in system marked proteolytic by macromolecular, way ATP-dependent, located which Proteins a is rapidly the degraded cytosol. in results its proteasomal CFTR of example, 450) p. the For misfolding degradation. (see protein proteins degradation.] unfolded ER-associated which triggers the ubiquitinated, accumulate in folding cytosol, causing is RER impeded, of in and the degraded sent are proteins global by the is stress in translation called the to response, eIF-2 a phosphorylation; expression the and chaperones If decreased [Note: is unfolded the by proteasome protein that process unfolded increased;

VII. SUMMARY CHAPTER

presented language of messenger cytosine the (C), three composed (G), uracil of (U). and in adenine (mRNA) guanine are nucleotide (A), bases RNA Codons always written They are 5′→3′. Of code acids signal 61 termination for 20 the 64 and 3 amino combinations, standard synthesis of protein (translation). possible the three-base codes (the the original codon a or nucleotide altered (the acid), codon for codon). acid), amino altered for a sequence the can codes nonsense mutations codon amino codon a silent mutations is termination cause altered mutations missense in Altering different (the and and code is Characteristics specificity, (Fig. the and universality, include genetic commaless of nonoverlapping degeneracy, it 32.17). of one for energy for eukaryotes); appear transfer competent RNA and factors ATP synthesized; in protein one the sources. protein synthesis; for amino amino in fully finished least ribosomes and coding protein; the aminoacyl-tRNA be initiation, synthetase type and acid; termination triphosphate needed that synthesis each amino protein for for 80S each of all Requirements to acids prokaryotes, acid; mRNA as elongation, protein in (tRNA) eventually include at (GTP) guanosine the (70S specific the its amino for anticodon specifying site at has is 3′-end tRNA tRNA attachment codon recognize the and acid the acid the region can amino a carrying. an an specific that (rRNA). protein complexes are Ribosomes large and RNA ribosomal of and two in and 30S and prokaryotes subunits, eukaryotes. in They 50S consist 40S 60S of Each binding that has sites ribosome cover P, and the A, neighboring for tRNA E codons. sites molecules: three three ribosome. site peptidyl-tRNA, the aminoacyl-tRNA, The is by to occupied A is is an site occupied exit site empty it tRNA by P and incoming as the the E the about binds accomplished to tRNA antiparallel the the following an anticodon, complementarity binds is of codon by Recognition rules the and codon mRNA of which binding. states as hypothesis is that The (5′) wobble the other as base spatially first of two the not bases. anticodon the defined the than thus codon, one recognize of amino of base-pairing specific first with that for base (3′) allowing the allows tRNA single Movement nontraditional acid. more a base to a codon last are of the of with and For translation synthesis, the the system ribosomal initiation small subunit. assembled, components mRNA associates protein process (IF). The factors initiation requires a purine-rich the (the region of mRNA the the on sequence resulting sequence) rRNA, the mRNA with translation that In in base-pairs prokaryotes, begin. small subunit so on Shine-Dalgarno can a of complementary 16S positioning on the by the small subunit to used mRNA family) position eIF-4 is of The the on 5′-cap (bound mRNA. eukaryotic proteins acid initiating The is AUG, eukaryotes. methionine whereas used prokaryotes, N-formylmethionine amino the is initiation in is and codon in (e)IF-2. The initiating site the to (tRNAi) is charged tRNA brought by P polypeptide of In is by acids lengthened addition carboxyl end chain the chain. the the of to its elongation, growing amino process site A as of along that the of the the elongation to factors ribosome movement the well facilitate The aminoacyl-tRNA binding mRNA. the requires as the therefore, which intrinsic bond is activity and, is large peptide of subunit catalyzed formation ribozyme. peptidyltransferase, the to rRNA by a of The the an the is the along next (translocation). formation, 5′→3′ codon advances to the peptide-bond mRNA ribosome the Following the in direction of polysome. message, the of than translate ribosome time most can mRNA, at a more forming one length a Because a begins A Termination codons moves three the termination of one the when site. into release recognized by are codons factors. These from The dissociated the the protein and the complex, newly is ribosomal from synthesized released mRNA. ribosome is termination elongation, of by hydrolysis and GTP. Initiation, driven the are ATP in requires also Initiation for scanning. eukaryotes process protein the interfere of Numerous synthesis. antibiotics with chains during polypeptide covalently Many modified after or are translation. targeting; removal; phosphorylation, in Such and plays seen such which that amino modifications which as include in inactivate a protein collagen. role the hydroxylation glycosylation, protein; acid may activate or secreted (as proteins). or mitochondrial cotranslational proteins) (as either with can with posttranslational Protein be matrix targeting form. fold to achieve must functional their Proteins or spontaneous be facilitated by chaperones. can Folding misfolded) of destruction of Proteins the (for for for that are defective turnover conserved example, marked or ubiquitin. a by chains small, called protein destined attachment are rapid highly Ubiquitinated a degraded as by the proteasome. complex known rapidly proteins cytosolic are

best the ONE Choose answer.

2.1. Constant normal form in is a that rather the than long, protein. Spring) amino found to β-globin with is abnormal (Hemoglobin 141 an acids A microcytic the man of anemia have found 172 20-year-old consistent of following point is with mutations Which this abnormality? the question. Figure to answer Use the 32.2

CGA→UGA A.

GAU→GAC B.

C. GCA→GAA

D. UAA→CAA

D. UAA→UAG

in to UAA point. that Correct CAA Mutating ribosome the normal to the a RNA termination causes answer (stop) insert β-globin D. glutamine codon = at messenger from resulting upon It the an continue chain protein. message, stop it in extending protein farther codon comes the next until down abnormally the will long UGA with the The replacement (stop) to of cause be protein (arginine) CGA short. too would and in no GAC change cause would GAU for both the code and aspartate protein. size GCA the Changing (glutamate) GAA protein would to of (alanine) the not change product. one for the A have and codon simply no to protein. from would termination effect on UAA UAG would change another change

2.2. inhibits pharmaceutical a bacterial company is protein studying A new that synthesis. antibiotic messenger When synthesis that an translating to this dipeptide sequence protein added is antibiotic the RNA fMet-Phe. formed product system the is the vitro in AUGUUUUUUUAG, is only inhibited step likely is protein synthesis most antibiotic? What the by in

Initiation A.

B. A a charged RNA Binding to ribosomal site the of transfer

C. Peptidyltransferase activity

translocation D. Ribosomal

Termination E.

the bind activity (formylated peptidyltransferase answer Because complete bond. made, fMet-Phe site, methionyl-phenylalanine) Correct A Phe-tRNA and be to first the form D. peptide to to is must the ribosomes = initiation, use able Because proceed inhibited any most to the is not able ribosomal further, is movement the likely (translocation) ribosome step. ribosome of message. termination this the Therefore, reaches the is codon stopped it before

2.3. it mischarged, alanine to carries is molecule (tRNA) carry that A transfer cysteine (ala-tRNAcys). so actually is RNA supposed that (tRNAcys) during residue correction Assuming this be protein no synthesis? of what fate will alanine the occurs, It will:

into incorporated a codon alanine. A. a be in to protein response for

cysteine. a protein in for to a response be codon incorporated B. into

C. randomly incorporated any codon. at be

D. used be attached for the synthesis. tRNA cannot to because protein remain it

enzymes. to be by cysteine chemically converted E. cellular

Correct = answer B. specificity determines the anticodon a of acid to tRNA tRNA Once only an of amino attached incorporation. is molecule, that the incorporated cysteine be incorrectly alanine the the protein by a determined into will a activated Therefore, codon. position at

2.4. by (CF) with a CF folds caused fibrosis the regulator ∆F508 In mutation, transmembrane protein (CFTR) incorrectly. patient mutant conductance the cystic by modify to cells protein patient’s molecules abnormal attaching ubiquitin The it. this What protein? fate CFTR the this of is modified

A. effect of the It mutation. corrects because for function its the largely performs the ubiquitin normal

B. degraded by It is the proteasome.

It is C. into storage vesicles. placed

cellular enzymes. is by It repaired D.

E. secreted the cell. from is It

damaged, usually old, cytosolic Ubiquitination proteins or marks destruction B. proteasome. answer for = misfolded Correct by the repair proteins. mechanism no damaged of There is cellular for known

2.5. antimicrobials Many translation. inhibit its Which action? following is the of with antimicrobials paired mechanism of correctly

to subunit. A. the 60S binds Erythromycin ribosomal

factor-2. inactivates Puromycin elongation B.

the to binds ribosomal 30S subunit. Streptomycin C.

D. peptidyltransferase. Tetracyclines inhibit

and translation answer inhibits Streptomycin the initiation. Correct binds 30S = subunit C. 50S blocks ribosomal peptide ribosome. and the subunit which Erythromycin the leaves through the binds tunnel a denotes eukaryote) (60S the similarity Puromycin structural has RNA. to aminoacyl-transfer premature and is in growing results the termination into and in inhibits It eukaryotes. prokaryotes chain, both elongation, incorporated subunit ribosomal and the inhibiting access to 30S A Tetracyclines bind block the site, elongation.

2.6. of cell-free the homopolypeptides: system polyribonucleotide Translation polyasparagine, synthetic polythreonine. a repeating polyglutamine, a CAA in produces and protein-synthesizing containing three sequence is are codon the and CAA for the and codons glutamine triplets following of threonine? for the respectively, which If asparagine AAC,

AAC A.

B. ACA

C. CAA

CAC D.

CCA E.

answer B. Correct = any synthetic by polynucleotide could is, of one in vitro second the at the be in frames). the of the three or A protein-synthesizing system CAACAACAACAA sequence C, read reading (that first … starting The A, first the case, codes be the first in be would asparagine; which the codon the the triplet CAA, case, for first codes codes AAC, second which last in would triplet In triplet which glutamine; first for threonine. would first ACA, case, the codon be codon

2.7. synthesis? Which the required following both for is and eukaryotic of prokaryotic protein

A. of the subunit Shine-Dalgarno sequence small to the ribosomal Binding

(t)RNA Formylated B. methionyl-transfer

nucleus and of RNA messenger the Movement of the C. the out cytoplasm into

D. by 5′-cap factors of initiation the Recognition

the Translocation site of E. the site P peptidyl-tRNA the A to from

and the to In next Correct allow (elongation) of site. requires = both prokaryotes aminoacyl-tRNA E. the to eukaryotes, A answer the continued P the from to movement the site enter peptidyl-tRNA translation A only use have Shine-Dalgarno and their and mRNA. formylated prokaryotes nucleus and have sequence eukaryotes Only methionine a a posttranscriptionally process co-and

lung serine in protease, is action result emphysema, elastase, deficiency a (AAT) the because α1-Antitrypsin a can 2.8. pathology, unopposed. of consequence impaired in the liver, of synthesis. lungs the of from the Deficiency its secretion is of AAT site the characterized that by such the Proteins are as best destined statements? AAT be secreted are which to of following

A. Their on smooth reticulum. synthesis endoplasmic is the initiated

B. targeting mannose They a signal. contain 6-phosphate

methionine as They amino N-terminal contain always C. the acid.

from produced They N-terminal products have signal D. that translation an sequence. are hydrophobic

the sugars with linkages synthesis Golgi. involve their does not because O-glycosidic E. no contain They

free Synthesis of secreted answer is ribosomes. D. begun Correct on = (cytosolic) proteins cleaved signal the threaded As as bound by signal sequence taken the rough (RER), N-terminal particle, from recognition ribosome, reticulum peptide translation the it the lumen, endoplasmic is to into emerges the of the and continues. proteins RER and (Golgi). the such the and as undergo O-glycosylation The move Golgi N-glycosylation and processing (RER) through Golgi, packaged in vesicles the In the are and cell. from released they secretory reticulum proteins, attached. is no has with ribosomes associated smooth synthesis of The not lipids, endoplasmic and residues (acid targets mannose proteins these terminal at to 6 Phosphorylation hydrolases) glycoproteins of in carbon lysosomes. The from N-terminal most is proteins methionine processing. removed during

2.9. Why and degenerate is as the both code genetic described unambiguous?

but one code), amino (unambiguous amino A one for given for code). can just (degenerate be acid given particular than acid codon by codon coded codes more a

33 Expression of Gene Regulation

For to additional this thePoint. related ancillary chapter, please visit materials

I. OVERVIEW

production a either the ribonucleic results acid expression process refers or in ultimately gene multistep product, (RNA) Gene that functional to protein. of the the the both gene of of is (DNA) primary the RNA (transcription), in expression, regulation of eukaryotes. synthesis use first and The in prokaryotes for deoxyribonucleic step site acid expression and gene involves posttranslational particular well to In of influence however, actions the that regions also posttranscriptional eukaryotes, as extensive as processes access DNA. can steps that of be provide these regulated Each amounts control the produced. and to over are products additional functional of kinds

are Not genes all tightly regulated. encode at constitutive essentially constant For as level. a for so and cellular example, genes expressed described products basic required functions are known They “housekeeping” also are genes. as certain are under however, genes, only Regulated conditions. expressed may example, They hepatocytes. cells cells, in be in for subset a all expressed of or only (that and function. is, ability regulate be gene over the much, if, gives will to The to particular when made) determine expression structure and products gene how control cell cellular morphogenesis, of for basis adaptability the organism. and differentiation, is any It best is of in in are themes understood repeated but expression many eukaryotes. Control prokaryotes, gene where Figure some shows 33.1 controlled. can expression sites be the of gene

II. REGULATORY AND SEQUENCES MOLECULES

in controlled genome. of gene by the regions of transcription, all expression, are step of DNA usually is Regulation initial regulatory that noncoding the in the sequences embedded can these molecules, or kinds The between induce influencing DNA that the such regulatory sequences produced. amounts machinery, products factors, and transcription are the interaction and of as repress transcriptional the cis-acting regulatory sequence 439). as on regulatory of p. sequences chromosome are the they (see same because The DNA called genes influence expression The DNA-binding because their from trans-acting are site sites synthesis of called their through (Fig. cell to diffuse (transit) molecules they can regulatory the 33.2). gene gene on a a chromosome (a itself produced might on For molecule) factor from that protein regulates 6 trans-acting example, 11. chromosome a have transcription been of The motifs zinc binding DNA to (Fig. through as finger is proteins structural the such the helix-turn-helix protein. or leucine zipper, 33.3), in

III. GENE PROKARYOTIC EXPRESSION REGULATION OF

expression mediated (E. bacterium binding gene the prokaryotes trans-acting In (chromosome). of cis-acting of coli), single their to on coli of in and, as primarily such transcription by molecule DNA occurs level Escherichia regulatory the elements at is the regulation proteins general, the an first approach, in Regulating the wasted gene products.] making as gene [Note: expression energy efficient step a is unneeded is of insofar not control premature termination or Transcriptional can prokaryotes involve initiation the transcription. of in

RNA bacterial A. transcription operons Messenger from

proteins chromosome on encode a that transcription metabolic In of that found genes. cis-acting the are in with the often grouped sequentially elements bacteria, pathway involved particular structural these the genes the along regulate The transcription product 434). see ([mRNA] a p. messenger RNA polycistronic is single off unit). turned a regulated on coordinately The is, (that genes thus, or are, as referred package to entire operon. an is as This

B. operons Operators in bacterial

of segment activity of of as the a that protein contain the DNA an regulates genes by Bacterial repressor. operator, the binding reversibly the structural known operons operon a is operator, it the promoter, RNA over binds transcribes the by reaches passes mRNA. genes (RNA bound protein-coding operator polymerase the pol) not the If to and that the repressor, the does to produce the is and not bound polymerase blocked operator, If mRNA. repressor the is no as proteins) the to no (and, therefore, made. long As mRNA operator, are bound is the repressor present, inducer binds However, repressor shape no it molecule the binds when causing to operator. the the so an it to change is repressor, that longer this When initiate happens, RNA can pol transcription. inducible (lac) regulation operon illustrates the coli negative E. lactose is One of best-understood positive the and (Fig. that of both examples 33.4).

operon Lactose C.

the the disaccharide operon codes for gene glucose; and which lacZ thiogalactoside lacY lactose. gene in involved contains acetylates transacetylase, the a movement for of βgalactosidase, for catabolism permease, gene the galactose the three of into code the hydrolyzes lacA the which codes and to lactose which that The genes lactose the cell; codes lactose: lac for facilitates proteins [Note: this unknown.] The physiologic function is acetylation of and to glucose these is produced are only available when is maximally proteins the All of cell lactose not. if fuel other preference a to sugar.] use as Bacteria [Note: any in available, glucose, and structural (O) region regulatory of upstream catabolite of (CAP) protein pol The two three additional the sites, the promoter of portion consists activator and operon regulatory where where binds the sites, and RNA the is bind. operator proteins the genes The the protein regulatory empty expressed lacY, and is site and 94) only a see complex by the genes of sometimes CAP, O p. cAMP monophosphate CAP maximally and lacA adenosine the bound site when ([cAMP] are lacZ, cyclic the called is (CRP). trans-acting repressor O factor) codes high (a gene, lacI gene, that the protein affinity. to for binds the the with A regulatory site The and [Note: is own the of its not has lacI gene operon.] part lac promoter 1.

When (turned the is is glucose case, this In off). available: operon lac only repressed (Fig. by Repression motif a mediated binding helix-turn-helix via repressor protein the is is the promoter Fig. the O downstream (see site, to which 33.5) of 33.4A). binding with of the Binding promoter, interferes the inhibiting pol thereby RNA the genes. repressor transcription structural of the of to example an is negative This regulation. of

2.

induced case, this on). available: When expressed, the (maximally or operon In is only lac lactose turned is amount of to A small converted lactose an isomer, is allolactose. so the that to can repressor its an inducer it site. the binds O to changing conformation protein, no is bind compound longer This that the adenylyl In absence to made of and binds cyclase is cAMP glucose, CAP. is and the active, promoter initiate at with causing high the to CAP The the pol efficiency Fig. site, (see to transacting binds transcription cAMP–CAP RNA site complex 33.4B). regulation. example This positive an is of polycistronic sets The that a is transcript single of start three and molecule stop codons. contains mRNA the energy be three the that production lactose the produces of Translation proteins allow by to for used cell. mRNA lacZ, inducible whose regulated, is lacA constitutive. to [Note: In contrast the the and genes, expression lacI is gene lacY, present.] always repressor protein, active inducer made and gene unless Its is the is the is product, 3.

concentration. uninduced, if present case, even are this is both lactose In high is lactose transcription lac and glucose is available: negligible, the When operon a and at as of no and is cAMP–CAP forms, remains complex the inhibited cyclase site repression) (a process glucose CAP known in catabolite presence empty. Adenylyl so the the transcription, repressor bound though unable the is even to not the O is Therefore, to effectively pol initiate RNA site. at very structural three of (see low a only level expressed Fig. the the (basal) genes Consequently, are operon 33.4C). over basal a enhancement 50-fold Induction expression.] [Note: causes

operon D. Tryptophan

contains tryptophan for the tryptophan. structural The five amino of that the operon for (trp) genes code synthesis enzymes required acid operon subject control. with the trp negative is As to operon, lac the facilitating control the to repressible negative and trp the itself of a Trp operon, for the is to a protein Trp repressor operator: binding repressor binding includes corepressor. However, the unlike the a always known Trp Because by trp operon, also complete, process by not operon, is is repression lac as regulated the attenuation. (Fig. but transcription terminated before attenuation, is is completion well initiated With 33.6). (stopped) Trp is mRNA structure rho-independent repression by attenuated seen hairpin (see If (stem-loop) plentiful, attenuator, is that 437). that to formation in the in termination of initiation escaped the a similar Trp transcription p. by an of that temporally are peptide nonfunctional rapidly (see 454), [Note: in truncated, Because the and product also attenuation degraded.] results in formation linked transcription is translation p. prokaryotes a the If operon becomes expressed. scarce, is Trp Trp. of for mRNA codons contains The adjacent two 5′-end the of The ribosomes causes these formation codons, mRNA the Trp the to stall of at hairpin. for lack regions attenuation of required covering prevents continue. This and allows attenuation to transcription

attenuation its of before in prokaryotes Transcriptional occur an complete. is because translation begins can synthesis mRNA presence in not does a translation. of occur membrane-bound eukaryotes and spatially transcription the and temporally because This separates nucleus

of and transcription translation E. Coordination

and protein environmental of of RNA primary to adaptation bacteria, is important ribosomal regulation (rRNA) roles in Although production synthesis in plays stress. regulation mRNA transcriptional

1.

in that rRNA and coli each in seven ribosome environmental E. operons to response regulated response: assembly, changes is for conditions. synthesize the Stringent needed has stringent amino is as response acid the Regulation in response. starvation to known RNA A series to triggers leads ribosome binding p. production (ppGpp). a of events to (tRNA) (see the transfer The of a alarmone an of tetraphosphate that the site of guanosine the 452) uncharged catalyzed with (RelA), (GDP) enzyme The ribosomes. of this of by guanosine diphosphate associated factor synthesis derivative an stringent unusual physically is Elevated inhibition of of rRNA ppGpp levels result synthesis in (Fig. 33.7). example, mRNA (for synthesis addition tRNA synthesis, and inhibited. for rRNA synthesis proteins) ribosomal to In some also are [Note: However, inhibited. mRNA is synthesis acid of for required biosynthesis enzymes not amino for 2. ppGpp alters promoter RNA and binds pol

proteins: excess proteins (rproteins) Regulatory ribosomal protein Operons an for be products. can of their own by ribosomal inhibited for r-protein repression different selection p. (see in of through the operon, factors functions specific one use each sigma For of polymerase the 435).] of (Fig. polycistronic that translation operon from the mRNA 33.8). Shine-Dalgarno physical the first located the (see does the to a the just p. codon the mRNA by initiating SD impediment upstream (SD) to of and small The as acting 448) binding on to of sequence. so sequence subunit r-protein AUG binding the ribosomal synthesis of Thus, r-protein the r-proteins inhibits the of one all operon. a same higher for rRNA and affinity to also r-protein This with mRNA. binds than then bind r-protein to available its its the and falls, translation. If the inhibit mRNA of rRNA is concentration own of balance appropriate that keeps in with synthesis of amounts for the each formation the This in rRNA, so transcription of the ribosomes. regulation coordinated is r-proteins present

IV. REGULATION OF EXPRESSION EUKARYOTIC GENE

of of degree eukaryotic of complexity range a as The genomes, as a membrane, presence the necessitates wider higher nuclear regulatory of processes. well primary the regulation. the transcription of As is site prokaryotes, with to is Again, elements trans-acting factors seen. of cis-acting binding the theme problem of coordinately to genes specific Operons, eukaryotes, response. not however, the all alternate found regulate how must required strategies in to a the solve are for use which regulated also In expression at levels is than transcription. gene other multiple eukaryotes, regulation polyadenylation, modes alternative are For splicing of translational posttranscriptional the and and mRNA level of stability, mRNA control example, mRNA control the efficiency. at major of modulate stability, by Additional the or occurs mechanisms processing, level the protein. targeting regulation at protein of that

A. regulation Coordinate

than coordinately to importance group regulate a to need particular chromosome. key of one genes more a The response is organisms in with cause of An consensus of each the (see trans-acting on (STF) in occurs on to specific genes they transcription factor as the A that a 415) binds repeatedly: chromosomes. different functions theme cisacting sequence underlying a protein are regulatory if p. group even DNA-binding STF The transcription (TAD). has and a activation a (DBD) domain domain [Note: 438), p. that, for (see 439) as general pol, TAD with are histone transcription the required of formation such at p. transcription RNA the recruits initiation The coactivators, complex the along (see and factors promoter. acetyltransferases is dependent of of the effect upon a any them TAD variety the Although the specific the complex. recruits protein of composition of proteins, one as This combinatorial control.] known is eukaryotes the of galactose include and system. response circuit in coordinate Examples regulation the hormone

1. scheme available. galactose for regulatory when circuit: use This Galactose glucose of the not allows is yeast, metabolize chromosomes. on unicellular In a different are organism, genes required the to galactose by = each galactose), a sequence STF binds is the regulatory to of Gal4 the of expression DNA upstream (Gal a short Coordinated that genes. protein mediated upstream the sequence sequence called is (UASGal). Gal The activating through in and of presence fingers both to of UASGal zinc in DBD its galactose. Gal4 occurs Binding the absence protein the at sugar Gal4 gene Gal80 thereby inhibiting the transcription regulatory (Fig. binds When TAD, absent, is its 33.9A). protein. present, Gal3 the When activates galactose Gal80, allowing activate thereby Gal3 (Fig. to Gal4 binds transcription 33.9B). prevents by galactose protein.] Gal4 Glucose the [Note: of of expression inhibting use

galactose. of B. presence genes, chromosome, upstream galactose different activating (UASGal).] a sequence whether on the same have an [Note: each or Target RNA. = domain; messenger = = DBD TAD activation mRNA transcription domain; DNA-binding

2. in to multicellular organisms. sequences are DNA (HRE) elements hormonal gene proteins response Hormone response response signals in expression and that Hormone regulate system: bind trans-acting (nuclear) (for hormone p. bind 314). steroid either to receptors the glucagon; p. intracellular or see example, receptors peptide see example, Hormones hormones; (for cell-surface 240)

a.

receptor and receptors: steroid and (glucocorticoids, the acid, estrogens), which function Members the androgens, as receptors, retinoic nuclear includes mineralocorticoids, STF. thyroid hormone vitamin D, superfamily, Intracellular of hormone In also a addition activation, for ligand-binding transcriptional and contain domain. these DNA-binding to domains receptors cortisol glucocorticoid) binds the receptors (a steroid hormone the at ligand-binding For example, intracellular domain (Fig. 33.10). the it. a conformational in receptor that causes Binding change activates enters hormone element that is complex the regulatory a zinc a nucleus, via (GRE) binds a motif receptor– of finger an and to element, at example the The glucocorticoid HRE. dimerizes, DNA response of GRE. of its cortisol-responsive of the in is Binding each and control under of the expression TAD recruitment coactivators which own allows genes, to results complex receptor–hormone expression genes, genes of different Binding to coordinate group of GRE allows chromosomes. a even of though the the are on these target them. downstream genes it the can regulates from be at The upstream great and GRE located of distances or 440). as (see can p. function a enhancer true GRE, The then, inhibit with hormone–receptor If complexes repressors, associated transcription.] [Note: b.

glucagon. Cell-surface and include epinephrine, These those receptors for receptors: insulin, hormone binds a its membrane glucagon-responsive Glucagon, plasma cells. on receptor that protein–coupled example, for G peptide is extracellular to (Fig. cAMP, second is transduced messenger a then This intracellular signal see also 33.11; Fig. A–mediated phosphorylation. 8.7 95), (and on activity) can expression kinase p. protein which protein through affect element–binding (cAMP [CREB] trans-acting to cAMP, response phosphorylated rise factor a and a activated. protein) is in response In with (CRE), element, motif to CRE response via binds leucine regulatory genes promoters. transcription a zipper protein the resulting in cAMP their element of a in target cis-acting Active CREB and key glucose carboxykinase of system.] the by genes 6phosphatase, for [Note: examples 122), of upregulated are The (see genes cAMP/CRE/CREB enzymes p. gluconeogenesis phosphoenolpyruvate

processing and B. RNA Messenger use

it undergoes cytoplasm protein events to the Eukaryotic nucleus processing synthesis. use exported for is from the in several before mRNA Capping most at the and the 3′-end production 5′-end essential the p. p. (see polyadenylation (see functional (see splicing from 441), a for p. are 442), of messenger eukaryotic at pre-mRNA. 442) and Variations polyadenylation splicing gene affect in can expression. gene In affects stability messenger expression. also addition,

1.

same splicing: can (loss), (Fig. sites of -acceptor be alternative pre-mRNA can intron use and skipping made isoforms through or retention, alternative splice-donor from Tissue-specific Alternative involve the which splicing, protein exon 33.12). (see pre-mRNA TM p. number of for For isoforms tropomyosin yield the splicing a (TM) tissue-specific to alternative example, undergoes 443). alternative 90% Over of undergo [Note: splicing.] genes all human 2.

Alternative Some have polyadenylation: pre-mRNA transcripts for than more site cleavage polyadenylation. and one polyadenylation generates coding altering untranslated the 3′-ends, (translated) or the with (UTR) different region sequence. Alternative mRNA (APA) is involved the APA M.] [Note: the production secreted in forms of membrane-bound of immunoglobulin and

25,000 genes sites how proteins. explains, can 100,000 ~20,000 alternative well genome rise the as as the least and give to in well to in of splicing transcription use over sites, human The start at part, polyadenylation alternative

3. mRNA in the base Even a altered. posttranscriptional it mRNA an processed, Messenger undergo been which has RNA fully additional modification is editing: may after in This RNA is editing. as known An p. (see with example (apo) chylomicrons for the in apolipoprotein essential B, transcript humans an occurs of component important

230). p. 228) lipoproteins very-low-density see ([VLDL] and made mRNA B liver the the in and intestine. Apo is small to to in shown intestine the as codon stop However, the base or deaminated uracil is enzymatically the the UAA, codon in CAA in (C) codon only, the glutamine changing for sense 33.13. (U), Figure cytosine nonsense This (apo of full-length, shorter protein made the intestine 48% in VLDL). a in the B-100, into (and chylomicrons) representing (apo being results made incorporated B-48, than in into message) the incorporated liver is

uracil. U =

4. the is it much How degraded how in from stability: be can it. Messenger remains RNA protein influences mRNA before cytosol produced product an long Regulation of mRNA RNA of metabolism importance the illustrate of gene-silencing the in (RNAi) of and regulation interference process the expression. gene iron stability

a. plasma (Tf) iron. transports protein Transferrin metabolism: a is Iron that binds erythroblasts, as receptors [TfR]) with and to provide receptors that Tf such get iron. internalized (transferrin cells, cell-surface elements mRNA (IRE) The iron-responsive its has TfR in several 3′-UTR. for cis-acting the regulatory bound in by short have a trans-acting that be shown structure stem-loop as iron 33.14. Figure (IRP), proteins IRE can for the iron synthesis. TfR in TfR, the the to concentration and bind stabilize 3′-IRE the mRNA low, the is allowing cell IRP When iron levels IRP are the When high, intracellular dissociate. in synthesis. lack destruction, of resulting The IRP its mRNA decreased TfR hastens bound to the iron 5′-UTR. of protein single storage, for [Note: a The ferritin, in IRE mRNA its intracellular an has ferritin bind of iron low, When levels use and prevent and less the IRP are the the mRNA, the is cell in 5′-IRE made. iron iron. ferritin in accumulates allowing the to of IRP molecules the cell, dissociate, store the synthesis When excess regulated erythroblasts, synthesis 2, contains p. in acid a 5′-IRE.] 278) heme enzyme the Aminolevulinic also (see of synthase Chapter a of (See for 29 iron discussion metabolism.) by degradation. of through mechanism translation by either increased a RNAi silencing RNA is b. repression gene expression of or of mRNA, decreased interference: processes in key proliferation, as differentiation, apoptosis. fundamental cell a such and role plays It RNA RNAi short is nucleotides), mediated (~22 microRNA (miRNA). called by noncoding (Drosha) miRNA partially the The by processed nuclear from to that pre-miRNA arise are transported to transcripts, cytoplasm. primary in nucleus genomically then an endonuclease (pri-miRNA), longer, the far encoded miRNA an double-stranded generates miRNA. completes the (Dicer) and short, endonuclease There, processing as associates silencing miRNA protein a (the complex cytosolic A the single (RISC). of strand RNA-induced with antisense the known guide complex strand) or a the RISC mRNA, sequence complementary The full-length to mRNA. with hybridizes in guide bringing strand a the 3′-UTR of target result of repression endonuclease RISC. can of mRNA This degradation of or (Argonaute/Ago/Slicer) in the by translation the an its factor appears the (Fig. complementarity extent The determining be to of 33.15). cell, exogenous that double-stranded potential. a process can RNA enormous short a the into triggered (siRNA) RNAi by therapeutic introduction also of be interfering has

by of growth behind of trial RNAi-based form degeneration blood (VEGF), age-related vascular is The first sprouting of clinical therapy the to triggered vessels involved the the of leading retina. which (AMD), endothelial excess neovascular overproduction macular factor is wet The referred destroying to vessels and (therefore, often also as entirely AMD). AMD clouding leak, vision neovascular VEGF An designed was mRNA siRNA target promote and degradation. of its to the RNAi-based to have to trials therapeutics, cancer, develop the resources especially of from effort and for products no been the market. Although have expended gone treatment considerable rapidly. however, RNAi, of applications research have grown The

5. level RNA mRNA of translation. at translation: also gene expression occur of the Regulation can Messenger which is translation regulated eukaryotic eIF-2 through of the phosphorylation factor, (Fig. initiation mechanism by is translation One 33.16). Phosphorylation translation step and inhibits inhibits eIF-2 so function 459). (see initiation the its p. of at its by Phosphorylation of eIF-2 [Note: reactivation exchange.] inhibiting GDP-GTP prevents are of endoplasmic the infection), (signaling presence in accumulation rough viral kinases 460). RNA acid that activated Phosphorylation starvation, misfolded such is proteins double-stranded erythroblasts, the by in conditions, as response the catalyzed reticulum of amino environmental in and deficiency heme (see p. to

= phosphate; phosphate.

through in C. DNA Regulation variations

the amount arrangement and also the by in to transcriptional DNA. of the expression Gene apparatus, DNA, of influenced the of DNA is eukaryotes accessibility (see 414) Localized also DNA B [Note: Z the affect gene transitions forms expression.] of can and between p. 1.

425). form chromatin DNA nonhistone and eukaryotes, to proteins histone DNA: to (see complexed Access found p. with is In ways. more from inactive (heterochromatin) differs number active, condensed, a Transcriptionally chromatin form the of decondensed (euchromatin) in and by reversible acetyltransferase of 438 been deacetylase). by acetylation/deacetylation histone covalently amino histone histone for p. methylation, or discussion histone contains proteins (see that a their chromatin modified Active at terminal phosphorylation ends have acetylation, positive of modifications negatively the proteins, their Such charged the decrease these strength basic association of charge with thereby DNA. decreasing factors (see access nucleosome transcription the the on specific DNA. relaxes allowing This regions to 425), p. is of be remodeling. repositioned, ATP-requiring Nucleosomes that also an can process chromatin part between islands) active methylation in the many regions of is (CpG in bases and chromatin Another transcriptionally CG-rich promoter the extent cytosine inactive difference of genes. of region donor (Fig. the methyltransferases as is Methylation S-adenosylmethionine by methyl use that 33.17). that gene methylated counterparts, active inactive are hypermethylation Transcriptionally (hypomethylated) expression. than genes their less suggesting DNA silences are base heritable that expression epigenetic in alter without and that are DNA Modification altering DNA methylation of changes sequence. of histones they in gene the

2.

affect can change a down of DNA: of up copies the number gene product amount gene of the of Amount A in or produced. (gene number increase An complexity has contributed in increased copy to in species. amplification) process normal genomic nonmammalian and certain developmental is a still chemotherapeutic pathway is (TTP) the gene amplification mammals, dihydrofolate diseases inhibitor required In however, such for some thymidine 303). enzyme (see response particular of seen methotrexate, and with reductase an the as (DHFR), to the in triphosphate of pyrimidine p. biosynthetic in synthesis drugs is for TTP essential DNA synthesis. to results be allowing made. number increase the in to DHFR and of genes drug, TTP in resistance Gene an amplification the

3.

The which by in (antibodies) B DNA lymphocytes the by DNA: these Arrangement involves cells. of process rearrangements produced permanent immunoglobulins of are of of containing consist IgG) light with chain constant chains, The variable sequence. amino two and each acid heavy regions immunoglobulins (for two and example, The the somatic of both the variable segments result within light-and is genes. heavy-chain region recombination of the to region a B-lymphocyte joining (V), gene rearrangement are and diversity brought (D), segments through development, variable variable During together unique (J) form single (Fig. gene 33.18). different of immunoglobulins the single generation allows a needed diversity gene, process the antigens. enormous This providing the from of of recognition 109−1011 number for an is chromosomes DNA with which translocation, a by process DNA Pathologic seen [Note: exchange rearrangement different segments.] two 4.

one different move segments that DNA from essentially of chromosome. random are Mobile site the on or mobile Transposons a (Tn) in manner to same DNA an another elements: mediated the by an is Tn Movement by itself. encoded enzyme transposase, site, cuts then remains direct, original out Movement is the the copied the Tn in in at and which a be while or new Tn elsewhere copy can the and inserted place. replicative, inserts in transposase which in reverse retrotransposon. intermediate is p. RNA a (see humans, In case 424), frequently eukaryotes, including replicative which Tn a involves an called the transposition transcriptase made by disease. genome also the to has has to alter expression potential but cause Transposition even to gene the variation in contributed and structural human with for retrotransposons the of comprise ~50% 90% genome, accounting of Tn Tn. some these ability have move, to majority the lost Although vast active. still of the retrotransposons are for the cases thought rare dystrophy. hemophilia transposition some be of is A to Duchenne and Their muscular basis antibiotic-resistant bacterial of a part, at growing least of in bacteria the [Note: problem plasmids consequence, of The is exchange cells. among recipient or drugs.] contain Tn-carrying If more gain plasmids one genes, antibiotic to the resistance bacteria resistance the antimicrobial

V. SUMMARY CHAPTER

transcription and results processes production (Fig. gene (either of protein) through RNA functional a the Gene translation the of expression product in or 33.19). in or (expressed or genes) only conditions (always Genes cells all in under constitutive can subset certain expressed, regulated either cells). a housekeeping be of ability (negatively in or repress genes regulate) organisms. essential is to (positively The regulate) induce appropriately all proteins occurs and regulatory DNA both and trans-acting mediated gene in cis-acting of Regulation primarily eukaryotes transcription to through is prokaryotes expression binding elements. at processing. posttranslational modifications DNA and eukaryotes, In through and through posttranscriptional regulation also occurs the arranged through genes whose a is elements determine along Escherichia chromosome of with the as coli, achieved of In sequentially genes (groups transcription). such are protein regulatory their process prokaryotes, coordinate that regulation products operons particular for on required the genes, A contains and the lactose. are products structural needed the which operon The of Y, protein Z, catabolism for of the lac regulation. is positive and to subject negative It is gene) repressed to the transcription. of preventing thus the When operon binding operator, by the of lacI available, the is protein product repressor (the glucose the (allolactose) protein, lactose isomer is operator. When binds the binding the operon present, of the to that it induced only repressor from lactose is an by preventing In cyclic complex the binds site. CAP catabolite the binds protein addition, the activator the DNA adenosine and at monophosphate (CAP), (cAMP) promoter in results This genes a (mRNA). and of of through the expression increases efficiency RNA the structural production the polycistronic messenger and present, cAMP, and of is of glucose glucose formation negligible. both prevents these transcription genes are lactose When genes trp like tryptophan control. lac operon, and, regulated is it the contains (Trp), by for operon the The needed negative of synthesis operon, which before also Trp by attenuation, is lac in it terminated synthesis by completion. repression Unlike regulated mRNA escaped is that the RNA is amino response transfer acid ribosomal inhibited in RNA of stringent and Transcription the to prokaryotes by selectively starvation. Shine-Dalgarno sequence regulation: of the ribosomes ribosomal Translation preventing Excess prokaryotic also gene site is polycistronic a proteins bind binding. their on mRNA, from own more eukaryotes. Gene regulation in complex is galactose as elements the circuit of through to coordinate be located not Operons seen yeast. chromosomes unicellular the achieved binding can in present, genes cis-acting are in on regulation trans-acting proteins the but transcription different of of DNA the receptor–hormone or organisms, a with the binding hormone coordinated activated in response to hormones (as complex cause second that protein steroid through a through to In with regulation, hormones) of can multicellular glucagon). binding either is of messenger the the (as motifs through each such finger. zinc structural DNA In as to is case, mediated the binding and mRNA Co-and interference. with and regulation is variations seen includes and stability and alternative transferrin receptor also in RNA in posttranscriptional eukaryotes seen with mRNA splicing editing, mRNA polyadenylation, as synthesis initiation phosphorylation by inhibition can of factor eukaryotic translational be at 2. caused and the the Regulation level histone apparatus the Gene (as DNA, transcriptional the of of of the DNA by amount accessibility eukaryotes to and DNA. epigenetic with also seen expression proteins), arrangement influenced in to is changes the

reticulum.

the answer. ONE best Choose

3.1. lac the reduced of of expression in mutations to Which is result most following operon? likely the

cyclase made) (no cya− A. adenylyl

(no protein repressor made) B. i−

(operator bind Oc repressor C. protein) cannot

resulting One uptake glucose D. in impaired

answer Correct A. = glucose, (cAMP), complex of catabolite a makes cyclase activator In protein monophosphate adenylyl absence with the (CAP). which cyclic the forms adenosine causing the complex lac polymerase the site DNA, more expression cAMP–CAP the bind on thereby promoter, to efficiently increasing operon. CAP operon to The of the RNA binds present. is cyclase is to and made, even operon is be maximally and is absent lactose cya− mutations, the not so when adenylyl unable With expressed glucose ability constant) of lac of the of or the the to repressor in constitutive absence The a operon. expression (essentially protein decreased bind repressor results operator

3.2. of best cis-acting? described as is Which following the

adenosine protein response monophosphate A. element–binding Cyclic

B. Operator

Repressor protein C.

D. Thyroid nuclear receptor hormone

= Correct answer B. is cis-acting. operator DNA and The the of is part itself, so protein, cyclic trans-acting. response nuclear affect to bind, that and expression repressor and the and are DNA, DNA diffuse adenosine protein monophosphate molecules receptor that the are (transit) The element–binding protein, hormone thyroid of so

3.3. the is B-48? expression the for following of basis intestine-specific the Which of apolipoprotein

rearrangement A. and loss DNA

transposition B. DNA

C. RNA alternative splicing

D. editing RNA

E. interference RNA

of a to and Correct codon apo to deamination in is the B-100 (apo) codon = result B-48 cytosine in apolipoprotein in production a The the nonsense is D. sense the answer intestine uracil. where changed of RNA posttranscriptional editing by liver intestine, of but well alternative alter as of splicing, and transposition, as not do tissue-specific interference the apo production. basis rearrangement and RNA DNA are B-48 expression gene

3.4. most iron in true following hemochromatosis, the is likely be to Which a accumulation? of of disease

A. the receptor its to for iron is of The proteins RNA binding messenger elements. 3′-iron-responsive transferrin stabilized by the regulatory

B. and proteins for regulatory by degraded. is messenger bound transferrin the iron receptor not is RNA The

its 5′-iron-responsive messenger The bound regulatory for proteins not iron is translated. C. is by element and at RNA ferritin

iron The RNA for regulatory ferritin by D. is is bound and translated. not messenger proteins

are Both E. C and correct. B

is body are levels synthesis When increased uptake = high, receptor of mediates in synthesis molecule, by cells. as (TfR) there hemochromatosis, iron the E. transferrin the is seen Correct answer the and iron that ferritin, of with iron-storage decreased of iron-responsive result and iron of for proteins, (mRNA) mRNA messenger degradation not elements trans-acting increased for regulatory effects by These RNA in being resulting the translation are bound the ferritin. of the TfR cis-acting

3.5. treated the (hormone the nuclear breast be cancer estrogen with may responsive) activating receptor drug estrogen without receptor–positive which Patients binds it. tamoxifen, with tamoxifen is outcome the following logical Which of of the use? most

A. estrogen-responsive genes acetylation of Increased

B. cancer of growth Increased estrogen receptor–positive breast cells

cyclic monophosphate C. of Increased adenosine production

of operon the Inhibition estrogen D.

of of E. genes transcription estrogen-responsive Inhibition

receptor. Correct Tamoxifen the estrogen nuclear for estrogen with = binding to answer E. competes fails of the activate its Tamoxifen binding preventing estrogen-responsive sequences receptor, upregulate DNA expression genes. that to to genes in results blocks cells. and growth-promoting effects of of Tamoxifen, inhibition estrogen-dependent these breast then, growth the cancer nucleosome. Acetylation relaxing increases the transcription by a is by monophosphate nuclear signal than mediated receptors. adenosine rather regulatory cell-surface Cyclic not have do Mammalian operons. cells

3.6. lac of maximally the operon ZYA be if: The will expressed region

adenosine are low. levels monophosphate cyclic A.

both available. lactose B. glucose are and

the to C. able form. stem-loop attenuation is

the D. occupied. CAP site is

answer is gone, maximally It = lactose levels Correct site, expressed the are and monophosphate protein CAP when bound activator (CAP) adenosine to only the increased, that (cAMP) complex (induced). is the is is D. is cyclic operon cAMP–catabolite available glucose a repression. off result is as glucose is catabolite If operon of the present, for transcription regulated operon some operons lac operon. a mechanism by not attenuation, as in The is stopping such trp the

3.7. inactivation X of condensed females is in and by mammalian is X of genes. prevent which two one process a chromosome to inactivated chromosomes overexpression X-linked inactivated of on be about would most X DNA the likely true What degree acetylation histone the chromosome? and methylation

hypermethylated, histone Cytosines be would and would islands deacetylated. proteins in CpG be maintaining decreased X in are gene both expression, inactivation. conditions important associated and Both with are

to For visit ancillary additional this related please thePoint. materials chapter,

OVERVIEW I.

have been confounded (DNA). understand complexity past, immense of deoxyribonucleic the the genes human expression to acid size In and efforts by and their billion protein-coding 20,000–25,000 that located human pairs haploid genome. genome genes encode The (109) contains base 23 chromosomes on in ~3 the (bp) entire It DNA, of of sequenced. genome sequence determine now stretches and the is possible the to long human nucleotide has been effort possible that to Human genetic diseases and This (called by Genome have completed several Project (Fig. understanding the tools our made many 2003) in was contributed already of 34.1). and techniques These of include sequences, nucleotide manipulation fragments, molecules development of huge has specific to of into defined synthesize ability that 3) of the probes, 1) the and of cloning of specific endonucleases the discovery permit 2) mechanism cleavage identification DNA that interest. sequences a which provide allowed restriction the nucleotide amplification the for identification sequences DNA. other and experimental of nucleotide normal both mutant have the permitted and in These approaches therapy. for genetic of in methods knowledge diagnosis the patients gene some development of by the This of led and has diseases the to successes treatment sequenced.] The also genomes several and of eukaryotes been viruses, nonhuman prokaryotes, have [Note:

II. ENDONUCLEASES RESTRICTION

of major One the size of is to molecular the DNA molecules immense involved. the of genomic analysis obstacles which the of cleave endonucleases The of analysis. fragments, way (dsDNA) double-stranded smaller, enzymes, DNA special opened bacterial for manageable into group restriction a more called enzymes), DNA discovery (restriction obtain at each enzymes are fragments. site), called defined cleaves restriction precisely Because specific to DNA restriction enzyme a (restriction used segments experimentally dsDNA nucleotide sequence

Specificity A.

that specific endonucleases Restriction recognize short of dsDNA stretches bp) contain sequences. nucleotide (4–8 palindromes, are which enzyme, they rotational for is, These differ exhibit sequences, twofold restriction symmetry each (Fig. that 34.2). nucleotide strands the identical read that, the of dsDNA, if 5′→3′ direction. each the region is within in short sequence the two is This on a means the 180° around upside the turn its rotate axis symmetry) down of is, the sequence page it same. if remains you Therefore, (that

cleavage. the DNA endonucleases (restrict) expression (foreign) nonbacterial bacteria, restriction of limit In through is from restriction adenine cleavage of at Bacterial DNA the by site. protected methylation

B. Nomenclature

which from isolated. restriction A named was enzyme is it according the organism to the genus bacterium. first name letter the of The is of from the of species. The are the the next name from letters two the (as organism. indicates particular to appended order a and discovered An strain needed), or which in indicate the additional the enzyme numeral) number is letter (Roman in was that type Haemophilus from For the third bacterium endonuclease aegyptius. HaeIII restriction the example, isolated is

and blunt ends C. Sticky

Restriction produce end on cleave 5′-phosphate 3′-hydroxyl other. a to and enzymes as dsDNA one on a the so group group such is, single-stranded complementary regions that have in staggered shown endonucleases, as or sticky to resulting cohesive Figure fragments each ends form restriction 34.3. the are DNA (that produce as that cuts other), Some TaqI, Other entirely as not form stranded with do therefore, ends have other. hydrogen that each that double are blunt HaeIII, and, endonucleases, fragments restriction bonds such produce joined that (Fig. endonuclease have ligase p. ends DNA DNA of ends (see can cleavage with fragments a same with covalently produced interest the enzyme fragment Using be by sticky of the 418), restriction sticky other DNA 34.4). by covalently blunt-ended fragments.] join T4 bacteriophage A ligase can encoded [Note:

D. sites Restriction

restriction site. DNA recognized restriction called A and by is a sequence is a cut that enzyme Restriction sequence sizes cleave into size dsDNA different recognized. the of upon of depending endonucleases the fragments For recognizes enzyme DNA in produces one molecule, sequence an that specific many every example, 4-bp a bp. the cuts 44 cuts unique therefore, (one produces and, bp) every a 6 enzyme 46 pieces. contrast, of an fewer In sequence longer bp requiring these specificities sites), nucleotide each in and of commercially both different having sequences (varying length cleavage recognition available. of enzymes, Hundreds are

III. CLONING DNA

a is, many or, the DNA. molecule of the (that replicating cloning identical permits production foreign a amplification that of copies) DNA Introduction cell into of tissue.] for saliva, can from be cloning obtained Human DNA [Note: blood, and solid and can some fragment purified cases, a to be In prior single DNA cloning. isolated creating with total to DNA More a first commonly, of thousands a hundreds sequence cellular restriction of fragments. the nucleotide interest, enzyme, clone of is cleaved specific a is molecule. a of to fragments DNA form vector cloning or resulting as molecule (referred hybrid, Each DNA the to vector) a DNA to joined recombinant, its example, it is where recombinant a (for a host replicated. carries single inserted into bacterium), DNA fragment cell Each molecule and process The for of and [Note: foreign yeast for called into eukaryotes.] introducing bacteria higher cell transformation DNA transfection a is appropriate As cell vector the forms it contains cloned the “cloning.” inserted copies the (using which clone its fragment, same in hence by The isolated. of multiplies, be bacterium the DNA endonuclease) DNA released a host cleavage name and from restriction can every interest produced. of mechanism, this copies can the be many identical By of DNA the to p. [Note: cloning, An described by on alternative (PCR), chain amplification is polymerase reaction biologic 495.]

A. Vectors

of fragment be is to joined. which DNA cloned a is vector of DNA the molecule to A and include specific presence autonomous (such capacity vector nucleotide for ability replication the vector. at recognized one to within least by the as the of for 2) a resistance antibiotic 1) properties sequence 3) gene host presence one at endonuclease, select that cell, confers Essential of an restriction of a least a gene) and viruses. used vectors include Commonly plasmids

1.

typically large, chromosomes. contain Prokaryotic organisms Prokaryotic single, circular plasmids: called DNA small, normally also circular, most bacteria (Fig. species addition, contain plasmids In of extrachromosomal molecules 34.5). Plasmid DNA that synchronized undergoes not chromosomal division. may may to replication be or another. convey antibiotic transfer the one of genes may bacterium Plasmids bacterium genetic carry to may facilitate the and host resistance from information to that cleaved to readily restriction bacterial (kilobases) can with 15 by foreign inserted. DNA specific kb and the be endonucleases, same up at They isolated circular DNA enzyme) of from (cut sites their restriction cells, plasmid. vector recombinant The be a the producing of numbers can bacterium, introduced large copies of plasmid into which cells grown The are provide presence in of resistance containing selecting (Fig. the hybrid thus the plasmids, antibiotics, antibiotic for bacteria 34.6). are constructed. routinely plasmids Artificial classic (see An is pBR322 Fig. the example genes, sites. antibiotic which of restriction an 34.5), unique resistance two >40 replication, and contains origin plasmids is size by of inserted. can of the the Use that limited DNA be

2.

the improved The more accommodate can that passenger development therapeutics. genetics express efficiently has aided types, Other molecular different in DNA segments, vectors: vectors research of genes and or cell larger currently prokaryotic or plasmids cosmids above, as artificial respectively), YAC, mammalian and as as described well cells bacteria naturally cloning are infect bacterial (bacteriophage chromosomes addition the (retroviruses, example), (BAC In artificial used as that or such for vectors. yeast to occurring constructs viruses λ, or for example) 250–1,000 [Note: inserts of kb and kb, and 100–300 can respectively.] YAC DNA BAC accept

DNA B. libraries

A DNA a organism. restriction fragments of collection library an cloned of the DNA of is kinds libraries. (cDNA) and Two complementary commonly are genomic libraries DNA libraries used: of in of sequence contain ideally Genomic every libraries the DNA copy genome. a nucleotide appear RNA as to messenger molecules, processed only differ DNA sequences cell libraries type according (mRNA) conditions. that and In these environmental contrast, contain cDNA those and these introns regions [Note: are DNA.] genomic whereas control genes, in the and the present lacks of cDNA 1.

an digestion the and to total A organism is subsequent of genomic created Genomic restriction library of libraries: DNA DNA an appropriate by vector. ligation a endonuclease with bacteria. molecules recombinant replicate DNA The within host are of a the library. fragments Thus, and amplified genome the collectively called entire genomic DNA represent the organism than enzyme restriction site by used, contains good the are of more restriction Regardless enzyme. chances that recognized the gene of one that the interest is to is, if the the of fragmented completion, interest is one If and (that in contained this is is not any to it the in the library). go clone gene allowed case, digestion in a action limited. or usually avoid amount the undesirable the this is digestion which time of the of is either To enzyme performed result, partial in the DNA thus of kb. fragments a restriction molecule, sites any of ~20 results This fraction on only producing one occurring at cleavage result Enzymes are of those purpose used is, so for that is frequently very cut that 4-bp the (that almost generally recognize that an random sequences) this fragments. collection is in interest gene of of probability intact, that a insures some the This degree contained, fragment. high

2.

is likely libraries: a present high gene DNA is Complementary mRNA gene a at in interest cells of that of If tissue, concentrations tissue. from at transcribed level in protein-coding that a particular high the also the expressed that reticulocyte code molecules example, chains is of the α-globin and largely hemoglobin composed For for β-globin mRNA of

A (HbA). a make used This transcriptase template can cDNA using reverse enzyme a (Fig. the molecule be to as mRNA 34.7). double-stranded a Therefore, the mRNA. is copy of cDNA resulting RNA The mRNA tail.] presence RNA ribosomal from its [Note: transfer the by and template isolated of is poly-A be cDNA can amplified PCR. or by cloning by biologic fragments. to in mRNA of fragments DNA the (or encodes as containing many the can mixtures original the be locate gene) It a gene unrelated probe that used different cDNA size a of the If mixture the a many is species, is mRNA heterogeneous. resulting as template used form library. to be a can cloned These cDNA mixtures (Fig. for it cDNA by eukaryotic cloned has introns, an synthesis into the expression bacteria can proteins vector be of no Because 34.8). translation transcription a to These a p. and plasmids initiate bacterial promoter the resulting of that ribosome the (see cDNA the contain (SD) bacterial molecule. mRNA allows special for of sequence 454) Shine-Dalgarno produced for bacterium gene that for a and contains 466), SD sequence, see the mRNA the an and such in expressed few downstream eukaryotic promoter The protein, is of is a codons the that the inserted protein lacZ; the within protein. codons all cDNA the a p. for example, (for bacterial production results more and efficient protein. the in of expression allows for This fusion a technology. insulin is made in bacteria Therapeutic through [Note: this human factors) extensive clotting the proteins even required hosts.] posttranslational modifications (for for of mammalian, use However, most human co-and the necessitates example, other eukaryotic, blood

cloned Sequencing DNA fragments C.

that of cloned be The sequence DNA fragments can base been determined. have was for Sanger this purpose the Figure illustrated chain dideoxy method procedure The 34.9. original termination in pol). (DNA for single-stranded by as polymerase In the be synthesis to (ssDNA) this method, DNA DNA sequenced is used DNA template the deoxyribonucleoside to is radiolabeled 3′-end primer (dNTP). DNA with the of complementary along the added, target triphosphates four A the the one of (ddNTP) added is to reaction The four tube. a dideoxyribonucleoside each sample is divided triphosphates into amount four of and small tubes, group, it Because terminates ddNMP point. a no at contains elongation that 3′-hydroxyl incorporation of The mixture of this then, specific different of consist of each reaction, base. lengths, a a products at DNA strands terminating of the Separation bands polyacrylamide the followed size DNA which be an sequence using of DNA read. by gel electric can autoradiography, field from in products of by a electrophoresis, pattern various base yields is, which it representing 5′-end).] fragment made that The first fragment, the gel, on shortest travels (that shorter was farther the the the [Note: the with dyes ddNTP labeled different used. and of to a mixture a place a reaction In linked the fluorescent now is single four tube commonly in primer, of (Fig. is and is separated generated electrophoresis, readout color fluorescent a sequence of The are the detected, the capillary mixture by labels 34.10). [Note: Project the of this genome.] Human variations technique sequence to Genome The used human cost DNA increased the of allow in or next entire fidelity rapid high-throughput generation, of pieces. decreased technology, sequencing an Advances the many so-called (parallel) sequencing, through sequencing and genome with sequencing simultaneous now portion is possible.] the the encodes of that exome, [Note: genome Sequencing of now that proteins,

IV. PROBES

DNA by enormous an large enzymes molecules restriction Cleavage array of of produces fragments. the DNA mixture? interest such picked sequence out be can of of How a RNA, or fluorescent radioisotope, with a piece biotin the a a of probe, nonradioactive or use such with a labeled ssDNA lies or 32P, of molecule, short in answer as a dye. as such The complementary interest, a sequence in the probe sequence to of called The of is a DNA. the DNA target to a identify which used which on called the a gel clone a process in or library screening. are contains target Probes DNA, band

DNA to A. Hybridization

The on of DNA. containing utility annealing) probes of binds complementary sequence process target a of sequence a a (or a in which single-stranded probe the hybridization hinges bound of support, a membrane. solid to by as dsDNA, nitrocellulose such first alkaline a denaturation produced is ssDNA, are DNA for exogenous, from the but strands to hybridization The available prevented single-stranded are probe. radiolabeled, self-annealing immobilized membrane. the on The by the of of radioactivity hybridization retention extent is measured do Excess removed washing membrane. the are that molecules probe hybridize by not

B. Synthetic oligonucleotide probes

are the sequence single-stranded of DNA short, target the part of a is region of all probes the that small can synthesized complementary known, If of oligonucleotide gene or interest. be to gene acid acid construct final code nucleic is If a a the genetic sequence unknown, the to the as be of sequence used using the may of gene probe protein, the product, amino the guide. is degeneracy necessary synthesize of p. of several code the (see 449), to the it genetic oligonucleotides. Because to can single-base are be to Oligonucleotides changes which [Note: used detect in the complementary. sequence they contrast, a bases, a many DNA In binding unaffected.] and thousands their target with contain change cDNA to of single-base is probes 1. presence the Detecting sickle mutation: the can (ASO) cell β-globin (Fig. gene used βS-globin be synthetic to A oligonucleotide of mutation allele-specific detect in the probe the 34.11). and amplified, membrane. isolated is and denatured applied from to (WBC) a blood cells white DNA, codon to GTG, → with (GAG applied complementary the to radiolabeled in point mutation βS oligonucleotide patients the is the glutamate probe, at A 6 → valine) membrane. gene, detected. probe a double-stranded (sickle (sickle anemia) the is patient a individual form or a from DNA isolated cell hybrid complementary contains heterozygous can cell and that sequence trait) homozygous be a to position a DNA does and, contrast, hybrid Fig. not this not complementary therefore, form obtained In (see is at from normal individuals 34.11). for to the the mutant allele probes normal allows and possible (one Use mutant) such specific be one of (Fig. ASO homozygous of a three and for specific distinguished normal, allele) (homozygous pair all genotypes heterozygous, 34.12). its are and known.] are ASO mutation the location only [Note: if probes useful

C. Biotinylated probes

is nonradiolabeled the developed. radioactive been have of becoming increasingly probes expensive, disposal Because waste used the the based biotin to most p. One 385), probe. linked is to the chemically of can the (see vitamin which synthesize on nucleotides be successful was a tenaciously to whites. binds avidin, egg Biotin protein it very contained available because chosen chicken in readily attached to with sensitivity. detectable fluorescent can great be a optically dye Avidin that made can fragment avidin. solution be a with gel visible by immersing DNA the in (displayed, probe electrophoresis) biotinylated gel a for hybridizes of example, Thus, the by dye-coupled the the washing excess DNA that probe fluorescent. fragment avidin, away is After binds the tissue DNA or detection sequences a preparations, probes and called RNA cell in process allow localization [Note: or can situ in (ISH). Labeled of hybridization (F), is FISH.] fluorescent If technique the probe called the is

D. Antibodies

the of no to direct If DNA cloning the amino detection transcribed probe and cloned can cDNA be to translated. synthesis sequence of that cDNA expression the acid of guide be is indirectly information by in interest, a an identified allows vector gene available a for of therefore, cDNA labeled protein to A is and, produces interest. identify antibody the contains which bacterial the colony used

V. BLOTTING SOUTHERN

technique blotting generate, and and the electrophoresis, enzymes, use separate, detect restriction that of pieces a DNA. probes DNA Southern combines is of to

A. Procedure

Southern, Edward steps named after This involves inventor, (Fig. method, its following the 34.13). is DNA for WBC. a example, cells, from extracted patient’s First, enzyme. fragments the many Second, DNA into cleaved is a restriction using by fragments size are the charged) basis resulting (all the on are of separated negatively electrophoresis. of Third, which to lengths position the calculated usually slowly the the of fragments relative standard fragments of be of the size.] can number ones, known large of base the band expressed more move as Because than comparison fragments, smaller of [Note: pairs, the the from (blotted) DNA for membrane transferred in denatured nitrocellulose analysis. and a are The the gel to fragments individual’s enzymic contains fragments. digest original represents entire the If DNA the ≥106 the genome, (or fragmented) on a is pieces one few interest of gene of The only these itself gene was DNA. of if the visualized by the as overlapping technique, fragments nonspecific appear If bands. an were unresolved blur would a of DNA they all the avoid in this, identify uses blotting to a fragments DNA step Southern interest. probe To the last of depend the both used Southern restriction visualize patterns the and fragments. endonuclease the specific probe observed restriction The blot on on to on analysis the (see if studied points p. to of have Variants compass.] [Note: studied blot which being Southern of 500), (see facetiously RNA is being the or named is anyone’s relates neither and if of p. western protein name been to 499) northern

Mutation detection B.

nucleotides. deletions, Southern and detect mutations expansions, as insertions such large or DNA blotting repeat rearrangements can trinucleotide of point sites. another; (replacement or that restriction of gain 449) by loss can It see of p. detect the mutations nucleotide cause one also the seen those normal pattern to Such bands cause of differ with mutations gene. from a site lost. are is a if Longer fragments restriction generated 34.13, present in Figure person lacks restriction example, in person For site 1. 2 a mutation with create a point shorter fragments. Alternatively, the new of production may site cleavage the are sequence restriction differences Most variations at the [Note: in DNA.] harmless sites

VI. FRAGMENT RESTRICTION POLYMORPHISM LENGTH

It has of 99.5% unrelated people identical. the estimated two been are genomes any that variation that bp. genome, million With represents in in human diploid bp the 6 ~30 billion mutations that polymorphisms. These result are to lead variations of the genome is that or, rarely, change disease, harmless, can the genotype in in a in change phenotype to no increased a result phenotype polymorphism A causes that or is a causes susceptibility in change disease. locus in >1% a sequence at given population. as variation a (allele) a defined of traditionally It is not the and genome proteins of (that introns encode occur is, in the does in primarily 98% regions). intergenic Polymorphisms that fragment variant genetic cleaving DNA with restriction fragments) a endonuclease. observed can fragments into by a (RFLP) A be restriction that is length polymorphism (restriction the length DNA restriction is site. the variant the The or as of create altered if the alters restriction abolish fragments so to a RFLP fetal human parents tissue. prospective can variations, used in to in example, genetic detect be for or

DNA variations A. RFLP resulting in

of DNA repeats in DNA in changes and RFLP: DNA sequences. Two types commonly of tandem single-base result sequence the variations

1. in genome Single-base (SNPs, human one of nucleotide 90% comes is, base single variation polymorphisms (Fig. pronounced involve form changes: About “snips”), of variations that the just that 34.14). site at a particular unrecognizable The site substitution one by endonuclease. render the nucleotide restriction a restriction of can created by be also the site same restriction new can mechanism. A of differ In lengths detected Fig. case, either and from DNA normal hybridization by an with be results fragments in cleavage (see can endonuclease the that 34.13). disease-causing (rare) mutation. the at the mutation site The either be some a site distance at of restriction can from a or site altered SNP Map developed Project, of common The the [Note: by International is The human Haplotype genome. a catalog HapMap, in disease.] (GWAS) studies being identify in to association genome-wide those that used and are health The affect alleles data 2. in arise of DNA Polymorphisms shown 34.15. a chromosomal (VNTR), from of Figure variable presence as the can number repeats repeats: Tandem tandem also in genome, of after short in sequences DNA repeated are locations (one at in scattered the tandem These another). serves in person varies is person fragments restriction for repeated segments unique repeat these units vary “fingerprint.” enzymes in but by as many of Fig. number given (see contained how individual the yields on fragment depending length a Cleavage and, to therefore, any are from that The molecular 34.15). Many and such analysis, as identified and loci useful been extremely forensic are different VNTR have DNA in paternity for cases. fingerprint these or production which, structure, effect or whether It function, known in no particular the cases, SNP on of that emphasize are VNTR, polymorphisms, of is simply any to important markers, most rate protein. have

offspring B. chromosomes Tracing to parent from

the gained yields least of cleavage a DNA base If has an restriction additional one substitution, by then fragment. individual site at enzymic

loss produced a fragments restriction fewer enzymic Conversely, results site, if in mutation by of cleavage. are a heterozygous the chromosome. and a a has not polymorphism the in for An homologous individual sequence who chromosome DNA of in one variation is the individuals, determining of chromosome by absence from such presence parent offspring or each In be traced polymorphism. the to can

diagnosis Prenatal C.

a the in determine may wish to as relative, near disease, with previous child developing history disorder genetic or presence fetus. affected a of of such Families severe an the diagnosis, for with if in Prenatal affected. the decision an is reproductive association informed counseling, allows genetic fetus

1.

The methods available: and in specificity. vary available diagnostic Methods sensitivity genetic or the of (for example, defects devices in [NTD]). example, fiberoptic the (fetoscopy), useful ultrasound if Visualization defects is for gross abnormality by neural only anatomic results tube fetus, also of the composition provide can clues. fluid The amniotic diagnostic chemical is For the of NTD. levels αfetoprotein presence high example, of associated with be of can assesses fluid biopsy which obtained of morphology the Fetal chromosomes. or from villi cells the from metaphase used amniotic karyotyping, chorionic for an trisomies abnormal permit sorting or that cell and rapid and of of techniques chromosome identification the Staining lengths. extra translocations chromosomes produce DNA analysis most provides picture. However, genetic fetal molecular detailed the of

2.

cells, chorionic DNA be villi blood obtained (Fig. from may fluid, sources: or amniotic DNA 34.16). have to in For analysis. cells culture in fluid, order DNA weeks for amniotic 2–3 grow sufficient necessary it was formerly to for a amplify time dramatically DNA shortened DNA to needed ability the for The by analysis. has PCR

3. the The common in cell disorders of of diseases using are RFLP: anemia sickle Hb humans. genetic Direct diagnosis genetic most cell the sickle (Fig. anemia In of case to point rise 34.17), that gives gives and disease p. mutation polymorphism. is mutation the one same that to the the rise actually 35) the (see genetic mutations detection RFLP However, few to direct only point of limited result is by that diseases. diseases a from

a. nucleated efforts: from and past, cells diagnostic blood. of sickle fetal kinds prenatal In involved synthesized of the of the cell red diagnosis in Hb obtained amount the the anemia determination Early

to HbA a analysis and begins when invasive procedures (~5%), the be obtain until of mortality late However, cannot produced. variant) carried (and out blood HbS to the trimester rate pregnancy in fetal have be second its high

by point the endonuclease recognition Fig. the cell anemia, the sequence b. caused abolishes alteration see any sickle analysis: nucleotide; site CCTNAGG In N (where MstII: the is mutation of restriction RFLP 34.17). site eliminates the gene codon enzyme. A-to-T cleavage βS-globin in the Thus, of for 6 a the mutation from 1.35-kb a βS fragment, generated yields gene of result cleavage the the is with DNA 1.15-kb MstII one of a digested a fragment whereas site. MstII as Normal loss blood provide have DNA Diagnostic detection as genetic analysis sampling early diseases. well they chorionic as sickle cells fetal of allow anemia or other from because than cell of proved safe, fetal amniotic that techniques villus valuable rather than sites, [Note: Genetic between or creation also display RFLP.] insertions deletions of restriction will two sites, or by by rather the cleavage disorders loss caused 4. located gene phenylketonuria hydroxylase chromosome see is the using phenylketonuria ([PKU] RFLP: The (PAH), of enzyme p. deficient in 270), Indirect on phenylalanine for diagnosis 12. of contains introns genomic and kb exons ~90 It DNA spans by (Fig. separated 13 description a see 34.18; and p. for introns). 442 of exons in PAH endonuclease site. directly the Mutations affect usually not do gene restriction any recognition To of establish individual be a protocol DNA must for members PKU, family from the analyzed. affected diagnostic goal that (RFLP) identify genetic tightly linked to is to markers trait. disease the are The diagnosis. identified, out prenatal to Once used these markers are analysis can carry RFLP be

a.

marker the of identification: conditions done presence mutant gene by polymorphism be gene the Mutant can if identifying satisfied. Determining are the two can defective traced the polymorphism First, by to a disease-producing if closely the gene the be mutation, is RFLP. detection linked of For is is example, consistently are they is and RFLP that sometimes DNA linkage from cleavage family examined coinherited). find enzyme if and close restriction with gene carrying show to a possible Southern (that it gene is, blotting, an that associated disease-causing a by inheritance of genome. then location without defect its or genetic It precise knowledge the of nature gene the of the within a possible is in family trace to the the may study with be to the other The of unique may investigation.] under families in be disorder be the [Note: discovered family known from or polymorphism the disorders, family diagnosis. individual would for PKU, an Second, aid the as presence autosomal-recessive affected in in of the the such RFLP the allowing This identification with genetic disorder. on present chromosomes, would of have both the associated the mutation individual

b.

can markers normal shown polymorphisms to genes. RFLP abnormal The using PAH between as mutant and presence genes be DNA analysis: of for distinguish appropriate pattern restriction an DNA an Figure typical 34.19 shows affected electrophoresis. example, and members subjected For with from when obtained enzyme a of cleaved to is family restriction represent used. The sites the cleavage vertical the arrows for enzyme is of only that of in the “a.” the with whereas The of “b,” fragment hybridization autoradiogram PAH-cDNA this II-2 that the absence mutant probe), polymorphic a gene. the presence demonstrates labeled “b” creates polymorphism, subject (after as site fragment a the yields shown site with Note by associated presence fragment family, that this presence abnormal to for in the of polymorphic particular gene PAH. “b” fragment the Therefore, marks a of site appearance corresponds the corresponds The gene. normal only of absence having “b” the fragment to fetus therefore, 34.19, In has two that inherited the genes DNA from shows of abnormal examination parents PKU. the fetal and, Figure

c.

fetus gene is unaffected affected in DNA-based is carriers not in in to detecting by testing unborn an of but DNA determining only of also testing: family useful aid PKU the planning. Value mutated if phenylalanine. is dietary of treatable by [Note: restriction PKU neurologic essential treatment damage individuals.] in affected severe preventing diagnosis Early and are in

VII. CHAIN POLYMERASE REACTION

p. in that a is biologic PCR described an not on selected the method for 483. (in vivo) vitro on cloning amplifying DNA method does sequence rely specific a sequence in of copies a hours. millions nucleotide PCR of few of synthesis the permits the the of can less targeted sample. when It makes the a initial total sequence, than up million part one in even amplify sequence bacterial, used source, sequences viral, plant, can including animal. method The any be amplify or from to DNA Figures and 34.21. PCR in in 34.20 steps The are summarized

A. Procedure

to uses portions of pol repetitively genomic targeted DNA amplify cDNA. or PCR of in amplification. in sample, where cycles of the number) = (2n, DNA of to cycle n cycle with leading the increase doubles exponential DNA an Each amount repeated amplification sequenced. separated by gel and electrophoresis, can and then detected amplified hybridization, by be blotting products DNA Southern The

1.

Constructing the It the PCR know the primer: sequence method. is DNA target nucleotide not of in to necessary sequence nucleotide it know side However, segments to the is the DNA. target of necessary of each short on interest. sequence sequences, bracket These the called of flanking stretches, DNA are 20– to complementary of sequences usually flanking regions to nucleotide the nucleotides two, sequences. long, oligonucleotides, construct used respective which The are flanking the single-stranded 35 Fig. the points The toward end each oligonucleotide sequence target of 3′-hydroxyl (see 34.20). PCR. These synthetic in as oligonucleotides primers function

2.

is dsDNA the ~95°C strands. heated to into separate be single DNA to The target to Denaturing DNA: amplified

3.

to ~50°C each anneal The cooled strands sequence the primers separated strand) and ssDNA. complementary a for are the (one primers: on to Annealing two

4.

the complementary primers: to added initiate dNTP to new the to (in of mixture original excess) are the pol synthesis strands. DNA DNA two Extending and strands (~72°C) copies target. of in primer, 5′→3′ and the nucleotides DNA, across direction of 3′-hydroxyl target end extends the DNA complementary growth the adds the pol to making the strand thousand several be products can pairs long.] PCR [Note: base to four). mixture strands reaction heated of there At the separate which of the now is one are the cycle (of completion replication, again of complementary is binds primer strand primer, extension Each and repeated. the a step the high cycle. not the a to from does at Thermus pol at added (for have each lives example, aquaticus heat-stable temperatures), not is therefore, polymerase bacterium By Taq normally denatured that successive and, DNA using be However, activity. proofreading lacks Taq process, a the are by run this during cycles to amplifying (230). Typically, 20–30 a (220) million-fold DNA billion-fold product the is complementary extension [Note: its (see sequence to a Each 5′-end primer that includes at Fig. 34.20). newly Thus, for synthesized can (see strand cycles act Fig. a each the successive as template 34.21). last by to made few Probes of be in chain amount DNA the an can each cycle, target nucleotides hence, the labeled adding exponential cycles. during This with PCR “polymerase the leads name reaction.”] increase to

B. Advantages

specific sensitivity over as DNA cloning biologic sequence and advantages mechanism speed. a major PCR The for of amplifying a are in become trace be amounts the can amplified DNA to present predominant sequence. sequences only studied. and can that PCR in amplified sequences is sensitive so be individual an present cell DNA specific and difficult sequence a DNA Isolating traditional DNA than technically by using techniques. is methods PCR recombinant less amplifying cloning and faster

C. Applications

diagnostics. has forensics, become and very PCR common in clinical tool a research,

1.

laborious DNA. Comparison a sequencing biologic mutant of protocol the form: the allows cloning sufficient of gene mutant DNA PCR synthesis without of quantities its normal to in for a

2.

analysis fingerprinting revolutionized Forensic DNA scenes. analysis of of the samples: DNA means evidence has crime by from of PCR hair, the specific isolated sample DNA spot from tiny human whether individual. a blood, sample a of semen a a or single determine sufficient comes to of is from analyzed tandem DNA known as markers for such type polymorphism The short most are repeats. commonly of fingerprinting a p. described VNTR previously These (see the very to similar are

in smaller 491) but are size. uses [Note: Paternity techniques.] testing same the 3.

difficult infection conventional are of have period, immunodeficiency methods. Viruses (HIV), early such Detection low-abundance nucleic as of at that stage latency virus using long human acid detect sequences: to a the when small for sequences and even harbors offers a PCR only DNA sensitive the detecting proportion viral a of rapid virus. method cells of amount time) viral Quantitative [Note: amplification rather in load of than quantification each end as the is, also and real-time is (the the allows real nucleic number) of PCR, (copy in useful after (that known target virus).] determining cycle PCR acid the amount at of (qPCR), 4.

conductance carrier and protein. genetic transmembrane mutations detection an the Cystic gene disease fibrosis: fibrosis diagnosis fibrosis of regulator from resulting Prenatal for cystic the in is autosomal-recessive (CFTR) cystic of deletion three-base in a phenylalanine that is The loss the (see 450). a residue results mutation from most common the protein p. CFTR normal to three other is the by the obtained the allele, of from PCR size the each of it them the possible than bases portion mutant distinguish shorter amplifying products that Because by DNA. is allele of a Figure (carriers), distinguish can results heterozygous homozygous individuals. mutant between how homozygous normal, (affected) PCR illustrates 34.22 such the test and

simultaneous The known multiple target pairs using as DNA of PCR. primer a multiplex of amplification multiple is regions gene for It of exons exons allows gene loss ≥1 many of detection a such has exons. which 27 in the as CFTR, the with

VIII. ANALYSIS GENE EXPRESSION

of not of structure, and protein gene only tools analyzing study the but allow the also of products ways biotechnology of expression. The mRNA provide gene

A. levels the of RNA cDNA labeled or from mRNA either to Determining itself probes are mRNA levels usually to mRNA. messenger determined hybridization by produced retroviral mRNA RT-PCR.] of (RT) PCR referred made to cDNA [Note: transcriptase by Amplification from is reverse as by 1. Northern blots

blots blots similar Southern Fig. are to (see Northern a are electrophoresis, separated molecules and probe. that with sample radiolabeled that a 34.13), contains a by mRNA transferred of membrane the hybridized except to mixture then by measure autoradiography size the a amount the molecules mRNA obtained of sample. The and in give the of bands

2. DNA contain larger immobilized a sequences thousands area than no ssDNA an slide. microarrays organized of in microscope Microarrays: production for the mRNA a at gene of analyze time. same expression variations to analyzing used of mutations microarrays the are determine sample (gene to or of genes thousands or (genotyping) analysis), presence patterns These the For DNA. from the genotyping is genomic sample analysis, is converted (Fig. labeled of the a fluorescent cDNA expression For type and particular analysis, with population molecules from mRNA tag cell to a 34.23). corresponding of membrane of tiny is a a (or, chip, containing to gene. to spots thousands or a is different mixture slide gene which exposed each DNA) glass This DNA, then bound each amount spot sample. a that the amount is of the of fluorescence mRNA to particular The measure of in (for two gene of to Fig. differing cell cells; different the types DNA used microarrays of example, cancer and patterns are expression in see normal determine 34.23). to also such as be optimize to can cancers, treatment. breast They subclassify used cancer, treatment on to antibodies to involving profile. diagnosis, the them a prognosis, are disease patient’s and aid based recognize expression protein in being of proteins proteins [Note: biomarkers the Microarrays that identify and other used or medicine tools individuals.] development genetic, variations among lifestyle (precision) the the environmental, are important in microarrays consider and/or DNA) Protein treatment (and and prevention of the in strategies which personalized

B. Protein analysis

and of kinds proteins cells to the amounts always directly correspond amounts do of present. not The mRNA in posttranslational and are than efficiently some more others, translated modification. undergo Some proteins mRNA large used. a mass techniques, of such proteins, as automated analyzing variety and are a involving electrophoresis, of two-dimensional When spectrometry and abundance of methods the interactions number posttranslational a and When determine of proteins, to specific are quantify or investigating modifications. labeled (Ab) detect and limited used number one, to antibodies proteins

1.

microtiter the a immunosorbent dish. are (known ELISA) Enzyme-linked of wells performed as assays These assays: in plastic of to the antigen The (protein) bound dish. the is specific p. used probe the protein see be to The measured. of as 66) Ab an troponin, consists (such for colored is substrate. product The an to when which covalently bound Ab a its will to exposed enzyme, produce is color The amount protein test of to the proportional and, to indirectly, sample. of present amount amount the produced of Ab in a

2.

called that it the blotted a sample blots separated similar (also electrophoresis to and are membrane. blots, Western that Western by except immunoblots) in to molecules (transferred) is protein are Southern blots: of probe at a the location labeled its The which Ab, a antigen. band produces is

3.

by human western measuring in exposure patient’s the present Ab Detecting sample. and anti-HIV immunodeficiency are to a HIV to of exposure to blood detect used commonly blots virus: ELISA amount ELISA the tool they screening sensitive. primary are very are as because used Because confirmatory often a are however, these (Fig. give which positives, used specific, as blots, false test assays more are western sometimes 34.24). blots after can and the western detect anti-HIV [Note: HIV ELISA in only exposure appear bloodstream. Ab few is after PCR HIV useful based the testing first in months exposure.] for more

Proteomics C.

the macromolecules, or as is functions, genome, of study the a by proteins proteome, abundance, relative with modifications, interactions including posttranslational The known all expressed proteomics. distribution, other and their posttranslational into when The genome well and 20,000–25,000 the genes considered. modifications translate posttranscriptional protein-coding human proteins 100,000 of are over off. as turned a remains of Although are essentially on types and unchanged, cell change in and the particular genome genes amounts any proteins dramatically and analysis of data.] (and biologic required parallel computer-based bioinformatics, of development the [Note: genomics) Proteomics the storage, organization, compares Figure in of the discussed this chapter. techniques 34.25 analytic some

IX. THERAPY GENE

that normal, result a treat the gene goal The of gene a as gene somatic disease of of has a delivery into disease-causing DNA for cloned defect the to cells through mutation. a is of who in therapy patient a changes next targeted on somatic not therapy passed only change the cells, somatic gene the is Because the generation. to so modified, are In and on. the change therapy, [Note: germ germline passed is cells the gene effect worldwide.] moratorium therapy long-standing on gene germline is A in two 1) gene the are which in There cells transduced, which of vivo, ex are are types in patient transduced. returned, vivo, transfer: from 2) and removed, in the and cells directly DNA. use to vector types deliver the Both require of viral a and therapy expression, response. immune of long-lived such prevention of effects an Challenges achievement include development side of gene of as vectors, caused combined p. gene patients to The immunodeficiency adenosine involved two 301). the successful (ADA, gene first with severe by disease deaminase mutations (SCID) therapy see for vivo lymphocytes vector (Fig. It with ex retroviral mature T transduced a utilized 34.26). is cDNA now used.] Human ADA [Note: types certain a cancers, success. been of therapy, hemophilia, variety with and with Since patients a only (with disorders, blindness) of 1990, degrees treated number such as have varying of gene small of

gene opposed be editing, as addition, mutated repaired. Gene a to gene to allows and (proteins or DNA-binding identify Combinations endonucleases used sequence. molecules are to and the cleave mutated of RNA) of homologous sequence DNA gene. into the repair p. Cleavage correct that integrates 429) recombination the breaks containing dsDNA (see activates been has a in custom-designed [Note: used a lines. DNA RNA endonuclease gene human specific in editing sequence cell by An guided to palindromic is for) and prokaryotic repeats that The technique foreign in identifies based cleaves named protein) the on (and (clustered [CRISPR]-associated system short DNA regularly interspaced CRISPR-Cas9 bacterial cells. the CRISPR the in not is in laboratory but clinic.] currently used

TRANSGENIC ANIMALS X.

egg. produced a can Transgenic injecting into fertilized a cloned (a foreign gene animals be by transgene) to and chromosome, resulting present animal the If the generation germline in it a into generation. stably be be and can passed the gene from randomly of integrates will rat called injecting into by fertilized A hormone mouse for in was a “Supermouse” this mouse produced way gene giant egg. the growth have produced transgenic an 35), by milk, (see that goats protein human and a produce 2009.] was for Antithrombin, online Chapter called clinical their therapeutic process animals proteins designed anticlotting use [Note: approved in in “pharming.” Transgenic been the a functional mouse expresses targeted created. undergoes that insertion, gene random) the (not (KI) transgene knockin If is transgene express creates nonfunctional knockout Targeted does insertion version not a (KO) a of the that the of gene. mouse as animals of disease. engineered models a corresponding Such study for genetically the human can serve

XI. CHAPTER SUMMARY

enzymes (dsDNA) Restriction bacterial are fragments. into DNA smaller cleave double-stranded endonucleases that Each specific cleaves restriction 4–8 producing sequence DNA restriction (a a at enzyme base-pair called fragments. segments site), are are that palindromic. The sequences recognized cuts form on enzymes either or the ends) (sticky cuts Restriction blunt-end DNA. staggered restriction DNA join ligases Bacterial can same sources they different cut by the if from DNA been two have fragments endonuclease. molecule. a recombinant of hybrid combination called two DNA This fragments is cell many foreign of amplification the called process cloning. replicating Introduction DNA into of a the (production permits DNA, a of a copies) molecule of to which is A DNA of the be to DNA is a molecule fragment vector joined. cloned the nucleotide gene and antibiotic must be the Vectors that within cell, host by to replication such endonuclease, resistance autonomous must as a carry vector confers capable the sequence one least at gene. must least restriction of recognized one specific at contain select ability an for as Prokaryotic small, serve circular, organisms DNA molecules can contain extrachromosomal vectors. normally that called plasmids hybrid be copies which the can into the and making reintroduced thus joined (or from of interest, plasmid. readily multiple artificially with They the replicate, will bacterium DNA isolated of bacterium, constructed), the a DNA of cloned A restriction collection fragments is an the library organism. of DNA of of of to fragments a library appropriate total A endonuclease an with genomic the is vector. a and ligation collection of DNA the by organism subsequent dsDNA restriction of digestion obtained nucleotide the a copy It genome. ideally sequence every contains of DNA in sequences (cDNA) a to cell molecules contain in conditions. In environmental DNA type those contrast, cell libraries that messenger complementary according (mRNA) present and and are complementary differ to DNA processed RNA only an synthesis introns, cDNA eukaryotes. has cloned can bacteria Because of be proteins or human the no for into vector it expression by can Cloned, fragments sequenced, then example, using for of Sanger purified, be dideoxy termination method. chain DNA the the RNA radioisotope, DNA (usually such biotin sequence or A probe DNA a complementary such of dye) 32P, as fluorescent is small a or interest compound, a to identifiable DNA). molecule (target as has nucleotide piece a single-stranded that or of with labeled another DNA. of Probes contains on gel a or library the can to used target band a clone which be identify which is to present be in used that technique Southern detect can specific DNA. a sequences blotting endonuclease, and (blotted) is to nitrocellulose transferred by and electrophoresis for membrane pieces cleaved which after restriction gel The using separated denatured DNA are the are a a analysis. using is detected a The fragment of interest probe. thousands variations human polymorphisms at sequence many a locus). genome The (DNA contains given of Polymorphisms single-base from repeats. arise and can changes from tandem that polymorphism families. through a marker be genetic followed serve can can as A restriction that observed into restriction fragments fragment the DNA can be enzyme. restriction by a cleaving polymorphism (RFLP) A variant a is length genetic using particular site one a by nucleotides unrecognizable endonuclease. A in the can restriction or at a render more base substitution site restriction the A by also same new be created site can restriction mechanism. case, with detected can with fragments either of by results be endonuclease that in a differing In normal from the probe. lengths cleavage hybridization the the can of RFLP fetus. to gestation diseases used diagnose be genetic early analysis in a amplifying for on The another chain selected (PCR), biologic does reaction rely DNA sequence, polymerase not method a method. the cloning of a of few a millions of synthesis in nucleotide specific permits copies the PCR hours. sequence It initial less part million one than a the the in total can when sample. the amplify up sequence, makes targeted sequence even of from sequences The used any amplify can method be to DNA source. 1) (for sequences, example, analysis PCR normal forensic diagnosis 3) acid and carrier cystic samples, of detection Applications 4) mutant of with comparison of include a of gene, low-abundance the detection form fibrosis). of technique gene the DNA efficient and prenatal of 2) nucleic a and (ELISA); Southern differing proteins) radiolabeled to of electrophoresis, cancer are expression example, different used by contains used then by sample immunosorbent like (mRNA a gene detect of blots, as and be probe; (for blots northern in enzyme-linked to normal separated are cells western are techniques to microarrays such types blots a gene that molecules assays the (immunoblots) mRNA proteins. of of except determine The the and mixture cells); measured are that can specific expression hybridized two patterns products which expressed the the of a is Proteomics all proteins genome. by study whereas a to in gene gene of replace of mutated a is the editing goal The therapy normal a gene of defective somatic of insertion the the a is gene. cloned repair cell, goal gene knockin knockout gene animal a into foreign the human germline proteins can Insertion models gene therapeutic of an (transgene) creates that or produce animal diseases. for a of or as serve transgenic

Choose answer. the best ONE

4.1. HindIII is endonuclease. restriction a the Which most to enzyme? be following recognition for likely the sequence is this of

AAGAAG A.

AAGAGA B.

AAGCTT C.

AAGGAA D.

AAGTTC E.

Correct majority is and C. of double-stranded only recognize choices. in palindromes = the The AAGCTT answer endonucleases among vast the palindrome restriction DNA, the Because is the the sequence strand must given, base DNA only sequence one of determined. be of complementary strand To in read palindrome, the have both a 5′→3′ direction. strands must same when sequence be the 5′-AAGCTT-3′ is 5′-AAGCTT-3′. the of complement also Thus,

4.2. control, listlessness, for their has fixed 6-month-old son a evaluated and An Jewish gaze. poor Ashkenazi couple head is disease disease, of Tay-Sachs diagnosed. degradation, lipid an autosomal-recessive couple a has also daughter. The restriction to The in is fragment to closely a linked along disease. gene blots length Southern very family’s hexosaminidase of the is for the polymorphism right, pedigree defective which with A, shown Tay-Sachs the to Which accurate is below daughter? the with statements of most respect

A. 25% having of She a chance Tay-Sachs has disease.

B. of has 50% Tay-Sachs disease. chance a She having

Tay-Sachs C. disease. has She

Tay-Sachs carrier disease. a for She is D.

normal. E. She is homozygous

son, for and be an the Correct have Because must answer father this they disease. biological carriers both affected mother E. = each mutant parent. must allele have affected son a inherited The from band Southern only allele (kb) he band. the 3kilobase must Because for mutant linked 3-kb this on shows disease to the the the blot, be allele because hexosaminidase the the The homozygous inherited the must to be 4-kb daughter must and only she for linked gene. be the A band, normal 4-kb normal band,

4.3. global to order tumor like each chemotherapy the would most of of in appropriate for gene form of physician in to develop cells patterns two expression types different patient. determine the A of purpose? techniques following Which would for appropriate most the be this

Enzyme-linked assay immunosorbent A.

Microarray B.

C. Northern blot

Southern D. blot

blot Western E.

analysis (gene of messenger B. Microarray production Correct from = the answer thousands (mRNA) determination allows once. genes at RNA of expression) measures at northern blot time. from one only a production A gene mRNA immunosorbent expression) a only (also production but gene time. one measure enzyme-linked protein Western from and at assay gene blots not analyze DNA the to of products used are blots expression. Southern DNA,

4.4. defect. with a infant is diagnosed A cycle 2-week-old urea showed analysis Enzymic activity enzyme of transcarbamoylase (OTC), for ornithine no cycle. the an that the gene OTC identical of analysis product a control. messenger RNA Molecular to that the was revealed for (mRNA) of the of mRNA? likely techniques used Which analyze most below was to listed

Dideoxy termination chain A.

B. blot Northern

chain reaction Polymerase C.

blot Southern D.

blot E. Western

= Correct B. answer of in allows cell messenger analysis RNA particular (expressed) or a tissue. present the blot Northern Southern blot whereas is for for DNA used used protein is western analysis. analysis, blot Dideoxy is to used chain termination DNA. sequence is identical to in sequence copies chain reaction Polymerase vitro. used multiple, a generate DNA of

4.5. central the patient For which most above, affected? was likely phase dogma of the

= Correct Translation. answer able RNA. be as messenger of to evidenced is and normal The gene present by is production expressed The activity some that lack of affected. aspect means protein enzymic of is synthesis

visit additional For thePoint. ancillary related to this chapter, please materials

I. OVERVIEW

stop (coagulation) maintain rapidly blood to to (hemostasis). blood vessel Blood in order constant damaged is bleeding designed from clotting volume a a plug. the of Coagulation hemostasis) of through a platelets and clot of (secondary platelet vasoconstriction plug meshwork the hemostasis) of and is a formation accomplished consists (primary a fibrin protein that stabilizes that (thrombus) the platelets with and of (Fig. blood Clotting association occurs membranes in on the damaged vessels surface 35.1). lumen an vessel serious is known blood such as clotting a impeded, occurs that thrombosis, and is even tissue flow the and damage, If can [Note: within occluded occur. intact condition death (MI).] during example, infarction happens, myocardial a for is This what Processes to area remove of once underway is clot formation the in vessel roles to play the and limit clot also hemostasis. damage repair essential the multicomponent of the fibrin discussions processes. plug platelet and [Note: formation meshwork the facilitate these Separate of of presentation multistep, work to the together maintain However, two hemostasis.]

II. MESHWORK FORMATION FIBRIN

that meshwork pathways a pathway two unique of formation the form (Fig. converge involves fibrin to common The 35.2). are components numerals. factors the In by major (called proteins Roman [F]) pathway, each designated by liver, are The are the glycoproteins secreted synthesized primarily. factors and that factors Several by also alternative are denoted names. [Note: For of convergence, example, also the pathway Stuart factor known X as factor.] (FX), point is

A. Proteolytic cascade

in active which cleavage which initiates are product proteins set zymogen, cascade an reaction an or another. the up of protein inactive a proteolytic in converted pathways, one form, Within the is activation by to from form a the numeral. factor “a” The form is a of after by lowercase denoted active arginine on the serine FXIIa FIXa, proteins of cleave enzymes a residue that and, side The in bond function are FXa, active therefore, an trypsin-like as FXIa, lysine carboxyl and proteases a specificity peptide or FIIa, FVIIa, with polypeptide. through factor) by arginine 145 activated arginine (Christmas example, For at and 180 (Fig. cleavage FIX is FXIa 35.3). the The active of protease active produce because can many which, turn, can of molecules of in enormous each molecules acceleration, next protein results one in cascade. many product in activate rate proteolytic cascade the some the protein be the change of proteolysis. in a conformational absence cases, by In can in caused activation pathways. (cofactors) the in play role a proteins accessory as Nonproteolytic [Note: proteins and FVIII accessory proteins.] the FV, FIII, are

B. phosphatidylserine and calcium of Role

and in of the some calcium the the charged charged phosphatidylserine of clotting (Ca2+) positively negatively steps phospholipid The presence accelerates cascade. ions rate (PS)

1.

membrane. the of intracellular PS face (cytosolic) located Phosphatidylserine: is the primarily on plasma p. create the asymmetry [Note: Flippases (see 205).] blood signals Its to injury cells exposure vessels. line the that endothelial also surface platelets. activated the exposed of PS on is

2.

the binding clotting binds and residues of ions: proteins γ-carboxyglutamate FX), the (Gla) in negatively facilitating FVII, these proteases FIX, of the charged four (Fig. (FII, phospholipids Ca2+ of Calcium to exposed serine present 35.4). two because of Gla charged The good Ca2+ (Fig. adjacent residues carboxylate groups chelators their are of negatively 35.5). to clotting.] sodium agents The blood of as bind [Note: the from or tubes chelating prevents bags blood-collecting Ca2+ such use citrate in

amino γ-Carboxylation thereby residues Formation C. residues Gla the posttranslational in is get γ which 9–12 modification at carbon, target carboxylated forming the glutamate protein) (at the residues. of of a γ-carboxyglutamate [N]-terminus in occurs process liver. of the The reticulum (RER) rough the endoplasmic

coenzyme and dioxide oxygen as This hydroquinone form carbon of a the (CO2), K γ-glutamyl 1. carboxylation carboxylase, (Fig. γ-Carboxylation: a protein (O2), reaction substrate, vitamin requires 35.6). the water. reaction, hydroquinone reduced of its vitamin In to form gets O2 the epoxide form is as to oxidized K vitamin from (Fig. by K p. the vitamin vitamin 393), fat-soluble quinone is reductase Dietary form coenzyme reduced hydroquinone a the to form (see K, [Note: 35.7).] 2. inhibition of epoxide vitamin of (VKOR). warfarin, enzyme Inhibition analog warfarin: residues K to reductase inhibits by Gla synthetic K is that vitamin a formation sensitive the The by protein from the vitamin K integral reductase, to required the The the regenerate membrane, form of is functional of in epoxide hydroquinone the reaction. an RER γ-carboxylation form generated by a anticoagulant K as inhibits is antagonist. Thus, that clotting warfarin functioning an vitamin limit Warfarin therapeutically to used clot formation. are salts as [Note: poison. in control as a used Warfarin is commercially rat agent pest such hence name.] the Foundation, Research was Wisconsin Alumni It the by developed

Genetic VKOR (genotypes) (VKORC1) 1 subunit influence of to response warfarin. differences gene the catalytic patient for in p. the example, being polymorphism thereby necessitating lower expression, in decreases warfarin a to level. of the achieve a a For (see less of promoter region gene gene resulting made, therapeutic dose VKOR 491) in are also the warfarin metabolizes cytochrome in that enzyme P450 Polymorphisms known. (CYP2C9) warfarin In Administration dose the Food the 2010, genotype-based (package a to table label insert). and added Drug U.S. genetics response as to of an is on pharmacogenetics. known individual’s The influence drugs

D. Pathways

the extrinsic the intrinsic distinct pathways pathway, of formation involved meshwork: in the the pathway. common are Three pathway, and fibrin pathways (see intrinsic Production and extrinsic Fig. initiates of the the by FXa pathway common 35.2).

1. exposed tissue when the not get but a blood factor involves pathway in that protein, (TF), vessels blood is injured. This becomes Extrinsic: subendothelium. vascular FIII) (or, in glycoprotein TF a transmembrane is abundant accessory a and extravascular protein not It an protease. is FIII injury the TF) to seconds) blood (or, Any pathway. extrinsic (within rapidly exposes that initiates a Gla-containing conformational circulating it binds through exposed, FVII, Once TF protein, activating change. (see FVII thrombin activated 3. be can also by [Note: proteolytically below).] Ca2+ presence FVII of of and to Binding phospholipids. the TF requires proteolysis FX then TF–FVIIa binds activates complex by The (Fig. and 35.8). by membrane. in with occurs the activation FX pathway cell Therefore, of the extrinsic association pathway prevents pathway the extrinsic factor production of inactivated and that, binds quickly TF–FVIIa further inhibitor FXa-dependent is in by (TFPI) to complex FXa. tissue a The process, extrinsic to are and the FVII pathway.] TF unique [Note: 2. pathway blood Intrinsic: in present intrinsic are, protein factors and the of All are intravascular. the in the involved therefore, phase the two intrinsic FX-activation and known The phases: phase, involves contact with the each deficiencies. pathway

a.

activation to surface. (Hageman phase results binding through a negative conformational the in FXII Contact phase: of factor) This by change in do weight phase high question molecular of this in Deficiencies this the not in prekallikrein) the kininogen other coagulation. bleeding, proteins phase, and importance into FXII calling in (or result of in does inflammation. role However, contact phase play the a (see 3. thrombin FXII proteolytically below)]. activated be can by [Note:

b.

of leading Factor initiated FXa activation events by to the The is FXIIa the of by X–activation sequence pathway to (Fig. phase: FX intrinsic 35.9). FXIa a activates FXI, Glacontaining protease. and activates serine FXIIa FIX, complex FIXa and serine protein), bloodborne combines accessory activates protease. the (a with a Gla-containing FX, FVIIIa and FX containing [Note: The FVIIIa, FX regions, exposed complex gets charged FIXa, negatively on and membrane to forms FXa. activated Xase. as is to This sometimes complex referred requires of Binding complex to phospholipids membrane Ca2+.] the c.

A to FXII Factor not bleeding does XII lead deficiency a disorder. in deficiency: activated by FXI, the below). protein be 3. in can (see proteolytically is thrombin cascade, because next This the

d.

clot. a the defect Hemophilia: is in Hemophilia a coagulopathy, ability to in hemophilia, Hemophilia results of FVIII, FIX of A, accounts of B. all for which from hemophilia deficiency deficiency results 80% whereas friable is Each formation delayed characterized of ability and decreased to by abnormally (easily disrupted) and/or clots. deficiency clot manifested, for into the (Fig. joints bleeding be can This by example, 35.10). disease. severity deficiency The determines the of extent of factor the the using obtained DNA treatment replacement from FIX from or is Current therapy or hemophilia technology. blood factor pooled human for recombinant FVIII the However, factors to can antibodies develop. Gene is goal. therapy a Because both chromosome, on is proteins an X disorder. are for hemophilia the the X-linked genes with [Note: in hemophilia. sometimes results referred bleeding to of that disorder FXI hemophilia Deficiency C.] as is a

intrinsic inactivation dependence of in for production The on the continued the by TFPI pathway results of FXa. pathway extrinsic why with an though hemophilia explains even pathway. individuals bleed This extrinsic intact have they

3. of as paths produced that extrinsic fibrin initiates sequence a 35.11. Figure reactions FXa results (FIa), the both by in common Common: pathway, and the in shown intrinsic of the the generation membrane-bound accessory protein) Ca2+ referred complex a with forms prothrombinase. (a phospholipids, and FXa in of presence associates to bloodborne as the and, FVa to The complex prothrombin cleaves thrombin (FIIa). (FII) FXa.] potentiates of the proteolytic [Note: activity FVa membrane with residues FII binding the Ca2+ complex, FIIa. prothrombinase binding cleavage the facilitates subsequent The of FII to to and in to to the Gla of the (FI) the Gla-containing membrane thereby, the from fibrinogen it the region, releasing blood. and, activate freeing in Cleavage to FIIa excises release in is results only [Note: of example This that Gla of cleavage protein peptide. a a the Gla-containing of the liver the clotting it of for where travels thought a to signal proteins.] production increased as is to act peptide The have inhibitors anticoagulants. Oral, FXa approved clinical use as been direct of for onset rapid and warfarin, more contrast they a require shorter do In routine have monitoring. and not half-life to

to 3′ region (A) of for in in point replaces blood. common untranslated A (G20210A) the increased (G) leads FII the which levels gene mutation nucleotide 20210 of in FII at adenine an a the guanine characterized thrombophilia, condition increased an to This blood clot. for results a tendency by in

the to made liver. soluble is a. by fibrin: Fibrinogen FI glycoprotein cleavage a of different N three bonds. held together termini the [(αβγ)2] by polypeptide at of consists It dimers disulfide chains and the on β of The “tufts” chains domains N three termini (Fig. form the α of globular central 35.12). molecules. are charged between and repulsion The in FI negatively tufts result tufts Thrombin charged B), and and (FIIa) FI cleaves (releasing A FIa. the fibrinopeptides becomes clot a the monomers in associate result a (soluble) are loss is FIa able staggered the to array, soft noncovalently fibrin formed. of charge, a of As and

b.

associated get cross-linking: cross-linked. Fibrin molecules FIa The covalently clot (insoluble) converts the soft clot. to This hard a a glutamine FIa of bond of the covalently one through γ-carboxamide ammonia molecule in transglutaminase, formation and a residue ε-amino in links release of lysine isopeptide FXIIIa, a of the another to (Fig. an residue 35.13). activated thrombin.] is [Note: FXIII also by c.

by FXa of the “spark” in provides The thrombin. results initial the of pathway FX extrinsic thrombin: of of Importance the that activation activation (FVII) activates FVIII), intrinsic FXIII), (FV, and pathways of factors FIIa (FXI, extrinsic common FI, the (Fig. then 35.14). FXII activates the also phase. It contact of been pathway, clotting sustains by the the of extrinsic extrinsic clotting generation intrinsic FXa, pathway The TFPI. pathway amplifies and then, the by initiates has after and inhibited secreted a direct the gland from potent Hirudin, peptide thrombin leeches, inhibitor medicinal (DTI). salivary [Note: of is a

been use. approved hirudin for Injectable has clinical recombinant Dabigatran oral DTI.] an is the the extrinsic by clotting pathways achieved intrinsic the the Additional and is of pathway. of pathway between of FVIIa–TF-mediated the activation crosstalk FXIIa-mediated activation 35.15. in picture fibrin is complete clot Figure the a formation physiologic The of clotting blood of via hard shown the by are cascade of organized function shown in Figure The factors clotting 35.16.

an “a” be form would after by numeral. activated denoted the [Note: is Calcium

IV. VI. There no is protease is accessory an a (fibrin) I protein. neither nor is a XIII transglutaminase.] Gla γ-carboxyglutamate. =

as [PT] and common pathways Clinical time through thromboplastin laboratory through intrinsic (prothrombin and the [INR]) available to using normalized the evaluate the are [aPTT]). extrinsic ratio tests pathways expressed international partial time (activated common thromboplastin Thromboplastin + of phospholipids FIII. is combination a activate the is A needed thromboplastin intrinsic because partial pathway. phospholipid the just to FIII not derivative, portion contains

III. CLOTTING LIMITING

limit clots hemostasis. The once underway repair areas processes ability (anticoagulation) of important are are exceedingly aspects to damage and (fibrinolysis) remove to of to clotting binding by clotting degrading degrade or are them inactivate also to and that meshwork. the actions the fibrin proteins them either by performed proteins that them and from removing blood factors by These by

proteins A. Inactivating

sites the to by vessels form need the of beyond injury injured vessel formation clots the to and at their need liver the with the by themselves Proteins synthesized balance area. limit blood

1. (ATIII), referred blood. Antithrombin: (AT), in a to simply circulates Antithrombin as that the also hepatic antithrombin is protein III it the to It and binding free to (Fig. carrying inactivates FIIa it liver by 35.17). coagulation. in blood, FIIa it from participating ATIII the preventing Thus, from removes or a inhibitor, is ATIII serpin specific [Note: A reactive binds. a to which a contains loop protease “serpin.” serine protease the a bond in that a enzyme cleaves in covalent serpin Once a the change traps complex. protease peptide bound, causing conformational the α1-Antitrypsin is serpin.] 50) p. also a (see associated is cells glycosaminogly-can to with of when affinity greatly for vessels. response an to by blood ATIII (see heparin, p. in is increased intracellular ATIII mast released 159) The injury FIIA bound clot anticoagulant, formation. limit an therapeutically used Heparin, to is In the onset orally, which warfarin, half-life a slow is and a requires rapid [Note: to and and heparin intravenous a long administered short has contrast onset and anticoagulant administration. half-life a has the commonly treatment two used in in overlapping prevention) The an are drugs thrombosis.] (and manner of clotting, other FIXa, FXIa, and FXa FVIIa–TF and the FXIIa, proteases ATIII of also inactivates serine the complex. of form oligosaccharide heparin. [Note: pentasaccharide specific binds the to a within ATIII the of form. whereas FXa form, pentasaccharide requires of FIIa the inhibition requires Inhibition only oligosaccharide inhibit the Fondaparinux, version is synthetic FXa.] clinically of used pentasaccharide, a to 2. with complexed Protein Protein C–protein Gla-containing a activated circulating made the liver, FIIa in protein complex: C, by S thrombomodulin. is activated S, cleaves also Protein C cells, protein the thereby FVa integral FXa for fibrinogen forms C. glycoprotein an Thrombomodulin, affinity FVIIIa, protein maximal activity Gla-containing that protein complex a for of (Fig. membrane with FIIa, in of are increasing (APC) binds FIIa’s and complex affinity decreasing required for the and C accessory protein, endothelial proteins its which 35.18). S anchor to clot. APC the Protein helps of thrombin, a Thrombomodulin, it of coagulation thereby converting the activity from protein then, clotting. limiting extent protein of anticoagulation, the to modulates a of (glutamine is mutant to is V Leiden that position Factor APC. FV substituted is arginine of at form 506) resistant for a with frequency in thrombophilia Caucasian inherited most United It population. of the States, cause highest the in is the common increase. a venous increase to for Heterozygotes 7-fold the a and thrombosis, have have homozygotes in 50-fold risk up Leiden or during are taking with pregnancy risk greater estrogen.] FV when thrombosis at [Note: Women even of

of S, from proteins production can ATIII; FII Thrombophilia of mutation). excess the from of and Leiden antibodies; and C, deficiencies result (hypercoagulability) (G20210A and presence antiphospholipid from FV travels and veins [Note: the (or clot lungs, the thrombus off, deep of thrombosis, a of piece embolism forms cause breaks if circulation.] DVT) (deep can it) (PE) A a venous or that blocks the pulmonary to leg in the

Fibrinolysis B.

removed wound be begun. must are repair Clots has patches that once temporary products by is fibrin fibrin degradation The to (Fig. cleaved the plasmin protein clot 35.19). containing the plasmin, action D to domains a extent D-dimer, of released [Note: clotting Measurement assess Fig. (see the by cross-linked degradation product of fibrin used two be can of 35.12).] is from activators. serine that a by Plasmin protease generated is plasminogen plasminogen by the they binds is Plasminogen, clots form. into incorporated the secreted as liver into FIa to and circulation, form endothelial made active inactive FIIa, to vascular Tissue by to becomes an plasminogen FIa–plasminogen. response t-PA), bound secreted when cells (TPA, and activator in in Bound are inhibitors, plasminogen inhibitors, TPAa and from respectively. α2-antiplasmin activator and protected their plasmin is fibrin dissolved, clot TPAa to plasmin and the Once inhibitors. become their available stroke fibrinolysis in Therapeutic by with MI by made treatment an TPA commercially achieved with or can ischemic recombinant available patients DNA an be techniques. Mechanical (thrombectomy) clot is possible. also removal plasminogen made Urokinase and a from of a (u-PA) tissues is originally urine. in [Note: isolated variety activator free bacteria) fibrin-bound (from activates and plasminogen.] both Streptokinase

mediate as that interactions. known structural contains Plasminogen “kringle motifs domains” protein–protein binding it [Lp(a)] for plasminogen with Because also lipoprotein kringle to domains, (a) FIa. contains competes may elevated inhibit potential fibrinolysis be cardiovascular risk the increased for the 236). (see basis association p. for disease of to The Lp(a) with

IV. PLATELET FORMATION PLUG

that damaged form adhere collagen a aggregate of of activated, and small, megakaryocytes fragments (thrombocytes) are Platelets endothelium, anucleate get (Fig. exposed to platelet to plug see Fig. also 35.20; 35.1). is the first hemostasis of Formation is plug to the referred response primary it as to because bleeding. platelet platelets of are normal a there 150,000–450,000 adult, µl per In blood. which liver after taken by and they up life up and a 10 have days, They of spleen the to span are destroyed. platelet number and activity measure available. laboratory are Clinical to tests

Adhesion A.

at site by the protein platelets of collagen of Adhesion mediated injury von vessel (VWF). Willebrand is exposed the to factor complex collagen, of glycoprotein component bind (GPIb), platelets the Ib platelet to binds receptor membrane VWF (GPIb–V–IX) surface on and a a (Fig. VWF to via 35.21). Binding to VWF platelets. stops the forward of movement Bernard-Soulier Deficiency in decreased [Note: syndrome, in disorder VWF a results of the adhesion.] for receptor platelet a VWF is platelets. from glycoprotein is that released secreted cells. is by made It also endothelial and VWF and stabilizes also mediating FVIII addition to binds to to the collagen, of binding blood. platelets In the in Willebrand most disease of (VWD), inherited results common Deficiency von the coagulopathy. in VWF and increased FVIII results from to collagen platelets (due decreased of a to degradation). deficiency binding in VWD via directly VI also collagen bind the receptor can membrane (GPVI). Platelets glycoprotein to adhered, platelets get activated. Once activation FIII, blood to [Note: of extrinsic exposes Fig. the clotting also the and of pathway initiating FX Damage (see endothelium 35.8).]

Activation B.

to of platelets activated. get adhered areas injury, Once activation process δ and (or, by of granules. degranulation, involves changes platelets morphologic their contents storage and (shape) Platelet the the dense) which secrete α Activated PS expose their on platelets also surface. p. 205). by mediated externalization is of disrupts flippases (see as enzyme PS asymmetry The the membrane a created Ca2+-activated that scramblase known by the most platelet Thrombin activator. potent is protein–coupled receptors, receptor (Fig. G surface and FIIa activates platelets on protease-activated of (GPCR), of the a type to binds 35.22). primarily and trisphosphate p. FIIa C associated activation phospholipase rise Gq and in (DAG) proteins (see diacylglycerol (IP3). a of resulting in 205), is with inositol [Note: through its binding of Thrombomodulin, decreases FIIa the activation Fig. platelet (see FIIa, for availability of 35.18).] 1. DAG a kinase for degranulation. activates Degranulation: C, key event protein causes the IP3 (from Ca2+ of granules). dense release 214). Ca2+ phospholipids by A2, A2 in of substrate activated The the for platelets phospholipase release p. arachidonic to membrane activates the synthesis cleaves acid, thromboxane (see cyclooxygenase-1 (COX-1) which (TXA2) platelet to TXA2 vasoconstriction, causing causes augments degranulation, GPCR, activation additional and binds of platelets. COX synthesis is antiplatelet to aspirin and referred TXA2 that and, an inhibits irreversibly Recall drug. as consequently,

diphosphate and also granules. in (ADP) of Degranulation from serotonin dense release adenosine results Serotonin vasoconstriction. causes GPCR binds to platelets, activating on of ADP the additional platelets. surface are drugs, as clopidogrel, ADP-receptor antiplatelet such antagonists.] [Note: Some (involved Platelet-derived FV, released other VWF, in granules. are factor healing), from α and wound among growth proteins FI FXIII, receptors factor including activates (see ether endothelial platelets synthesized cell a 202) of an on platelets, and them.] Platelet-activating surface p. (PAF), the types cells by of [Note: and (GPCR) binds PAF variety phospholipid 2. pseudopod-like and shape facilitate platelet–platelet platelets from change change: discoidal to interactions The that with platelet–surface Morphologic of processes spherical in activated (Fig. Ca2+ dense by initiated the 35.23) of granules. is release from p. cytoskeleton. Ca2+ chain mediates platelet light the the that phosphorylates (see kinase resulting a to light major of of reorganization bound the myosin activation 133) myosin chain, in calmodulin

C. Aggregation

their lead in changes dramatic that Activation aggregation. causes to platelets in a binding for (GPIIb/IIIa) surface fibrinogen. changes expose receptor Structural sites link FI activated to Bound platelets another one molecules (Fig. two a FI platelets. single bind able to 35.24), with and platelets. the FI and both the FIIa by coming by cross-linked from is then converted FIa to blood FXIIIa covalently of and and of subsequent surface Ca2+) PS of on generation Xase The exposure of formation of the with complex platelets activated FXa [Note: X, IXa, FIIa.] formation allows (VIIIa, the strengthens hemostasis) the plug. (secondary formation platelet Fibrin autoantibodies receptor receptor function), FI platelet of whereas thrombocytopenia are the defects thrombasthenia (decreased (decreased [Note: a in number).] immune to platelet Glanzmann platelet this in Rare for result cause

endothelial cell the of wall contact 1) and surface endothelial 2) preventing synthesize which or that prostacyclin) endothelial blood separated oxide, a intact monophosphate. converts collagen; an and 3) a monolayer ADP of platelets prostaglandin each to (PGI2, of is by vasodilation; cells I2 the cells, have Unnecessary prevented because vascular ADPase from of is adenosine cells activation causes platelets with nitric

CHAPTER V. SUMMARY

blood a Blood constant bleeding (hemostasis). maintain a to volume rapidly vessel to (coagulation) damaged clotting is order blood from in designed stop the (Fig. a (thrombus) of meshwork of a of platelets formation fibrin protein is and Coagulation through plug a consisting of accomplished clot 35.25).

cascade the associated pathways common factors fibrin The (and meshwork clotting of pathway. formation the by [F]) the to the extrinsic converge intrinsic form involves their FXa that protein and at specificity. proteases factors serine the of Many with are trypsin-like protein of certain and phosphatidylserine platelets. charged on site injury the the (FII, Calcium of (Gla) facilitating negatively γ-carboxyglutamate FVII, of the binding surface present proteins at charged FIX, the in binds clotting proteases of the exposed to and negatively residues these FX), coenzyme, γ-Glutamyl K, form the for of required are carboxylase vitamin and of formation its Gla residues. hydroquinone the the epoxide K oxidized In gets reaction, form. to vitamin nonfunctional vitamin the reductase used epoxide reduce regenerates reduced vitamin K that analog synthetic enzyme clinically clotting, a Warfarin, K functional of inhibits the form. to of exposure The protein, vascular pathway is (tissue accessory initiated FIII an extrinsic subendothelium. [TF]), by factor in FVII, change. TF Glacontaining it Exposed circulating activating conformational protein, binds through a and binds proteolysis. activates TF–FVIIa The by FX then complex pathway. common allows FXa the by production thrombin from extrinsic pathway the activates of the pathway. then Thrombin intrinsic components inhibited inhibitor. pathway extrinsic by factor The is rapidly tissue pathway pathway initiated by The intrinsic is FXIIa. FIX. and FXIa activates FXIIa activates FXI, complex protein), accessory FIXa with FX. FVIIIa combines the (an activates and deficiency deficiency forming hemophilia FVIII whereas A, prothrombinase associates common that FVa the in thrombin FXa (FII) B. FIX (an with less to results protein), cleaves in results hemophilia (FIIa). accessory prothrombin then cleaves Thrombin fibrin (FIa). fibrinogen to (soft) forming monomers associate, fibrin clot. Fibrin a soluble a get forming The fibrin FXIIIa, by clot. (hard) fibrin transglutaminase, cross-linked an molecules insoluble coagulation blood anticoagulation. vessels Proteins themselves the with synthesized and by by liver balance Antithrombin III, removes serine serpin, binds a to and thrombin the or protease blood. from inhibitor, is to limit for formation. clot therapeutically is increased thrombin which heparin, by Its affinity used protein, Gla-containing activated a by Protein thrombin–thrombomodulin complex. C, is the anticoagulation. fibrinogen, to it for a thrombin’s of coagulation decreases affinity converting protein protein a of from Thrombomodulin that FVIIIa. forms complex FVa accessory with (APC) protein) protein C activated complex in protein the Protein cleaves (a Gla-containing and S the proteins C FV to is APC. resistant Leiden the It thrombophilic the is condition United in States. most common inherited plasminogen (TPA, as fibrin that t-PA). serine cleaved tissue protein protease from activators by a (fibrinolysis) generated plasmin, activator plasminogen is the by is clot plasminogen such The

Recombinant clinically. TPA used is

tissue to collagen. exposes a and Wound vessels blood damages adhere aggregate get form platelet the plug. Platelets to to and activated, (thrombocytes) collagen, exposed a by is Willebrand (VWF). factor von Adhesion mediated within a receptor and surface. VWF collagen, via glycoprotein platelets the binds bind VWF (GPIb) platelet on Ib complex common most Willebrand disease, results of coagulopathy. von VWF Deficiency the inherited in platelets activated. get adhered, Once activation spherical to degranulation, involves (discoidal granules. and their by with of changes the which Platelet process pseudopodia) storage contents platelets release shape the in the platelets. most potent activator is of Thrombin on of the to binds Thrombin platelets. protein–coupled surface G receptors protease-activated cause (serotonin fibrin diphosphate platelets thromboxane [TXA2]), support (FV, that vasoconstriction and platelets and and and release TXA2), other (adenosine the substances of A2 and recruit fibrinogen). clot activate FXIII, a formation Activated changes to their platelets Activation in aggregation. causes lead that surface fibrinogen. (GPIIb/IIIa) for binding receptor Structural changes sites in expose a molecules to one platelets Fibrinogen link activated another. both and fibrin The to thrombin and is from blood by coming FXIIIa the from then fibrinogen activated platelets. by cross-linked strengthened plug is by meshwork fibrin hemostasis) loose The platelets (primary the (secondary initial hemostasis). of to in of result in ability Disorders deviations platelets the and clot. coagulation proteins can laboratory clinical to time tests evaluate Prothrombin (aPTT) and clotting the used (PT) are activated thromboplastin cascade. partial time

Choose answer. best ONE the

For most description. appropriate 31.1–31.5, clotting (F) match to factors Questions the the of protein

5.1. activates pathways. of and intrinsic, common components the extrinsic, This factor

5.2. to insoluble factor This an the clot converts soluble clot.

5.3. initiates factor common pathway. This the

5.4. factor of activity This accessory Xa. that the factor potentiates is protein an

5.5. serine factor protease the is of This extrinsic pathway. a γ-carboxyglutamate–containing

clotting the answers H, of formed = E. Thrombin in three of the is activates Correct D, and pathway components the B, J, pathways each common (FII) in cascade. soluble transglutaminase, converting a an fibrin a to FXIII, covalently insoluble clot associated cross-links monomers, thereby one. pathways the pathway. by of the intrinsic generation FXa extrinsic The initiates and common the activity increases of FV FXa. (nonprotease) one of It is accessory proteins. three others The with FVIII FX). activate and to are (complexes factor) (tissue FIII FIX pathway. the protease FVII FIII complexes serine is γ-carboxyglutamate–containing a that extrinsic in with

5.6. unaffected activated time which prothrombin would prolonged? and partial In time thromboplastin be be patient

A. therapy A patient on aspirin

B. patient A liver disease end-stage with

patient hemophilia C. A with

with patient A D. thrombocytopenia

partial activity the intrinsic the the thromboplastin (PT) activated Correct through of pathways. C. through extrinsic the the activity common common measures the measures (aPTT) Prothrombin answer time time and pathways, of = in deficient with are hemophilia Patients either FVIII (hemophilia

components the pathway. FIX B), or of (hemophilia A) common extrinsic pathway. an have intact They unaffected, is the Therefore, and is prolonged. the PT aPTT and on therapy not those number, the proteins and of have aspirin in platelet thrombocytopenia function cascade. alterations with respectively, clotting in Patients the and unaffected. PT aPTT the and both the are Therefore, have proteins. Patients clotting ability end-stage to decreased disease synthesize liver with They and PT show aPTT. prolonged

5.7. the can thrombophilia? of patient ruled be following one in out a with Which

A. antithrombin III deficiency of A

B. deficiency A of FIX

protein deficiency of C. A C

D. An of prothrombin excess

Leiden Expression E. of FV

factors present in to answer will with clot decreased ability (coagulopathy). B. deficiencies a = Symptomatic Correct clotting by is an characterized increased Thrombophilia, tendency clot. to however, Choices and thrombophilia. E A, C, result in D,

5.8. caused shortly vessel be recommendation Current guidelines a for onset with stroke used that patients include obstructing that to of (TPA) the the ischemic clot activator tissue (a a by acute after of brain) the stroke blood plasminogen supplies blood the symptoms. treatment The for activates: is that basis TPA of recommendation the it

antithrombin III. A.

activated B. the complex. C protein

von receptor Willebrand factor. the for C.

D. fibrin. degrades the that protease serine

thrombomodulin. E.

= to plasmin. plasminogen converts TPA Correct answer D. the removing fibrin degrades blood Plasmin the to (a meshwork, obstruction protease) flow. serine III the thrombin with blood. in liver, association decreasing thrombin's the to carries it Antithrombin and heparin availability in binds the C FVIII. FV proteins degrades activated complex The protein accessory and by von TPA. platelet receptor affected The not for is factor Willebrand protein to by fibrinogen of increasing protein of activation of a it activation its coagulation and its one decreasing C. and converts thrombin binds anticoagulation from of Thrombomodulin

5.9. initial activation, site provide adhesion, the the of platelets aggregation and injury. The of plug at vessel the statements this plug the concerning is of of correct? following platelet formation Which

A. a platelets change Activated that area. decreases their shape surface undergo

B. vessels intact cells. Formation by endothelial production the of by A2 in platelet prevented of is thromboxane a plug

adenosine phase activation production monophosphate. The requires of C. cyclic

D. of glycoprotein von binding mediated phase by to is factor The the platelets adhesion Ib. via Willebrand

causing to G receptor activation Thrombin protease-activated platelets a protein activates kinase A. of binding E. protein–coupled and by

von surface platelets. platelet of phase receptor initiated of factor Ib) binding D. answer adhesion plug formation = Willebrand on of to The by the (glycoprotein a Correct is the Shape the surface platelets. pseudopodia increases of discoidal from with area to spherical change by A2 platelets. Thromboxane is made It vasoconstriction. causes activation platelet and diphosphate activates and is from platelets. activated Adenosine it itself released platelets, activation works coupled proteins Gq through C. receptors to Thrombin primarily phospholipase causing of

5.11. by Nephrotic (≥3 edema. in characterized a disease syndrome g/day) the is protein accompanied kidney by that loss is urine hypercoagulable loss state. The results a in protein of of explain the thrombophilia seen in Excretion would proteins following the the syndrome? of which

A. Antithrombin III

FV B.

C. FVIII

III clotting pathways. the (FIIa), action of intrinsic, A. = answer Prothrombin that and Gla-containing a Antithrombin of thrombin the D. activates protein inhibits (ATIII) common extrinsic, Correct continue, to of allows the hypercoagulable in FIIa syndrome nephrotic actions a ATIII in Excretion resulting state. of are The required proteins other for choices clotting. would the decrease excretion Their clotting. in urine

5.12. hemophilia following of rational be which the a would for of proteins therapy B? the Blocking action

A. FIX

FXIII B.

C. C Protein

inhibitor factor Tissue D. pathway

the = by as caused a pathway Hemophilia B by of deficiency FIX the a result decreased production Correct of D. a is thrombin in pathway. common intrinsic answer coagulopathy thrombin of blocking pathway this Because result inhibitor) the also thrombin in in pathway should, pathway (tissue production. increase inhibitor principle, the extrinsic factor can production,

5.13. is allow levels prevent refuse deficiency the after vitamin K in low bleeding, vitamin parents vitamin to the the to given birth baby girl to of by of baby the of injection caused newborns. which shortly The newborn a that recommended is K be be activity clotting The vitamin which protein of K the with would of involved deficiency? one following decreased in factors

A. FV

B. FVII

FXI C.

D. FXII

FXIII E.

clotting. γ-carboxyglutamate B. Correct of (Gla)-containing FVII answer = protein a is Gla creation vitamin residues of requires The coenzyme. carboxylase by γ-glutamyl a K as proteins contain and as C and limit clotting, FX, FIX, as that Gla also FII, well residues. S residues. not Gla other do The choices contain

5.14. Thrombin, anticoagulant both activities. clotting, produced pathway has of and the in common procoagulant following activity of thrombin? is anticoagulant of one Which the an

A. Activating FXIII

B. thrombomodulin to Binding

oxide Increasing production C. nitric

and D. FVIII Inhibiting FV

activation Inhibiting E. platelet

pathway Inhibiting F. tissue factor inhibitor

Correct answer bound = protein thrombomodulin degrades Thrombin clotting. proteins accessory the inhibiting B. thereby FVIII, and activates that to C FV fibrin the of thrombin strengthens FXIII Activation clot. by formation. cells, a vasodilator clot oxide, by Nitric made decreases endothelial thrombin. is by not It affected a platelets. activator of is Thrombin powerful would clotting. of factor pathway inhibitor Inhibition tissue increase

5.15. of clotting suspected the (aPTT) is A evaluating time time thromboplastin a and a prothrombin in activated use deficiency student partial reviewing protein. of (PT) correct would deficiency FXIII? a results one in be Which of the for following

A. partial prothrombin time activated decreased. Both time and thromboplastin are

B. thromboplastin increased. partial time and are activated time Both prothrombin

thromboplastin partial C. prothrombin Both unchanged. activated time time and are

prothrombin time D. is affected. Only

activated partial Only E. affected. is time thromboplastin

clot FXIII clot. a cross-links a Correct hard = transglutaminase C. in soft to molecules a is answer form fibrin that Its or affect does deficiency not tests. the PT aPTT a evaluated clot test.] by It is solubility [Note: 5.16. mutations platelets, Scott caused a have in to Why to by syndrome, individuals disorder with scramblase do bleed? a rare tendency

moves cytosolic plasma to the platelets. Scramblase phosphatidylserine membrane of the leaflet from in the (PS) extracellular leaflet the phospholipids (move direction). by in extracellular created cytosolic membrane the flippases disrupts PS (move [PC] from to phosphatidylcholine and This asymmetrical floppases localization ATP-dependent leaflet) opposite of thrombin. membranes the activate outer protein for to face site clotting platelet PS Having factors provides a of interact and on scramblase is is not available results. PS bleeding factors, to If inactive, and these

5.10. concerned might girl the infestation their treated Several of rats, pellets. parents for after 3-year-old an ingesting she had days having be poison-containing home that become a the of the the department. calling After emergency they her Hotline, to Poison take FII, and activated reveal a partial FIX, time of decreased FVII, Blood prolonged prothrombin and and thromboplastin FX. concentration studies a vitamin of a K Why be approach might patient? this to of administration the treatment rational

super warfarins, drugs Many in have that the half-life a body. long poisons rodent are Warfarin of proteases inhibits γ-carboxyglutamate, the Glacontaining and decreased as (production γ-carboxylation clotting proteins cascade. the Gla, reported residues), clotting of or the are [Note: proteins.] anticlotting are also and S Proteins of C Gla-containing K as rational antagonist, to K of warfarin vitamin vitamin a is a Because functions approach treatment. administration

I. I. Cases Integrative

interconnected initially are, in pathways, presented network. linked fact, Metabolic an isolation, form to in studies four result case network. how in in illustrate a integrative following perturbation process in one processes perturbations The other can the of

Pain 1: Case Chest

duration, at local Patient is brought hospital Presentation: man hours’ 5 substernal ambulance BJ, his 35-year-old AM. by a to pain ~2 severe with of chest dyspnea by (shortness (sweating), The accompanied and diaphoresis breath), of is nausea. pain

BJ in chest were the last they exertional duration. and History: but few episodes of less Focused reports short pain severe of months, eats only his and wife alcohol diet, (2–3 walks most “typical” rarely, smokes with drinks He per day), a packs weekends. been blood normal. pressure His has died and that Family 45 father disease aunt heart of reveals paternal age and history at 39 his years, respectively. in (age 31 younger brother said health. to His and good mother be are years)

Examination Physical pale distress and is pain. is chest BJ (Pertinent clammy due and Findings): to in Blood respiratory pressure and elevated. are rate skin right see (corneal his Lipid on deposits image) his image). on the (xanthelasmas; noted and see eyelids arcus; of around the periphery left and corneas under are (xanthomas) deposits his are tendons detected. No on

(MI). is BJ’s Test myocardial a electrocardiogram with Pertinent infarction consistent Results: coronary severe stenosis (narrowing) Angiography of reveals several areas of arteries. Initial the include results from following: the laboratory clinical

H L High; = = Low. prior [Note: hours the for draw.] not to eaten had blood BJ ~8

(decreased a blood (death) secondary blood blood vessel a MI, of most irreversible by necrosis supply), is of by muscle the heart commonly Diagnosis: occlusion (thrombus). to the (blockage) clot ischemia caused type hyperlipidemia. also to familial subsequently have hypercholesterolemia BJ as is determined (FH), IIa known heterozygous

and O2, a medication, clots and (thrombolytics) drugs reduce given vasodilator, Treatment: clotting blood dissolve is to Immediate BJ (antithrombotics). pain

acid daily part and and counseling and would on the cessation Lipid-lowering long-term Long-Term niacin); high-potency statins, exercise, example, sequestrants, bile be β-blockers; aspirin; (for Treatment: of drugs treatment nutrition, [BA] smoking plan.

(>50% of for with them hypercholesterolemia risk) risk FH disease premature LDL normal that a three receptors heterozygous to coronary (CHD). Prognosis: Patients normal) (two have puts number heart the and of at times high ~50% functional patients hypercholesterolemia with However, FH. have of <5%

g/day) Nutrition sterols for their recommendations unsaturated individuals to soluble fats, calories fiber include g/day) fats (2 cholesterol and <200 plant mg/day, <7% (10–20 effects. saturated heterozygous with total fats hypocholesterolemic of for adding and substituting for saturated and Dietary to limiting FH Nugget: Fiber excretion. BA increases results cholesterol-rich in to This BA the uptake substrate synthesis. LDL for of supply increased hepatic absorption cholesterol sterols the intestine. in Plant decrease

chromosome gene mutations function. of the affect hundreds for FH LDL Genetics the (on caused amount different in that and/or receptor receptor by is Gem: 19) more disease heterozygotes. in FH than autosomal-dominant an seriously are which is affected homozygotes Heterozygous population. FH incidence general an of has the ~1:500 in risk with It increased associated cardiovascular disease. is of treatment. would for BJ identify of Genetic the screening affected individuals of first-degree relatives

best Choose ONE answer. the Review Questions:

RQ1. Triacylglycerols glycerol-based are lipids. of following is Which glycerol-based a lipid? the also GM2 Ganglioside A.

Phosphatidylcholine B. C. PGI2 Prostaglandin

D. Sphingomyelin

RQ2. E. D Vitamin of patients benefit to are with Statins they: hypercholesterolemia because

step by a novo biosynthesis A hydroxymethylglutaryl A. cholesterol of coenzyme regulated de decrease CoA) rate-limiting (HMG reductase. and inhibiting

regulatory the of cleavage–activating protein-2 endoplasmic protein the the with (SCAP) expression gene Golgi. B. the membrane SREBP decrease complex (SREBP element–binding 2) preventing movement receptor the to of sterol of the for the in the of from by reticulum LDL membrane

H2O. + to of oxidation CO2 C. the cholesterol increase

in circulation, the synthesis. D. bile thereby absorption to interfere the from liver up of BA in salts causing blood take the for cholesterol with the use enterohepatic

cholesterol reduce synthesis. E. by increasing steroid vitamin D hormone and

RQ3. reductase. inhibitors CoA HMG of competitive are Statins is the inhibitors following about statements of correct? competitive Which

A. irreversible Competitive inhibitors examples inhibitors. of are

B. the maximal both (Km) Michaelis the inhibitors Competitive velocity and constant apparent increase (Vmax). apparent

on Km effect increase C. Vmax. and the inhibitors Competitive no have the apparent

Km inhibitors the the apparent D. Competitive both and apparent decrease

Vmax.

the the Vmax. inhibitors no Competitive decrease and E. on Km effect have apparent RQ4. In production a of a blood blood a forms plug MI, clot vessel that an platelet result meshwork. a injury leads and a of as to fibrin to preventing of blood flow occludes blood The the clot and, delivery vessel, therefore, O2. the of clot Destruction restores blood flow. (thrombolysis) the one an thrombolytic example of of is following Which agent? a

A. Activated complex C protein

III B. Antithrombin

Aspirin C.

D. Factor XIII

E. Heparin

plasminogen F. Tissue activator

G. K Vitamin

Warfarin H.

RQ5. results Decreased in perfusion tissue (decreased availability). O2 hypoxia the: to normoxia, in hypoxia Relative

to upregulated electron transport provide for synthesis. will ATP A. protons be chain

(NAD+) B. (NADH) adenine the increase. of ratio the form reduced dinucleotide to oxidized form will of nicotinamide

pyruvate be will complex active. C. dehydrogenase

in of increased D. be process will substrate-level the phosphorylation cytosol.

provide tricarboxylic upregulated occur. E. needed phosphorylation to be for to the reducing will cycle equivalents oxidative acid

RQ6. receptor automated chain Genetic gene. region reaction–based screening polymerase 18 the via BJ’s of of amplification mutation of promoter relatives and by by sequencing followed first-degree exons the LDL analysis the would accomplished be This process the: would involve

of DNA complementary (cDNA). use generation A. and

of DNA B. dideoxynucleotides. with synthesis initiation

of isolation from cells. genomic C. germ DNA

D. labeled fluorescently use of nucleotides.

TQ1. would expected B-100? an apolipoprotein what phenotype familial an LDL with the individual receptors, with Relative familial defective in be to defective individual isoform receptor? binds only With its E-2, the apolipoprotein that poorly

TQ2. prescribed? was Why aspirin pathway Hint: aspirin? lipid by metabolism of affected is What

TQ3. to Heart energy needs. meet normally uses muscle its metabolism aerobic However, anaerobic in hypoxia, is increased. glycolysis for this of allosteric activator effect? is responsible What glycolysis the glycolysis? of end what be hypoxia, will With product

TQ4. reasons the HDL, is One smoking HDL the BJ cessation and level raise the of changes reduces for risk these encouraging exercise elevated for and that CHD. of for in a How reduce rise for the CHD? risk HDL does

2: Hypoglycemia Severe Fasting Case

movements makes “twitching” is before about mother he Patient just JS whose feedings. Presentation: a 4-month-old is concerned the boy are eating. She disappear tells week the pediatrician the that morning, movements and shortly started apparent ago, ~1 after most the in

the delivery. Focused of product a pregnancy History: is JS normal and birth. normal He at appeared percentile On been both 30th since weight growth length he for at charts, and the birth. has his up date. His are immunizations to last ago. few ate hours a JS

JS (Pertinent Findings): clammy feels and Examination to Physical touch. sleepy the appears rate elevated. is His respiratory temperature normal. is His nontender. JS be abdomen has a protuberant, appears that to firm is liver right and is below the costal His smooth. palpable margin cm 4 and symmetrical. kidneys enlarged are His

Results: Test Pertinent

H High; L Low. = =

the is sent to children’s evaluation. further regional hospital for JS Ultrasound studies and confirm no tumors. of show renomegaly hepatomegaly evidence and biopsy A is liver performed. hepatocytes The distended. are large (primarily and reveals of lipid Staining triacylglycerol) amounts carbohydrate. in and is amount Liver structure. normal glycogen in elevated the of and of assay detergent normal in the activity kidneys. endoplasmic reticular reveals treated membrane liver an using <10% 6-phosphatase, with liver homogenate (ER) Enzyme the of enzyme glucose the

Gierke von deficiency storage type 6-phosphatase disease). [GSD] glucose JS (glycogen Diagnosis: Ia, disease has

and into range. rose the glucose glucose given (Immediate): JS was normal Treatment intravenously, level blood his as below the to progressed, well fell normal. it However, day lactate. glucagon blood increased on effect but glucose blood no had of Administration levels glucose. infusion constant to able JS’s of be by levels glucose maintained were blood

are deficiency starting develop for at second Prognosis: in with hepatic decade glucose 6-phosphatase hepatic the increased life and of risk adenomas Individuals carcinoma. impaired can and Kidney in function is result failure. glomerular kidney before puberty. occurs gout, Patients but risk for increased developing this at rarely are

to the his maintain blood medical in normal designed levels glucose nutrition range. is Nugget: Long-term JS Nutrition therapy for feedings slowly hydrolyzed) cornstarch (pump that carbohydrate uncooked advised. are and (every in glucose hours) rich nighttime of (provided by daytime Frequent 2–3 is nasogastric infusion assisted) can they galactose problems. recommended exacerbate fructose and lactate, is and to Avoidance the because metabolized metabolic of glycolytic intermediates which are Calcium prescribed. vitamin are supplements D and

to disorder chromosome caused for autosomal-recessive >100 an Genetics located the mutations known on 17. Gem: 6-phosphatase Ia is gene by glucose GSD United It has the of an 1:100,000 accounts all for of cases GSD incidence of ~25% States. in and newborns. in is of genetic It hypoglycemia the one of causes few GSD routinely in for Ia is newborns. not screened the the translocase [Note: the moves into is of GSD cause 6phosphate ER that glucose of Deficiency Ib. and are seen.] neutropenia Hypoglycemia

Questions: ONE best answer. the Choose Review

RQ1. is JS hypoglycemic because:

of the A. a in or from result deficiency cannot gluconeogenesis glycogenolysis 6-phosphatase. either glucose free produced (nonphosphorylated) be as glucose

B. and dephosphorylated glycogen inactive, be is cannot degraded. and phosphorylase glycogen

is gluconeogenesis be and cannot dephosphorylated C. lipase and generated. substrates acid fatty hormone-sensitive inactive, for

decrease resulting in of the upregulates increased the in ratio transporters kidneys, the glucose insulin/glucagon D. blood and uptake glucose. liver in

RQ2. can cause in resulting chronic supplements demineralization, osteopenia. calcium because JS acidosis was prescribed bone was D prescribed vitamin Vitamin (1,25-diOH-D3) because D: also

release in a calcium with of membrane stores. protein–coupled binds trisphosphate Gq and intracellular causes inositol from receptors A. rise

be diet. and, be cannot the synthesized therefore, supplied in B. by must humans

absorption a of fat-soluble that increases vitamin calcium. is intestinal C.

transporter D. calbindin, coenzyme-prosthetic in the for the intestine. a calcium is group

RQ3. seen in JS are amount result an glycogen organs. and in the these in hepatomegaly The of renomegaly the stored of primarily increase for in these is the What organs? glycogen accumulation basis

A. downregulated, glucose glycogenesis. to which Glycolysis is pushes

B. spares of oxidation Increased fatty glucose for glycogenesis. acids

6-phosphate glycogen of Glucose is b. activator an synthase C. allosteric

favors insulin/glucagon D. in rise the ratio glycogenesis. The

RQ4. 6-phosphatase an integral the membrane. ER protein Glucose is of is the about proteins Which following such correct? statements of

A. glycosylated, extends If is that into on the the carbohydrate cytosol. the of the protein portion

B. in free They ribosomes cytosol. are synthesized on that the are

C. hydrophilic membrane-spanning consists amino domain acids. of The

is sequence. signal targeting terminal hydrophobic amino D. an initial The signal

TQ1. for JS’s the is likely twitching movements? What reason TQ2. Why treated was liver with homogenate detergent? the about Think where Hint: the located. enzyme is TQ3. unaffected by glucagon? level blood is JS’s glucose Why blood glucose? role normal Hint: glucagon a individuals the in What of who experience drop in is

TQ4. lactate elevated Why and in urate glycogen a metabolism? are disorder of the Hint: result decreased? why Pi is It (Pi), of phosphate in inorganic decrease but a is

TQ5. are triacylglycerols and cholesterol elevated? A.Why for Hint: their the is carbon Glucose synthesis. primary source bodies B.Why elevated? are not ketone

and Case Hyperglycemia 3: Hyperketonemia

in 40-year-old MW, disoriented, was husband. the by woman, state Presentation: her a Patient a hospital brought to confused

has the noted 1 alert (T1D) had History: medical MW 24 As bracelet, type Focused diabetes her on last years. for in 2 that this years. reports her emergency Her is first husband medical

Findings): and as (such breathing pressure) dehydration deep, dry signs displayed skin poor (such and Examination [Kussmaul of membranes acidosis MW Physical respiration]). and turgor, (Pertinent mucous rapid as skin, blood low Her had fruity odor. breath a faintly Her temperature was normal.

for strongly and Rapid, tests glucose Test and positive Pertinent negative for were bedside Results: acetoacetate protein. shown blood are tests below: Results by the clinical on laboratory performed

H=High;L=Low.

(UTI). revealed urinary examination infection a Microscopic of her tract urine

Diagnosis: is ketoacidosis MW by that in diabetic (DKA) UTI. precipitated a was the infections as risk such increases [Note: UTI.] Diabetes for

with (IV). Treatment: was saline normal rehydrated Immediate given intravenously MW was She insulin also given IV. measured Blood were glucose, periodically. bodies, electrolytes ketone and Antibiotic started. was treatment of UTI her

artery stroke) complications and and Diabetes increases Treatment: disease (such complications neuropathy). risk and microvascular coronary macrovascular nephropathy, as Long-Term as (such retinopathy, for the monitoring complications for these continued. be will Ongoing

Prognosis: States. by seventh cause United disease Diabetes the in death is of the leading a to relative expectancy diabetes Individuals with reduced without those life have diabetes.

Monitoring blood is control. Nutrition primary carbohydrates intake glucose Nugget: of in total fruits. and come grains, Carbohydrates vegetables, whole from should legumes, encouraged. rich and ω-3 acids Low-fat are fish nuts and dairy fatty in products Intake and should minimized. trans saturated fats of be

characteristic cells of Gem: of pancreatic Genetics destruction T1D. Autoimmune β is the 6 that genetic confer chromosome human-leukocyte association. loci T1D, on region antigen Of (HLA) for the risk the has strongest in the involved region The majority genes the immune of response. are in HLA

the Choose ONE Review Questions: answer. best

RQ1. the correct? following is of T1D Which statements concerning

A. hemoglobin or Diagnosis of (HbA1c) the blood. glycated can made level by measuring the be glucose in

B. individual likely stress, physiologic test urine an reducing with of would During negative for T1D periods of sugars. the

a sedentary C. T1D with associated and obesity lifestyle. is

and seen T1D result The to both metabolic insulin from glucagon. abnormalities in D. characteristic insensitivity

glucose (euglycemia). blood allows exogenous normalization E. Treatment with insulin of

RQ2. of is greater DKA utilization. the than when body rate rate production ketone occurs of the body concerning of the statements ketone metabolism correct? is following Which Ketone bodies:

(CoA) acetyl made coenzyme the are glucose. primarily mitochondria of A. produced in from A by oxidation

B. tissues, acetyl conversion by the CoA. liver, to many particularly after utilized are

fruity acetoacetate, can impart C. the a odor include breath. to which

D. the for through albumin transport blood. require

the load energy that utilized the metabolism proton to are in add organic of can E. acids body.

RQ3. (FA) acid generation the Adipose of ketone by followed of the products for lipolysis required β-oxidation bodies. fatty is concerning following and of Which generation the is use correct? statements FA the of

CoA. FA is β-oxidation by Mitochondrial inhibited A. of malonyl

B. insulin. adipose of upregulated is FA Production by lipolysis from

CoA C. complex. The pyruvate use dehydrogenase acetyl of favors product by activating the for of the FA β-oxidation pyruvate gluconeogenesis

The by FA gluconeogenesis. reducing equivalents D. utilizes of β-oxidation generated

taken for are E. by and by brain lipolysis The produced energy. the oxidized FA up

TQ1. At hypoinsulinemic, was she was MW insulin. and given admission, Why in did hyperglycemia? result MW’s hypoinsulinemia Hint: in metabolism? of insulin What role the is glucose

TQ2. (glucosuria)? Why urine in there glucose MW’s is How glucosuria related to dehydrated the state? is her TQ3. being Why being from tricarboxylic the in oxidized than FA used β-oxidation acetyl CoA rather of cycle? majority acid for the the is ketogenesis TQ4. negative MW balance the nitrogen when Was positive she brought in to hospital? was or

TQ5. to is apparent in response What the MW? DKA occurring likely in is kidney? What the response body? the In toxic to how conversion ammonia urea, removed is addition from to Hint:

TQ6. with glucose true of the about FA ketone oxidation? stress physiologic impaired bodies What would in levels during individuals and periods be of

Hyperketonemia, Case 4: Liver Hypoglycemia, and Dysfunction

slurred Emergency a and AK, off speech, of male (loss (ED). with Presentation: ataxia the abdominal dropped at pain, coordination), was Department 59-year-old Patient skeletal muscle

ED known visits. Focused is AK the History: previous from to staff of excessive has history 6year He a alcohol chronic, consumption. not drugs. illicit take to is known He he drinking the ED day has At or past that visit, reports in so. been heavily AK this anything He having cannot eaten time. recall that in recent of no apparent. blood is is evidence There but vomiting,

was physical Examination emaciated examination Findings): (Pertinent remarkable for appearance. Physical The AK’s the underweight determined which be index 17.5, put (His to body was him later category.) mass in (red in facial blood color) in were skin (telangiectasia). due the dilated vessels His erythematous to cheeks movement Eye was normal. nor was fluid seen. to retention) (jaundice) Neither edema icterus due (swelling enlarged. The slightly liver was acetoacetate). and tests hyperketonemia Bedside hypoglycemia (as revealed was clinical drawn Blood the to sent laboratory. and

Test Pertinent Results:

= the Low. under H influence; = driving High; DUI L =

anemia revealed and (see a right count Additional blood blood Tests: Complete image). smear macrocytic (CBC) were B12 ordered. levels Folate and

diagnosed with Diagnosis: alcoholism. AK is

Treatment and given (Immediate): intravenously. glucose Thiamine were

States. Alcoholism in dependence) is third (alcohol common of United cause the Prognosis: death the preventable most some at liver for increased pancreatitis, gastrointestinal and cirrhosis, alcoholism are People with risk bleeding, cancers.

intake Nutrition of and as are alcoholism for decreased vitamin absorption. a Those Nugget: risk result with at deficiencies syndrome Wernicke-Korsakoff serious neurologic have effects. B1) is its can Thiamine as such deficiency consequences common with (vitamin and

transfer the (such α-keto by coenzyme acids (TPP), as Thiamine dehydrogenase-mediated well pyrophosphate is pathway. ketol pentose in for as pyruvate) required as the interconversions of in form, the transketolase two-carbon groups oxidation the sugar the phosphate of reversible

of cytosolic, acetate hepatic, alcohol to the by is aldehyde dehydrogenase enzyme the dehydrogenase Genetics Gem: ethanol (ALDH2). (ADH), Acetaldehyde, (NAD+)-requiring NAD+-requiring product adenine nicotinamide by oxidation dinucleotide mitochondrial, the oxidized have essentially majority polymorphism (SNP) The European renders ALDH2 or a of single of nucleotide not individuals African) inactive. heritage (but East Asian that This to facial amounts of results in aldehyde-induced of and intoxication mild small ethanol. after flushing consumption moderate

Review answer. the best ONE Questions: Choose

RQ1. of metabolic nicotinamide dinucleotide adenine (NAD+) AK in in are reduced excessive both an mitochondria. Many its the of form the result chronic in consequences the of (NADH) the oxidized to seen consumption ratio cytoplasm of and alcohol increase in rise the NADH of of mitochondrial concerning the is statements effects correct? following Which the

increased. oxidation Fatty A. acid is

is B. increased. Gluconeogenesis

Lipolysis C. inhibited. is

tricarboxylic The acid D. inhibited. cycle is

increased. to reduction The of in is malate shuttle oxaloacetate E. malate–aspartate the

RQ2. important P450 and by cytochrome Ethanol can be also example. oxidized (CYP) CYP2E1 enzymes, is an which ethanol inducible, reactive oxygen species of is metabolism ethanol. its (ROS) in CYP2E1, generates

correct? concerning Which of the CYP following is proteins the statements

heme-containing CYP proteins are A. dioxygenases.

reactions. B. in detoxification the inner proteins CYP mitochondrial of involved are membrane

and are hormones, of endoplasmic smooth CYP the synthesis of the calcitriol. proteins in C. steroid involved bile membrane reticular acids,

as by such ROS oxidized D. glutathione be can CYP2E1 peroxide by hydrogen generated peroxidase.

phosphate the is proteins provides dinucleotide adenine E. the an CYP equivalents source The that pathway of functional of the (NADPH) for and needed pentose phosphate important activity regeneration of glutathione. nicotinamide reducing

RQ3. the the serotonin is functions levels as Alcohol in to system, where of modulate central nervous monoamine the a known neurotransmitter. is of following statements about the serotonin Which correct? is: Serotonin

associated anxiety A. depression. and with

the also degraded oxidase, methylation by monoamine degrades catecholamines. which via B.

platelets. by C. activated released

a tetrahydrobiopterin-requiring pyridoxal a a process synthesized and two-step utilizes from tyrosine that hydroxylase requiring carboxylase. in D. phosphate–

RQ4. leading activation excessive of gland a Chronic, alcohol consumption by condition is of that of enzymes. a results the pancreatitis, autodigestion from pancreatic inflammatory of painful premature acute cause statements pancreas following correct? of is the concerning Which the

pancreas Autodigestion in would the to the in in result expected proteins of a be pancreatic A. blood. decrease

B. changes from with steatorrhea characteristic acute chronic that individuals diabetes to who progress findings. pancreatic expected pancreatitis, are decreased function, in and result In the structural

lumen. intestinal to exocrine in lower secretes C. pancreas to pH secretin, response In the the protons the

in seen may D. also hypercholesterolemia. be Pancreatitis individuals with

TQ1. A. does NADH in effect What cytosolic with glycolysis? metabolism have ethanol the seen rise on is required Hint: in What coenzyme glycolysis?

B. relate seen alcohol-dependent liver individuals? (hepatic How fatty commonly the in to this steatosis) does TQ2. ethanol? might their individuals gouty to history Why of advised consumption with a of be attacks reduce TQ3. prothrombin might affected individuals? Why alcohol-dependent be time in TQ4. be Folate B12 and that vitamin may a those anemia macrocytic seen with cause in deficiencies alcoholism. before it macrocytic B12 with is measure supplementing folate Why individual with advisable levels an to anemia? in vitamin

Review Case Questions to Answers 1:

diphosphatecholine. glycerol-based phospholipid RQ1.Answer diacylglycerol is B. phosphate (phosphatidic acid) a cytidine derived = from Phosphatidylcholine and are a lipids with Gangliosides derived ceramides, backbone. from sphingosine arachidonic series from carbon fatty PGI2) Prostaglandins acid 20 acid. derived as of are the the 2 polyunsaturated (such is Sphingomyelin derived sphingophospholipid a ceramide. from the from derived intermediate an in is biosynthetic the cholesterol. sterol for pathway Vitamin D reduction adenine figure thereby dinucleotide A the (see reductase, biosynthesis to inhibit hydroxymethylglutaryl of mevalonate decreasing coenzyme phosphate and nicotinamide (HMG RQ2.Answer (NADPH)-dependent = A. HMG preventing cholesterol Statins CoA) CoA below). membrane. the SREBP (SREBP-2) from sterol activating with cleavage– results reticular (SCAP) movement The by content in Golgi caused complex the of cholesterol protein element–binding decrease endoplasmic statins regulatory membrane in the to in protein-2 upstream the CoA moves the for increasing sterol HMG reductase low-density receptor, transcription regulatory (LDL) binds cleaved, to the genes the of SREBP-2 and element factor generating lipoprotein is their nucleus expression. and a to that the to nucleus CO2 + to Humans steroid are unable degrade

H2O. liver, Bile such the by excretion. cholestyramine, their acid the increasing absorption (BA) prevent of bile as sequestrants, salts thereby via the receptor takes cholesterol BA, blood reducing cholesterol thereby then it to liver The levels. and LDL up make uses biosynthetic intermediate hormones cholesterol the cholesterol, synthesized and (7dehydrocholesterol) synthesized in are vitamin from from an is Steroid skin pathway. D in would Therefore, be well. expected of decrease synthesis production to their inhibition cholesterol as

site to as prevent bind the same Competitive inhibitors substrate = from the the S RQ3.Answer (S) C. binding. and apparent one or the gives This in in velocity results an half the that constant, (Michaelis concentration increase S of Km that maximal [Vmax]). Vmax additional adding by unchanged at the right). can figure However, the inhibition is substrate, be because reversed (see is and Vmax effect Km. apparent inhibitors no the It noncompetitive that on decrease have

(fibrinolysis), fibrin plasminogen the plasminogen degrades = plasmin that activator converts (TPA) (thrombolysis). thereby RQ4.Answer Tissue degrading to clot F. cyclooxygenase, Aspirin, antiplatelet drug. an inhibitor of an is and from by the Antithrombin potentiated removes (ATIII) blood, its is action III heparin. thrombin complex proteins protein (APC) accessory FVIIIa. C cleaves the (F)Va and factor Activated involved in ATIII and are APC anticoagulation. FXIII meshwork. a that the fibrin transglutaminase cross-links is for FX. vitamin FII, of γ-carboxylation Vitamin a required FIX, is the FVII, and K fat-soluble ATP. provides the vitamin hypoxia, In form Warfarin functional, substrate-level reduced glycolysis of K. prevents regeneration D. phosphorylation in of = RQ5.Answer phosphorylation Oxidative the inhibited of O2. lack by is by phosphorylation the oxidative electron of inhibited. rate synthesis of cellular rate the controls Because ATP transport is respiration, inhibits the oxidized (NAD+) form resulting the of pyruvate and the the The in acid form cycle to nicotinamide dehydrogenase the adenine reduced complex. tricarboxylic ratio rise (NADH) of dinucleotide be of D. determined. = nucleotides base Fluorescently interest DNA the the of to labeled sequence RQ6.Answer allow messenger and not RNA contain (cDNA) generated processed the Complementary DNA from is promoter. would and, the DNA nucleotides lack will the form joins the 3′-OH 3′→5′-phosphodiester synthesis. bond needed Dideoxynucleotides that thus, terminate to source be Genomic DNA isolated a of from DNA. white would the cells sample obtained blood from the

Questions Answers Case Thought to 1:

the phenotype be same. would TQ1.The altered In (apo) ligand the for familial and defective number in are B-100, but decreased. receptor function, binding receptor the such the LDL that apolipoprotein normal to receptors is is of results blood increased in LDL Decreased levels binding the ligand–receptor in hypercholesterolemia. with thereby gain-of-function phenotype the mutation recycling would its that of decreases The PCSK9, same be individuals with the in LDL a the increasing protease [Note: degradation.] receptor, to chylomicron E-2 the cholesterol-rich accumulate isoform, apo and would lipoproteins remnants With blood. intermediate-density in PGI2 synthesis and, as platelets. of TXA2 such irreversibly cyclooxygenase the (COX) vascular in such endothelial therefore, inhibits activated TQ2.Aspirin as prostaglandins cells, in (PG), and thromboxanes (TX), these promotes inhibits and vasoconstriction of whereas TXA2 PGI2 formation events. plug, a platelet synthesizing cannot COX. Because they anucleate, are platelets this more by overcome inhibition nucleus. However, endothelial have a cells the inhibits platelet. then, clots of life production Aspirin, TXA2 blood the formation of by for of preventing in O2 monophosphate TQ3.The causes in in (as decrease a decrease the thus, phosphorylation) decrease in increase a and, (AMP). an oxidative adenosine of result ATP AMP regulated allosterically enzyme of the glycolysis. key activates phosphofructokinase-1, glycolysis substrate-level The the rise of ATP production by increases in phosphorylation. also the the ratio forms of to of oxidized It increases reduced NAD. as anaerobic pyruvate to is produced to conditions, lactate by lactate dehydrogenase glycolysis reduced Under is in NAD+. oxidized NADH required glycolysis. NAD+ for is continued ATP oxidative produced glycolysis relative to conditions. the anaerobic of fewer under are per rate phosphorylation substrate-level molecules Because compensatory of phosphorylation, a there substrate in molecule in is increase

functions lipoprotein in TQ4.High-density transport. reverse (HDL) cholesterol from brings to figure and (peripheral) next tissues page). nonhepatic the arteries) liver it endothelial (for takes It on cholesterol (see of layer example, the the efflux The transporter cholesterol of ABCA1 mediates to the HDL. requires extracellular apo esterified that as A-1 by a coenzyme. The cholesterol is acyltransferase lecithin–cholesterol (LCAT) (CETP) to lipoproteins transferred very-low-density by cholesteryl ester exchange cholesteryl for triacylglycerol. is protein in transfer Some ester (VLDL) remainder receptor of hepatocytes. scavenger on taken by surface The a up (SR-B1) is the synthesis can from in liver the the acids. use The bile cholesterol of HDL cells risk cholesterol from Removal accumulation endothelial disease. (as prevents cholesteryl heart ester), of the its cholesterol or of decreasing tissues the liver to LDL peripheral from to carries liver.] contrast, cholesterol the In [Note: or back

Review 2: Answers Case to Questions

A. RQ1.Answer = released glycogenolysis generated 6phosphate blood glucose Deficiency from prevents being (see of 6-phosphatase and figure gluconeogenesis by below). into the glucose and the dephosphorylated Blood hypoglycemia results. and glucose levels fall, fasting severe, a his months, [Note: less JS’s appeared 4 are age because, feedings only at frequent.] recently symptoms

activation which stimulates glycogen and leads of of that and kinase phosphorylation activates release Hypoglycemia to glucagon, glycogen phosphorylase. phosphorylates phosphorylase leads of phosphorylation hormone-sensitive and activation Epinephrine also and is lipase. to released However, as (FA) fatty substrates typical cannot acids for gluconeogenesis. serve liver insulin glucose in insensitive. are The and transporters the kidneys

a D a is that steroid RQ2.Answer fat-soluble as C. hormone. vitamin functions Vitamin = intracellular In a calbindin, of the (Ca2+) it intestine (see protein calcium right). figure the its increases transcription complex gene at with nuclear for transporter in receptor, to does produce bind and does not second membrane receptor a Vitamin not messengers. D intermediate 7dehydrocholesterol. ultraviolet synthesis, of an in be of action cholesterol by synthesized the on the It can light skin functions only and fat-soluble E, Of K), D, vitamins as the a coenzyme. K (A,

positive inhibited (phosphorylated) the effector 6-phosphate covalently allosteric a = glycogen synthase Glucose is RQ3.Answer b. C. of increased glucose the 6-phosphate, and activated, With the the in liver and is both in glycogen are rise glycogen kidneys. stores synthesis of availability glycolysis. The glucose also 6-phosphate increased drives increase in The substrates provides triacylglycerols (TAG). lipogenesis, FA of thereby synthesis glycolysis and increasing for insulin/glucagon the hypoglycemia, high. In not low, is ratio

hydrophobic by proteins sequence. an the targeted D. initially are terminal amino = Membrane to endoplasmic RQ4.Answer signal reticulum (ER) most common the Glycosylation is in posttranslational proteins. modification found proteins membrane the found of of membrane. on face The portion the is extracellular glycosylated domain acids. of consists ~22 membrane-spanning hydrophobic The amino the lysosomes synthesized or Golgi, on associated for secretion lumen, destined ER or Proteins the with are membranes, for ER. ribosomes

2: Case Answers Questions to Thought

the the in rise response epinephrine. by to is of adrenergic the result twitching is mediated TQ1.The and hypoglycemia tremor response and The includes adrenergic sweating. in the can delivery seizures, death. coma, brain Neuroglycopenia that (impaired of to function brain) and glucose of to lead results impairment develop the Neuroglycopenic symptoms if hyperglycemia persists. amphipathic [nonpolar] hydrophilic (that and they both have [polar] molecules TQ2.Detergents are hydrophobic is, regions). membrane membranes, disrupting structure. thereby solubilize Detergents rather membrane substrate the to allow of ER, ER the substrate the the the into 6-phosphate were translocase phosphatase, the the would needed If problem phosphatase. move glucose disruption the access to than pancreatic G hypoglycemia, from released peptide binds α a in cells plasma protein–coupled hepatocytes. its TQ3.Glucagon, hormone receptor on membrane guanosine cyclic adenosine (cAMP) subunit and is adenylyl αs is by that associated diphosphate ATP. activates monophosphate replaced triphosphate), separates (guanosine from the protein from G and generates The cyclase trimeric the β γ subunits, activated of cAMP activates phosphorylase glycogen (PKA) and phosphorylates and phosphorylates which kinase, activates kinase that A protein phosphorylase. activates glycogen glycogen, 6-phosphate. generating degrades phosphorylase to The glucose is that converted 1-phosphate glucose glucose the here process deficiency, degradative stops With below). figure (see 6-phosphatase cause to Consequently, a rise blood glucose. is in unable glucagon administration of would [Note: be ineffective.] Epinephrine similarly

decreased 6-phosphate. glucose it glycolytic availability intermediates as of because is phosphate upregulation as result by trapped (Pi) a TQ4.The in of glycolysis phosphorylated inorganic the the is rise of ability (ADP) the ATP, adenosine trapping (AMP). Pi and ATP decreases because in is diphosphate in adenosine elevated fall of rise phosphorylate a monophosphate the to causes the Urate to urate. degraded The to is AMP a rise in drives in pathway, Additionally, (from ribulose phosphate of availability resulting a 5-phosphate) in 5-phosphate consequently, the ribose rise glucose synthesis. pentose 6-phosphate purine the and, Nicotinamide rises. dinucleotide (NADPH) adenine phosphate also page). urate Purines to figure degraded on beyond (see are the need next made Pi the decrease in activity increased structure.] a resulting [Note: normal storage in with phosphorylase, glycogen reduces of The glycogen of decrease a these in to cellular a processes coupled. of ATP because (respiratory control) of result as elevated respiration results phosphorylation in Lactate ADP being the decrease in is I reduced adenine transport be dinucleotide from Complex a electron cannot nicotinamide of As consequence, chain. by (NADH) oxidized the glycolysis is NADH coenzyme oxidized reduced by is as with lactate its Instead, dehydrogenase it pyruvate cytosolic to lactate. result glycolysis.] a as in increased of [Note: increase the Pyruvate is and leading metabolic The increased pH production protons caused to acid). acidosis of here (H+) a lactate by (low releasing ionizes, causes rate. increased respiratory compensation an Respiratory

in results glycerol hepatic availability TQ5.Increased for of synthesis. TAG glycolysis increased 3phosphate pyruvate decarboxylated Additionally, acetyl oxidatively be to coenzyme (CoA). of generated A the glycolysis in will some the However, is CoA the the by and in citrate. cycle is NADH, acetyl tricarboxylic transported inhibited acid the to as rise cytosol in cytosol results CoA of acid synthesis. increased acetyl The the in rise fatty (FA) that activator (ACC). carboxylase of Recall CoA citrate allosteric an is acetyl FA the The carnitine oxidation product step. malonyl I ACC inhibits palmitoyltransferase of at not FA do body CoA oxidation Because generates levels ketone the for substrate rise. ketogenesis, mitochondrial acetyl hepatic FA in of esterified out glycerol gets the an sent as very-low-density liver (VLDL). The to the lipoproteins that backbone, in components gets TAG resulting of increase of lipolysis blood. FA free The the in results release hypoglycemia epinephrine into and the of activation [Note: with TAG of release FA TAG excess are synthesis.] hepatic The used in oxidized, the with for a The acetyl cholesterol CoA is also synthesis. substrate increase the hyperlipidemia (see figure results seen in Thus, in glycolysis in JS below). the

Case Questions 3: to Review Answers

= by is A. answer RQ1.Correct characterized Diabetes hyperglycemia. glycosylation in hyperglycemia can hemoglobin (Hb), Chronic (glycation) result nonenzymatic of the HbA1c. producing Therefore, or measurement of glucose

to the HbA1c diabetes. used blood is diagnose in in physiologic glucose. of catecholamines) (for example, rise secretion to results urinary hormones infection), response a the counterregulatory in as a stress blood In tract (such Glucose reducing is a sugar. by obesity and and a insensitivity diabetes caused resistance). lifestyle with (insulin sedentary insulin (T2D) It is type associated is is that to 2 result of as insulin lack destruction by autoimmune of cells. β caused of is the pancreatic a T1D Even tight control a glycemic on individuals do of achieve euglycemia. program not E. of answer ionization load 3-hydroxybutyrate acetoacetate proton their the ketone = RQ2.Correct body. to are and The acids, bodies contributes the organic and generated the page). coenzyme β-oxidation are cells on (CoA) of next bodies A acids ([FA]; mitochondria figure from the acetyl the in Ketone of liver using fatty primarily made see soluble, water transporter. a they they not Because require are do of acetyl from The molecules conversion succinyl liver to which lacks enzyme thiophorase, moves it cannot the use CoA to acetoacetate CoA them CoA. for because two in that the It odor. released can the a fruity acetone impart breath is

the RQ3.Correct I. FA inhibits Lipolysis hormone inhibition ratio synthesis, of carnitine FA occurs an Malonyl insulin/counterregulatory of A. decreases. CoA, intermediate when = palmitoyltransferase β-oxidation answer through dehydrogenase of β-oxidation, and product of carboxylase. PDH inhibits pyruvate through FA the pyruvate activates CoA, the kinase (PDH) Acetyl complex activation gluconeogenesis. Acetyl pushes pyruvate CoA, then, to β-Oxidation (NADH), required nicotinamide reducing reduced for adenine generates equivalent dinucleotide the gluconeogenesis. by the for brain. FA are energy catabolized readily not

3: Questions Case to Thought Answers

adipose TQ1.Hypoinsulinemia by because and tissue. of hyperglycemia the required uptake muscle for glucose is insulin in results blood movement the sites. glucose storage transporter the cell to that in is insulin dependent required is transporter of from (GLUT-4) insulin Their intracellular for surface gluconeogenesis. hepatic required also to suppress is Insulin cells. of the glucagon release α Insulin suppresses pancreatic from of bifunctional results activation phosphofructokinase-2 domain dephosphorylation in of ratio resulting in kinase (PFK-2). The the the insulin/glucagon the and rise phosphofructokinase-1 of by fructose The figure produced (see glycolysis below). PFK-2 activates 2,6bisphosphate It inhibiting inhibits gluconeogenesis. 1,6-bisphosphatase fructose (FBP-2), thereby also take hyperglycemia. while out glucose it With blood results into hypoinsulinemia, the sending the from blood the to simultaneously up failure in

exceeded glucose [SGLT]). blood has the sodium-dependent glucose (via a glucose to the level transporter TQ2.The kidney capacity reabsorb of in the of glucose high concentration urine The water osmotically the from body. draws loss urination This results of water increased with that in causes dehydration. (polyuria) generated at acid steps. cycle the NADH β-oxidation (TCA) in inhibits three tricarboxylic dehydrogenase TQ3.The the NADH-producing FA as the use in oxidation hepatic ketogenesis. a acetyl away CoA toward TCA from cycle substrate This shifts and in

TQ4.MW was balance: More negative nitrogen nitrogen coming out in. was in than going patient reflected in the the urea blood level This is at (BUN) figure right). top seen elevated nitrogen in (see BUN dehydration.] reflects The value also [Note: fall as a of and acid proteolysis the are amino catabolism occurring Muscle insulin. result in does express receptor.) not that skeletal (Recall muscle the glucagon Amino urea (NH3), acid urea hepatic is the converted to into by catabolism ammonia sent the produces and blood. cycle which urinary as the reported [Note: Urea urea urine is nitrogen.] in response seen acidosis. the MW Kussmaul metabolic is to respiratory a respiration in TQ5.The renal excretion reducing includes, concentration in following protons the as CO2 ammonium water, of in part, of and (NH4+). off the equation: bicarbonate H+ Hyperventilation (HCO3−) reflected response blows the The as (H+) and acids in in blood. branched-chain the glutamine release Degradation the muscle large (Gln) of into skeletal of of amino results amounts the Gln, the catabolize in and up generating The process. kidneys NH3 take right). is (see NH4+ NH3 and H+ at middle excreted converted The to secreted figure by is using of enterocytes a plentiful, as shift bodies fuel are ketone them When [Note: instead to

Gln. going Gln kidney.] of This to the amount increases the make substrate for ketone ketogenesis, β-oxidation FA decreases ability impaired the the supplies TQ6.Because CoA bodies. β-oxidation to acetyl the on of are and, alternate bodies thus, increases. use Ketone an glucose, to glucose dependence supplies for the decreases. gluconeogenesis, glucose nucleoside the needed FA and NADH production β-oxidation triphosphates Because The result a hypoglycemia. hypoketotic is was this acyl CoA (MCAD) Recall with dehydrogenase deficiency. medium-chain seen that

Review Questions 4: to Answers Case

(NADH) acid dinucleotide and fatty in D. (TCA) gluconeogenesis. decreases oxidation, the the rise mitochondria cycle, (FA) nicotinamide in adenine RQ1.Answer The tricarboxylic = reduced acid regulated the isocitrate at (see step reaction the figure dehydrogenase of NADH TCA inhibits dehydrogenase cycle, reaction, bottom and right). the αketoglutarate the key condensation (OAA) for It the (not in reduction OAA the to decreasing cycle favors and A TCA coenzyme OAA), for oxaloacetate malate the of with availability gluconeogenesis. (CoA) also acetyl to malate of of and, dinucleotide FA the oxidation dehydrogenase (NAD+) adenine oxidized step NADH. rise nicotinamide for the in 3-hydroxyacyl CoA is the inhibited thus, by form requires acetyl needed gluconeogenesis. the FA allosteric activator decrease of carboxylase) in for ATP pyruvate CoA The of (the and decreases oxidation production result of catecholamines activated in that the the as in rise Lipolysis is a fall and of in hormone-sensitive activation in consequence lipase. fasting insulin

functional for = phosphate the P450 of for activity irreversible, pathway regeneration supplies dinucleotide RQ2.Answer of portion the equivalents needed oxidative of (reduced) adenine (CYP) the E. nicotinamide proteins that pentose reducing (NADPH) phosphate the cytochrome glutathione. provides and The It important as biosynthetic is processes FA for synthesis. cytosol, an of cholesterol reductive such source NADPH the and in also source.] another [Note: is enzyme Malic are CYP proteins oxidases). monooxygenases (mixed-function other water. one O2 from the O They as is the to reduced substrate atom incorporate into It proteins in of endoplasmic involved the reactions. smooth membrane are reticular the CYP is detoxification that and of acids, membrane the are inner by vitamin Those species is reduced peroxidase in are as bile synthesis D. of glutathione the glutathione involved oxidized. hormones, oxygen mitochondrial steroid Reactive causes RQ3.Answer platelet vasoconstriction = is by platelets C. released and Serotonin aggregation. and activated made Platelets which the not that up synthesize serotonin, intestine [Note: but the take do and secreted into they blood.] in was of a with is well-being. associated Serotonin feeling 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid is monoamine It oxidase to catalyzes deamination. oxidative degraded that by step methylation catechol-O-methyltransferase of that in degradation catecholamines. the the the It is catalyzes hydroxylase at Serotonin a right). that from synthesized phosphate tryptophan requiring (see utilizes in a (BH4) and figure (PLP)-requiring pyridoxal process tryptophan is tetrahydrobiopterin two-step decarboxylase RQ4.Answer = B. The enzymes fat. and protein, of secretes the for carbohydrate, digestion pancreas required exocrine dietary endocrine the and insulin glucagon. secretes hormones The pancreas peptide to lead fat. of the the functions (decreased and maldigestion pancreas of (fatty that steatorrhea affects dietary with the consequence stool), the diabetes of latter would Damage insulin) intracellular the rise was seen As proteins myocardial in in normally in a (as transaminases blood. that of loss would integrity in of the infarction being damage, and in higher-than-normal found autodigestion results liver with concentrations troponins seen are of be cellular the in pancreas) causes pancreas the stomach. chyme of the bicarbonate the raise the release to coming from Secretin to the to pH intestine work neutral slightly best enzymes alkaline at Pancreatic pH. or deficiency C-II. a hypertriglyceridemia as lipoprotein is in lipase or a Pancreatitis individuals coenzyme, with its of in apolipoprotein seen result

4: Answers Case Questions Thought to

TQ1.A. inhibits in NADH metabolism with ethanol glycolysis. seen rise cytosolic The reduced glyceraldehyde gets 3-phosphate as dehydrogenase requires oxidized. glyceraldehyde gets 3-phosphate which NAD+, step The rise in With 3-phosphate accumulates. the glyceraldehyde NADH,

in triacylglycerol synthesis is (see B. 3phosphate, (TAG) glycolysis to figure Glyceraldehyde of initial converted at glycerol from the right). FA acceptor 3-phosphate lipolysis and CoA, increased availability of increased (from acetaldehyde the acetate production use available FA result are in in synthesis product increased of both tissue, acetyl and a cycle), decreased of which degradation. as increased because adipose TCA the decreased from oxidation is from and accumulate in liver (steatosis). lipoproteins) very-low-density part, of cause TAG to in (due, fatty produced production The liver decreased the is (and alcohol-related Hepatic in steatosis early an disease. reversible) stage liver hepatitis stages cirrhosis (irreversible). and Subsequent (sometimes are reversible) alcohol-related

TQ2.The lactate to reduction of favors dehydrogenase. rise lactate NADH in pyruvate the by causing excretion renal attack. acid, necessary in the acute a step an Lactate uric of decreases thereby gouty hyperuricemia, gluconeogenesis. decreases pyruvate, The the substrate from lactate for shift to of a [Note: pyruvate availability AK.] contributes hypoglycemia in the seen This to the (PT) of the after the clot for (FIII), time factor of common) addition measures allowing extrinsic coagulation. tissue (and takes of it to TQ3.Prothrombin time evaluation thereby pathways plasma bottom figure FIII a calcium at FVII right). pathway, extrinsic (see In phospholipid in (Ca2+)-and process the activates (PL)-dependent most clotting, proteins of made by is the the of liver. FVII, like can synthesis. liver damage decrease its Alcohol-induced synthesis short Additionally, as K. ability and, its nutrition to FVII Poor γ-carboxyglutamate therefore, (Gla)-containing vitamin K a a decreased in decreased requires and, has vitamin result can protein, clot. of half-life, availability PT partial and aPPt.] disease time, in Severe [Note: results or thromboplastin liver prolonged activated

vitamin in manifestation a mask deficiency (macrocytic hematologic reversing the TQ4.Administration the can B12 anemia) of deficiency. of by folate B12 by folate deficiency. effect on damage caused has neurologic the no However, effects can severe and time, the neurologic become then, Over irreversible. a the neuropathy until and of apparent. B12 folate treatment deficiency Thus, prevent is mask can

III. Cases Focused

Microcytic 1: Anemia Case

who Patient evaluated Presentation: he a a follow-up prior man had medical 24-year-old preplacement being to to starting his job. evaluation is ME as new is a

issues. ME has History: Focused no significant medical knows His those health unremarkable, he the status who history is of of family Greece. family but remain in little members

Pertinent was normal. Findings: examination The physical analysis blood of included results: the his following Routine

the hemoglobin electrophoresis performed. Based (Hb) was on data, follows: results The are as

Low. L = High; H = includes HbA1c.] [Note: HbA

anemia (see at is (β-thalassemia Diagnosis: ME trait microcytic causing right). has minor) image β-thalassemia that a Ethnicity risk (such thalassemia. being Mediterranean of for origin) as the influences

required this at is None Treatment: time. anemia. their are will iron prevent not advised that supplements Patients

does or morbidity. mortality trait significant Prognosis: not β-Thalassemia cause is autosomal-recessive β-thalassemia because serious anemia) informed planning of (Cooley nature for should Patients condition of their be considerations a genetic disorder. homozygous the family

Case-Related best ONE answer. Choose the Questions:

Q1. cause the the globin that decreased result are of Mutations protein the β-thalassemia. of for gene production β to in RNA or processing of gene transcription product. affect primarily the messenger mutations The posttranscriptional (mRNA) following statements correct? mRNA of the is concerning Which

Eukaryotic mRNA polycistronic. A. is

to B. trans-acting cis-acting involves elements. factors synthesis binding mRNA

is synthesis guanine DNA mRNA (TAG). at thymine base terminated C. the sequence adenine

requires mRNA of Polyadenylation eukaryotic 5′-end of the a methyl donor. D.

the exons by E. of proteasome. of and eukaryotic Splicing mRNA involves removal joining of introns Q2. to 2 lungs delivers tissues protons a the and lungs. α β tetramer from of the O2 globin from the and chains, the 2 tissues and HbA, CO2 to following result by delivery in the concentration of O2 will which of Increased decreased HbA? A. 2,3-Bisphosphoglycerate

B. dioxide Carbon

C. monoxide Carbon

Q3. D. Protons in the in the Hb) HbA2 HbF the is and βthalassemias? What basis (fetal increase for

Q4. technique oligonucleotide is allele-specific of Why of but cell (ASO) cases hybridization of anemia the cases the in not all diagnosis all β-thalassemia? sickle useful

Case Rash 2: Skin

a symptoms. with a 34-year-old left is KL rash and presents who red, woman Patient Presentation: thigh nonitchy flu-like on her

that appeared first a over weeks little ago. KL 2 Focused rash History: the reports but small started It gotten larger. has out and flu has her few the thinks and for she is arthralgia, headache and because also muscles the joints She had ache getting she respectively), a days. (myalgia last and through that month. KL a her husband camping New questioning, England last she took trip Upon reports

Findings: the a (erythema a lesion is of remarkable Pertinent cm presence at in that red, physical image bullseye for size flat right). ~11 examination (see resembles The migrans) circular, low-grade a has also KL fever.

is bacterium disease Ixodes. caused which transmitted KL by the tick the Borrelia genus the of a burgdorferi, Diagnosis: Lyme by in has bite of are United the region ticks endemic the Infected Northeast in States.

antibiotic doxycycline, tetracycline in family. KL prescribed Treatment: is an the have symptoms continue until all KL will of completely resolved. Monitoring for drawn Blood clinical tests. is laboratory

appropriate treated stages in the Prognosis: disease completely. typically of antibiotic Patients Lyme recover and quickly the early with

the Case-Related ONE best Questions: Choose answer.

Q1. at step. Antibiotics (translation) initiation synthesis the protein class inhibit in tetracycline the the Which is following translation about of correct? statements

A. the methionine. translation, is acid eukaryotic initiating amino formylated In

B. to transfer the Only RNA A site. charged initiating the goes directly ribosomal

between C. Peptidyltransferase amino peptide forms two is acids. a that ribozyme the bond

D. inhibited translation the 2. factor by can phosphorylation Prokaryotic initiation of be

independent of translation of E. triphosphate is hydrolysis. Termination guanosine

The ribosomal messenger large facilitates to Shine-Dalgarno the of RNA eukaryotic subunit sequence F. the binding (mRNA).

Q2. result. (ELISA) a assay immunosorbent two-tier Lyme for on a a for Centers followed analysis The ELISA that screening by equivocal western Control procedure Prevention involves confirmatory recommends or with blot disease Disease any a and sample enzyme-linked testing positive of procedures following the statements about these Which correct? is testing

A. techniques are Both mRNA. specific to detect used

B. antibodies. of use involve techniques the Both

electrophoresis. requires of the ELISA use C.

Western of use chain polymerase reaction. the blots D. require Q3. unaffected eukaryotic by are in antibiotics the class? tetracycline Why cells

Toothbrush Blood on 3: Case the

bleeding gums 84-year-old whose for Presentation: have LT man an Patient been months. several is

Focused on widower LT community in suburban and a lives East the alone is History: Coast. a drives. no longer He His come on two and the live West children east infrequently. Coast has hard get the months and he it out death 11 isolated wife his Since house. of to of been finds the ago, coffee, appetite His he has content snacks. is with packaged cereal, and and changed, is Chewing difficult.

the gums presence Findings: for right). (see dark-colored examination remarkable of image physical The at swollen Pertinent was loose, Several his teeth LT’s bridge. anchors that dental one of including were was sore present marks and blue black noted (ecchymoses) wrist. legs, an unhealed on on Several right the and the were his red revealed scalp the (petechiae) hair around spots follicles. of some Inspection of tiny for drawn Blood was testing.

blood: of tests Results LT’s on

negative. stool The (occult in his blood for test) blood test was

tests of included the the days several following: follow-up (obtained Results appointment) after

High; H L = = Low.

to hypochromic deficiency vitamin has with LT C Diagnosis: the microcytic, a secondary deficiency. anemia

vitamin prescribed oral ferrous LT acid) ascorbic (as oral supplements. and iron (as C Treatment: was sulfate) will services. also social referred be He to

is for The excellent. prognosis recovery Prognosis:

ONE the Case-Related Choose Questions: answer. best

Q1. the C Which of about following statements vitamin correct? is Vitamin is: C

intestine. in absorption A. of competitor the a iron

B. in fat-soluble typically stored with a supply 3-month tissue. vitamin a adipose

the several as of in enzymic such C. reactions hydroxylation coenzyme a proline.

collagen. for D. required the of cross-linking

Q2. macrocytic iron a older microcytic of anemia vitamin seen acid. of characteristic In in and/or anemia contrast B12 with is (common the deficiency folic to deficiencies adults), vitamin also adults. older in are common These deficiencies the these of vitamins statements concerning correct? Which is following

A. inability pernicious to absorb results anemia. An in B12

B. gene expression. cause Both in vitamins changes

energy a role plays Folic key most cells. acid in in metabolism C.

form folic in of Treatment can with of toxic acid. D. the coenzyme methotrexate result levels

deaminations, and coenzyme enzymes is the catalyzing E. B12 transaminations. acid amino for Vitamin decarboxylations, Q3. from anemias hemolytic anemias? How nutritional do differ

Heart Rapid Rate, and 4: Headache, Sweating Case

presents and brief Presentation: BE heart racing Patient a headache, a episodes (diaphoresis), of with concerns about intense, (paroxysmal), who is sweating woman 45-year-old (palpitations). sudden

attacks Focused weeks that History: the started ~3 BE ago. reports time she They anxious. last quite feels from minutes, during which 10 2 to heart though it as (arrhythmia). is the skipping beats her feels During attacks, the thought related were at At recent she menopause. even maybe stress work attacks first, and to in and blood her a she taken. The time happened, had was pressure it last pharmacy 165/110 Hg. was was She told it mm weight even notes has been BE her has appetite lost good. though (~8 that period this lbs) she in

thin, examination Findings: The BE’s appearance. physical Pertinent remarkable was for pale was (110–120 rate heart (150/100 as elevated was the Hg), Blood beats/minute). pressure mm on and were history, of metanephrine BE’s normetanephrine levels blood ordered. Based found were to elevated. They be

pheochromocytoma, the Diagnosis: a rare of adrenal medulla. catecholamine-secreting BE a has tumor

the abdomen locate were tumor. to of Treatment: done studies Imaging the tumor resection Surgical was of performed. the The be was found nonmalignant. to tumor 2 and in was Follow-up metanephrines later was plasma the normal range. performed weeks measurement of

5-year rate >95%. pheochromocytomas survival Prognosis: for The is nonmalignant

Questions: best the Choose answer. Case-Related ONE

Q1. epinephrine. (NE) norepinephrine Pheochromocytomas secrete and statements the amines following is degradation concerning and Which biogenic the two these correct? of of synthesis

A. for to by their hydroxylase. is tetrahydrobiopterin-requiring hydroxylated is substrate which The tryptophan 3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine tryptophan, (DOPA) synthesis

B. a dopamine carboxylase. The to phosphate– conversion pyridoxal of requiring utilizes DOPA

The NE epinephrine vitamin to of C. conversion C. requires

NE epinephrine. from metanephrine normetanephrine and by catechol-O-methyltransferase and from Degradation D. produces methylation involves

monoamine oxidatively metanephrine acid homovanillic and to are deaminated by Normetanephrine oxidase. E.

Q2. the NE epinephrine and/or the of of concerning following Which actions statements are correct?

a hormone. as neurotransmitter and a NE A. functions

B. are by of tyrosine their autophosphorylation in residues initiated select receptors. They

mediated receptors, C. are to are by of They nuclear which class receptors. a adrenergic binding

in and glycogen activation the D. synthesis. of result They triacylglycerol

Q3. and NE vasoconstriction receptors certain in pressure. blood an bound increase causes to of Why treatment clinically in be might used shock? septic NE the

5: Sensitivity Sun Case

neck, AZ freckle-like lower is hyperpigmentation being Presentation: forearms, a boy Patient of areas for his who 6-year-old evaluated is on legs. face, and

been the reports Focused has AZ’s that always to father sensitive the sun. boy History: quite the for and exposed skin His eyes red (erythema) period he his is turns to (photophobia) hurt if time. sun of any

skin thickened, remarkable exposed hyperpigmented sun. The was on (actinic radiation and of areas keratosis) Findings: the Pertinent (UV) examination for areas the scaly presence from to physical ultraviolet were seen. dilated blood Small also vessels (telangiectasia) squamous on several and later were determined cell to carcinomas. Tissue sites from biopsied, was be his face two

AZ defect pigmentosum, excision Diagnosis: nucleotide a of has in xeroderma DNA. rare repair

essential. sunscreens sunlight from as through protective that reflect clothing such that absorb Protection chemicals and Treatment: of is use radiation UV it are recommended. Frequent skin examinations eye and

xeroderma Prognosis: at with from die age skin Most early an patients pigmentosum cancers. possible. beyond is age survival However, middle

Choose answer. Case-Related Questions: ONE the best

Q1. DNA correct? Which about is statements the of repair following mechanisms repair: DNA

is only performed eukaryotes. by A.

is free. B. error double-strand of breaks

strand. bases parental involves the of repair of C. mismatched

UV oligonucleotide of of radiation–induced D. a dimer. involves containing removal dimers short the pyrimidine

endo-and uracil the uracil cytosine produced of requires of exonucleases to E. deamination actions of the remove base. the by

Q2. the DNA following is synthesis statements (replication) of Which about correct? one Replication:

primer. requires an eukaryotes A. prokaryotes and both in RNA

chromatin. condensation of eukaryotes in B. requires

a polymerase. in DNA is by single C. accomplished prokaryotes

random D. is initiated in sites genome. at the

linked 5′→3′-phosphodiester monophosphates produces by E. polymer bonds. a deoxyribonucleoside of . DNA the difference is between and proofreading What repair?

Urine Dark Case 6: Yellow and Sclerae

fatigue with Presentation: yellow sclerae. and boy JF 13-year-old a who Patient presents is

infection. analgesic with for began a History: a JF urinary and tract ~4 urinary treatment antibiotic days a ago sulfonamide Focused would (more last urine been had but that (become change gotten has the 2 reports brownish) told color over analgesic, with it He darker the his he days. that reddish) eyes mother his his night, that yellow a Last had tint. noticed energy. as he though feels he JF no says has

(tachycardia). physical splenomegaly, for remarkable appearance, was examination rate mild mild scleral Pertinent (jaundice), and icterus heart increased pale The JF’s Findings: JF’s hemoglobin (hemoglobinuria). for positive tested urine blood smear a lower-than-normal bodies; (Heinz number RBC). containing (immature of right), number reticulocytes cells higher-than-normal at peripheral and red of image blood some precipitated hemoglobin see reveals with A (RBC), a complete are pending. blood Results (CBC) chemistry blood count tests the and of

has deficiency, Diagnosis: an glucose causes hemolysis (RBC lysis). X-linked JF 6-phosphate dehydrogenase that (G6PD) disorder

oxidative exposed a G6PD result to in affected agents. Treatment: anemia hemolytic individuals can deficiency in a be antibiotic. switched JF different to will He certain that example, to (fava them. and is susceptible exposure and avoid must (for certain naphthalene), broad or beans), to drugs), he advised be drugs example, (for foods chemicals will sulfa

does absence or to the mortality agents, not oxidative In cause deficiency Prognosis: of significant G6PD exposure morbidity.

Questions: the Case-Related Choose best answer. ONE

Q1. in pathway. step the G6PD the pentose phosphate catalyzes regulated of Which statements correct? following G6PD the is the and concerning phosphate pentose pathway

A. occurs Deficiency in only of RBC. G6PD

B. an keep Deficiency glutathione functional, its of G6PD form. to inability in reduced in results

of pentose interconversions. phosphorylated by pathway phosphate sugar reversible C. a one series followed reaction reductive includes The

utilized pentose fatty in phosphate D. product acid phosphate dinucleotide (NADPH) such is of reduced pathway processes as the adenine The nicotinamide oxidation.

Q2. consistent JF's anemia. CBC with hemolytic a results were The of elevation tests bilirubin the level. chemistry revealed in Blood an bilirubin of statements is Which concerning the correct? following

resulting in skin and sclerae the can bilirubin in of Hyperbilirubinemia jaundice. cause A. deposition

B. increased molecules by is two liver. The conjugating solubility ascorbic of with bilirubin in it acid the of

form with C. blood of conjugated hemolytic increases bilirubin a in anemia. The the

the of in increase generated can bilirubin porphyrias. excess the D. solubility the Phototherapy

Q3. in normal obstructive jaundice? in is urobilinogen to Why relative jaundice increased absent urinary and hemolytic

7: Case Joint Pain

a who Presentation: been IR is base (ED) in for Emergency follow-up treated the male for at severe Patient after the of Department 22-year-old having days thumb. 10 inflammation presents his

Focused History: IR’s of first was occurrence severe This joint pain. medication. he anti-inflammatory was given In the an ED, for needle-shaped carpometacarpal monosodium (MSU) organisms the but positive right). crystals image joint the aspirated urate at from negative (see thumb Fluid for of was The since resolved. have inflammatory symptoms in with no is IR reports otherwise, health he history. medical significant good past is body index His (BMI) 31. mass examination. MSU skin) of crystals physical the No detected (deposits were the under in tophi

Results requested of undersecretor is in that visit tests this acid. uric an 24-hour specimen advance on not Pertinent urine Findings: IR and reveal of blood a His 2.5–8.0). blood mg/dl (reference = 8.5 was urate are The young tests is additional suggestive metabolism, of age of and ordered. purine of presentation an enzymopathy unusually blood

a inflammatory deposition arthritis. crystal disease), Diagnosis: (MSU type of has IR gout

given and colchicine. prescriptions allopurinol IR for Treatment: was levels are his <6.0 attacks. to blood goals urate additional mg/dl treatment reduce to and The prevent or overweight obese for risk a lose to being gout. factor was weight is He advised because category. the 31 BMI obese His in puts him of also He gout. between on information was written diet given and the association

stones. developing increases renal the risk Prognosis: of Gout is diabetes, and with It heart also hypertension, disease. associated

Case-Related answer. the Questions: best ONE Choose

Q1. is of which Allopurinol in functions inhibitor metabolism. noncompetitive as oxypurinol, a to purine the converted in enzyme an body the its statements correct? purine of regulation and Which is metabolism concerning following

A. noncompetitive increases (Km) the target enzyme. As the a inhibitor, Michaelis apparent oxypurinol of constant

xanthine purine Colchicine B. enzyme inhibits an oxidase, degradation. of

provides the atoms purine of nitrogen ring. C. of the Glutamate two

5-phosphate. nucleotide constructed the ring is then and attached purine ribose to system first synthesis, In D.

E. amidotransferase the system. the Oxypurinol degradation initiates ring that purine of inhibits

complete bases hyperuricemia. in deficiencies the characterized F. or are purine of by enzymic Partial salvage

Q2. nucleotides. nitrogenous Purines are base of in one type found Pyrimidines other. are the following statements of the true Which pyrimidines? the is of

enzymic Carbamoyl synthetase pyrimidine in I phosphate regulated synthesis. is activity the ring A.

thymidine decreases pyrimidine nucleotide synthesis of Methotrexate B. the monophosphate.

aciduria degradation. a pyrimidine pathology is C. of Orotic

(PRPP). 5-phosphoribosyl-1pyrophosphate of independent nucleotide Pyrimidine is synthesis D.

Q3. PRPP form enzymic increased IR activity. that of to is shows synthetase have subsequently shown a Why in this hyperuricemia? result does

Bowel Movement No Case 8:

bowel not movement. Patient female a had yet 48-hour-old who DW has Presentation: is a

pregnancy full-term DW delivery. the and of Focused product a is normal History: She at birth. appeared normal the is European first child parents DW of Northern of ethnicity. are in their health, histories and parents family unremarkable. The both good are

a distended DW Findings: abdomen. Pertinent has material. small amounts recently (green-colored) bilious of vomited She

produced abdominal by Meconium was meconium, by ileum of ileus (obstruction the x-rays. newborns) first Diagnosis: confirmed stool the by cystic newborns have full-term meconium with fibrosis ileus (CF). 98% About of chloride Diagnosis a test. was sweat with of subsequently confirmed CF

treated The nonsurgically. Treatment: ileus was successfully of family regional For referred the was children’s at CF hospital. to center the management the the CF,

most common the Prognosis: in Caucasians. autosomal-recessive life-limiting is CF disease

Case-Related ONE best Choose the answer. Questions:

Q1. (CFTR) a the mucosal as gene apical the a to protein surface. membrane channel regulator mutations CF that in transmembrane is that encodes chloride on conductance of epithelial result functions CF the the cells of statements concerning the correct? Which following CF is of

A. causes to chloride that of sticky. retention on and CF are epithelial excessively mucus with water reabsorption increased the the thick Clinical consequence be surface of manifestations

B. insulin Excessive hypoglycemia. pancreatic results in secretion commonly in CF of

set fragment length the of testing for as restriction involve common probes analysis. of a technique Genetic use most mutations, the may C. CF known a polymorphism for

mutations of Some degradation ubiquinone by through with CFTR D. the premature in protein proteolysis. tagging proteasome-mediated result followed

phenylalanine loss is mutation. for results common in (F) E. frameshift ∆F508, a codon as a most classified and mutation, The the of

Q2. intrinsic plasma The glycoprotein. an membrane is CFTR protein components destined proteins as function membranes: of of to Targeting

through transport to A. Golgi. the includes and

an B. signal sequence is retained protein. involves the functional in amino-terminal that

been (that is, C. completely posttranslationally). has after occurs the synthesized protein

on requires the D. the mannose presence residues protein. of 6-phosphate Q3. might with seen be steatorrhea CF? Why

Elevated Case Ammonia 9:

Presentation: with male 40-hour-old of RL cerebral Patient is edema. signs a

History: delivery. a Focused full-term pregnancy is the product and RL of normal He appeared normal at birth. became hypothermic. irritable, and At hours, lethargic, age 36 he and only He vomited. fed poorly and He tachypneic (rapid) displayed posturing. breathing also neurologic hours, seizure. a had 38 At age he

Respiratory blood Pertinent pH, [hypocapnia]), were ammonia, and (increased alkalosis increased decreased CO2 Findings: urea found. decreased nitrogen citrulline amino was revealed screen baseline, >60fold that An and was increased increased argininosuccinate acid over 4-fold. arginine and normal. (Arg) to Glutamine relative elevated, was was decreased

has cycle onset. neonatal RL defect enzyme a urea Diagnosis: with

remove to was performed Hemodialysis ammonia. Treatment: was waste of aid in benzoate were and Arg. sodium Sodium phenylacetate to nitrogen, as administered excretion phenylacetate, essential dietary lifelong supplementation phenylbutyrate. Arg, include sodium sodium of administration acids; and limitation and of amino protein; treatment will with Long-term

Prognosis: into possible. is Survival adulthood extent and of impairment hyperammonemia. The related to of degree the the is neurologic degree

ONE Questions: answer. the Case-Related Choose best

Q1. on urea patient? which the to Based likely enzyme of in findings, the cycle deficient most this be is

A. Arginase

lyase B. Argininosuccinate

Argininosuccinate synthetase C.

D. Carbamoyl synthetase phosphate I

Q2. transcarbamoylase E. Ornithine supplementation helpful in is Arg case? this Why

Q3. expected during physiologic stress? of level periods the which be cycle deficiency enzymes, of partial of following the (milder) decreased would one In urea with be to individuals of

A. Alanine

Ammonia B.

C. Glutamine

D. Insulin

pH E.

Pain Case Calf 10:

female calf. is for in evaluated who right Presentation: her swelling pain 19-year-old is a Patient being CR and

removed eminence, a knee. she Focused ago, which History: her had her immobilization right tibial days Ten fractured following spleen accident CR the necessitating bicycle of in from has a She recovery had surgery. the good her pain medication oral contraceptives is longer taking CR no has but (OCP). continued

Pertinent in is calf (erythematous) right CR’s the warm color and Findings: touch. to reddish swollen. It visibly is calf normal and appearance is without The pain. is left in An is ultrasound ordered.

venous (DVT). a has CR Diagnosis: thrombosis deep risk a immobilization. factor for OCP and surgery are as DVT, are

warfarin (Immediate): Treatment are administered. and Heparin

third the recurrence. individuals 10 have Prognosis: a In years DVT, following a one of about

Case-Related answer. best Choose Questions: ONE the

Q1. A commonly clot vein, of a deep leg. lumen the a most occludes is blood in the that DVT clotting statements of the the is following cascade correct? Which about

A. deficiency of in A (F)IX hemophilia in results the factor intrinsic pathway A.

of a serine is protease. the B. extrinsic FIII pathway

as Formation primary is fibrin C. the meshwork to hemostasis. of referred

extrinsic, the proteolytically common Thrombin activates of intrinsic, components D. and pathways.

E. for fibrinogen. activation the K of Vitamin is required Q2. following risk the would of the thrombosis? one of Which increase

A. of antithrombin production Excess

B. protein of Excess production S

Expression FV of C. Leiden

D. Hypoprothrombinemia

von disease E. Q3. Willebrand of and warfarin. and contrast Compare heparin actions the

Cases: Answers Focused Case-Based Questions to

with Minor Case Anemia 1: β-Thalassemia

= Answer B. binding elements). of single-stranded sequences DNA) the RNA of Transcription double-stranded requires of (trans-acting (cis-acting to (synthesis the on proteins factors) DNA strand template the from monocistronic from one contains (mRNA) is RNA it gene messenger Eukaryotic because (cistron). information just the in in mRNA. The DNA sequence base (thymine U(uracil)AG coding guanine) is strand the of TAG adenine is a (protein UAG that signal translation transcription. not synthesis), terminates of (using that requires is 3′-end polyadenylation. methylation S-adenosylmethionine), of eukaryotic 5′-cap It the not mRNA formation mRNA the joined. removed eukaryotic process introns from is which spliceosome-mediated and are by exons Splicing

offload for the decreasing O2, tissues. in hemoglobin HbA = monoxide the to of C. increases of Carbon ability the (Hb)A Answer (CO) thereby affinity O2 right). CO curve the top stabilizes O2 shifts O2 and oxygenated dissociation form decreasing the delivery (see figure left, to at or (relaxed) the R or The shift (tense) O2, stabilize the the in and choices affinity decrease for the cause deoxygenated a form, right curve. other T do and fetal not HbA2 contain Hb globin. (HbF) β β (α2δ2) of production and HbF HbA2 As increases. globin (α2γ2) synthesis decreases,

the at the cell mutation point by by acid is valine results gene replacement of amino the in for sixth in Sickle β that position single in globin a the protein. (A→T) anemia caused glutamate (βS) (see the normal using used probes for oligonucleotide is (βA) and figure for Mutational analysis allele-specific right). at (ASO) diagnosis in that lower sequence mutation different caused contrast, in hundreds by is of β-Thalassemia, mutations. example, including ancestry). analysis can point (for Greek using populations common those ASO in mutations, Mutational assess of mutations, probes at-risk often less can in However, the and mutations not panel are DNA by common only detected be included sequencing.

Rash 2: Disease with Skin Lyme Case

to Peptide-bond the Answer is amino acid of the site P amino the and in subunit. formation by in A catalyzed site RNA added large C. the the = ribosome last growing the acid between peptide an the of ribosomal Any as with next is on referred activity the catalytic to a figure page). ribozyme (see RNA translation. used Formylated prokaryotic to initiate is methionine RNA tRNA next to amino P of tRNA leaving acid goes the only that the the charged the carrying A is the protein (tRNAi) for the made. being available site site, The directly initiating transfer by initiation phosphorylation Eukaryotic factor is inhibited the (eIF-2). translation 2 of interaction mRNA and with ribosomal (mRNA) RNA small found the the of the Shine-Dalgarno messenger The prokaryotic sequence facilitates is in subunit. cap-binding task. the that eukaryotes, proteins In perform

Answer = B. are to assay and immunosorbent western blot analyze enzyme-linked (ELISA) used proteins. The of to of detect and use protein interest. makes Each quantify the antibodies that blots It western is utilize electrophoresis. DNA. is polymerase to chain reaction (PCR) The used amplify family of synthesis protein site Antibiotics the the (30S) A the small in inhibit ribosomal tetracycline subunit prokaryotes. to and blocking in by binding translation Tetracycline 30S subunit, component specifically inhibiting (rRNA) with RNA the 16S initiation. interacts of ribosomal the Eukaryotes 16S not rRNA. contain do tetracycline. 18S not bind which rRNA, (40S) contains subunit Their small does

3: Vitamin the Blood with on Case C Deficiency Toothbrush

as in collagen, = matrix. lysine a fibrous the a Vitamin hydroxylation of Answer and in protein of (ascorbic the extracellular proline synthesis coenzyme C. of acid) C the functions dietary (DMT) the metal form from duodenal ferric coenzyme (Fe2+) the for (see the (Fe3+) via absorption Vitamin to (Dcytb) is below). that divalent transporter that ferrous reduces b the required for cytochrome C iron also figure of enterocytes is of iron microcytic, anemia. hypochromic With is deficiency results dietary impaired of vitamin C, a a and in uptake water-soluble stored. C is vitamin a As not vitamin, C. lysyl vitamin not Cross-linking oxidase copper, by requires of collagen

= Answer A. at to absorb (see parietal right). (IF) factor to the An intrinsic stomach figure leads cells by by of and of B12 pernicious anemia caused vitamin inability commonly production most decreased is the and to bind Vitamins receptors, expression. gene and alter their DNA with complex D in A, Thiamine and cells. important in of in in αketoglutarate the oxidative B1) energy is therefore, coenzyme (vitamin a decarboxylation is pyruvate and, most metabolism inhibits dihydrofolate folate. coenzyme the enzyme to that of dihydrofolate (THF), reductase, tetrahydrofolate reduces functional the form Methotrexate results THF. This of in decreased availability most that coenzyme pyridoxine as the acids. amino is B6) is reactions pyridoxal phosphate involving for (vitamin It amino is by synthases.] and acid aromatic [Note: oxide hydroxylases nitric Tetrahydrobiopterin required anemias blood by red either (RBC) are characterized Nutritional cell increased