High-Yield of Facts Database

Step database and authors Aid clinical for of expanded that a material high student 2 First the as edition contains faculty seventh identified CK yield revised for of and boards review. The USMLE have facts (e.g., according Renal) matter, are Cardiovascular, in topic or Ethics) whether high-yield to medical organized medicine. (e.g., specialty subject The subsections subject divided is of facts. Each into related then smaller definitions Treatment. epidemiology a are facts in approach, presented Exam, to Diagnosis, Individual History/Physical basic and generally from and logical Lists, when mnemonics, and tables in helpful key forming used associations. are

learned. reviewing material mostly content already is The for useful time. is material highly for ideal for This not or first section conceptual complex the learning throughout images text. appear Black-and-white the histology topic. patient 2, pathology by the full-color and reference Section the made In plates at which some end contains is image” cases, glossy “clinical of of section to 2, end feature to of before At a key cram and chapter facts associations the two a the Section exam. also of classic day Review Rapid or we

not is The Facts Database of comprehensive. High-Yield source. your not your material Use study primary to it and as study core complement The facts emphasize been essential and to the have condensed material. and notes edited techniques and add with notes work for own students. all and memory recognize mnemonics, the your all not material, Work that

update high-yield keep expand biannually content in to boards as with information. database to of well We as current 2 trends our Section new and our database. entries topics However, high-yield many included not inevitably are must note other that in yet we

database entries so and for students. enhance that may actively and faculty the We submit encourage mnemonics future we students to medical be study tools for of We to and such preparing computer-based in for diagrams, Contribute, recommendations the (see may that charts, as also additional solicit p. useful How xv). tutorials examination,

The of is opinions reﬂect what student in section high entries yield. this to sources material, Owing no of reference or entries made individually. diverse attempt origins the has trace to been the of the mnemonics public have We domain. essentially regarded as in authors, of through the errors gladly corrected attention will the either by All the directly brought and omissions publisher to or be if e-mail.

methodically intervals, and assess waveforms, enlargement cardiac abnormalities, the rhythm, and axis, 2.1-2). ECG Figures (see evaluate chamber for To rate, for 2.1-1 patients

bpm. is heart The rate normal 60–100 rate A 60 tachycardia. bpm bradycardia; 100 > is bpm < is

and sinus a rhythms, Look P QRS P), every rhythm QRS), before and QRS ventricular every ectopic (no irregular or rhythms junctional (P for before after beats.

(positive) (–30 I II +105 degrees). Normal: in and leads QRS to upright degrees An

An a (negative) (< Left-axis in upright in I lead QRS and degrees). –30 lead QRS II deviation: downward

deviation: upright degrees). A lead an +105 QRS in downward and in lead Right-axis I (> QRS II

F E 2.1 -1. V5 aVF II V6 V2 IGU III V3 aVL V1 V4 aVRI R healthy a Normal from electrocardiogram subject.

subtended by large estimate rate bpm. number complexes, two counting as heart consecutive 300-150-100-75-6050-30 QRS boxes Quickly of follows: by the

thumbs-up” ll—the leads a normal in An es axis. and I upright QRS “double sign—signif

rate a rhythm present heart 75 is of bpm. with Sinus QTc is interval QT about is (duration) the The sec; QRS QRS 0.08 the PR 0.36 interval sec; 0.16 and is is +70 sec; sec; the interval mean axis degrees. is 0.40 V3. The = with wave) the progression (R normal show leads lead precordial zone transition in R-wave S wave from AS Fauci permission, (Reproduced, et al. with 17th of ed. Principles Internal Medicine, Harrison’s Fig. 2008: McGraw-Hill, New York: 221-7.)

PR Action Potential 0.2 P line 0.4 0 potential T ST (s) Time (s) interval 1.0 0.4 interval QRS segment 0.2 Isoelectric Q 0.5 S P 0 -0.5 QT 0.6 Time T (mV) U 0.6

delay phase upstroke node of atrioventricular with inherent 100-msec "pacemaker" slow delay node AV SA dominance

-2. R F 2.1 E IGU measurements. Electrocardiogram

MaRRoW: WiLLiaM

M W of QRS QRS V3–V6 and in pattern V1–V2 for of LBBB in pattern

pattern and V1–V2 QRS pattern M in for RBBB in of W QRS V3–V6 of

and QRS between 120 PR interval and msec. 200 Normal: msec < 100

> 200 PR QRS Atrioventricular interval with no block: afterward. P msec, (AV) or

wide, V1; R and 120 waves tall > msec; Left wave QRS I, (LBBB): V5, R branch bundle block no in duration in V6.

V6. or I, wave with complex morphology msec; and R wide RSR′ a ears”); wide QRS qR V5, in a pattern in block branch Right S bundle V1; with wave R QRS duration > (RBBB): (“rabbit 120

Long QT > QTc syndrome: msec. 440 congenital An that tachyarrhythmias. underdiagnosed predisposes ventricular to disorder

precordial depression). or T R-wave in waves; poor ST-segment (elevation changes leads; progression Ischemia: Inverted

Transmural QRS 40 of Significant more msec waves amplitude). (> one-third Q than infarct: or the presence infarction possible instability. inversion; of on impending plaque elevation; based T-wave the ST

II > atrial in and negative width P-wave > terminal if in > left P-wave in lead ■Atrial 1 is Right hypertrophy: is mm ection duration. amplitude in V1 msec, abnormality msec or mm; abnormality 40 is in if amplitude deﬂ lead 2.5 II 120 < atrial if

2.1 -3. E F IGU R hypertrophy. ventricular Left

V5, and leads V2, V1, are V6. Shown in V2 S wave + R wave V5 55 = mm. in in ST inversion Note changes and V5 strain. suggesting V6, T-wave and LG al. (Reproduced, with from Gomella permission, et ed. Pocket Clinician’s 11th Reference, Fig. New York: 2006: McGraw-Hill, 19-27.)

see hypertrophy Left Figure (LVH; ventricular 2.1-3):

> in + women. > of men Amplitude in mm in 20 or aVL V3 Cornell 28 criteria: in S R mm

V5 35 criteria: V6 or in S + Sokolow-Lyon R mm. V1 > in

an in 7 deviation Right-axis hypertrophy and Right > ventricular R V1 (RVH): mm. wave

that can the Key the narrow following: include differential exam findings

distention overload, sternal > failure, hypertension, disease. cm right volume (JVD, regurgitation, heart angle): 7 or venous tricuspid pericardial pulmonary Jugular above Suggests

ux: Hepatojugular impaired ventricular compliance. right reﬂ overload; Fluid

infarction, tricuspid ventricular with Right tamponade, cardiac JVP constrictive sign inspiration): pericarditis. in regurgitation, postoperative Kussmaul’s (↑

murmurs: Systolic

systolic Harsh radiation murmur; ejection to stenosis: Aortic carotids.

to Holosystolic axillae to or radiation regurgitation: murmur; Mitral carotids.

Midsystolic Mitral click. or late-systolic valve prolapse:

Flow imply murmur: does Very cardiac common, and not disease.

murmurs: Always Diastolic abnormal.

Early Aortic murmur. regurgitation: decrescendo

Mitral stenosis: late, low-pitched Midto murmur.

(Tricuspid) from border, locations border, (Pulmonic) apex: and border, McDonald’s All upper left (Aortic) the sternal lower Try (Mitral). People sternal sternal Heart upper auscultation left right

Causes of CHF—

Toxins Infection Anemia Hypertension Failure Rheumatic Lung to Arrhythmia Endocrine disease take meds heart (pulmonary

Gallops:

pregnancy). normal mitral cardiomyopathy (ﬂoppy younger Dilated disease; and ventricle), in gallop: high-output (e.g., S3 valve patients often in states

younger patients often diastolic aortic stenosis; (stiff gallop: normal S4 and ventricle), Hypertension, in athletes. dysfunction

Edema:

Left Pulmonary: failure. heart

hypoalbuminemia, pericarditis, syndrome, constrictive Peripheral: heart Right hepatic biventricular and drugs. venous also nephrotic lymphedema; regurgitation, failure, peripheral failure tricuspid disease, disease, and

arteriosus. regurgitation, patent pulses: aortic Peripheral coarctation (arms > ■↑: Compensated ductus legs), Peripheral arterial ■↓: disease.

(↓ tamponade; and airway. in systolic asthma foreign body with COPD, paradoxus Pulsus BP tension pneumothorax, inspiration): also Pericardial

and systolic poor weak left impaired Pulsus pulses): alternans strong ventricular tamponade, (alternating function; prognosis. Cardiac

Pulsus pulse): Aortic delayed stenosis. and parvus et (weak tardus

2.1-1 Table the etiologies, common presentation, and outlines and conduction bradyarrhythmias abnormalities. of treatment clinical

ventricular clinical common of Tables presentation, and tachyarrhythmias. outline and etiologies, and the 2.1-2 treatment supraventricular 2.1-3

clinical as of enough Defined maintain metabolic a caused blood to and heart pump to the ﬂuid by the homeostasis. inability syndrome (CAD), and valvular hypertension, cardiomyopathy, artery include coronary factors disease disease, heart Risk diabetes. Heart 2.1-7). alternative according (see vs. to American systems include of left-sided right-sided syndromes, classify failure heart 2.1-4 Tables but severity, College The classification (AHA/ACC) failure, vs. systolic guidelines failure diastolic and functional Cardiology through clinical Association/American

-1. AB LE 2.1 T Conduction and Abnormalities Bradyarrhythmias

dysfunction calcium (CCB) or Sinus cardiovascular can sinus node also Normal from blocker conditioning; to β-blocker channel excess. result bradycardia response from or or also lightheadedness, hypotension. may with chest May present but syncope, pain, be asymptomatic, QRS < normal before 60 every complex. P wave bpm; rate Ventricular nitive atropine cases. rate; in used None be ↑ placement asymptomatic; def to pacemaker is necessary treatment the may if severe heart AV or vagal use. with occur and Can with in ↑ β-blocker tone normal First-degree block CCB associated individuals; Asymptomatic. PR interval 200 msec. > None necessary. block ↑ AV infarction. sinoatrial effects Wenckebach) ischemia Drug conduction tone; or coronary I/ Second-degree (Mobitz right or vagal disease; CCBs) (digoxin, β-blockers, asymptomatic. Usually Progressive occurs; lengthening beat until interval PR resets. a dropped PR then offending Stop the drug. or pacemaker placement indicated. as Atropine clinically Second-degree of or II) Results or block f infarction acute, subacute, myocardial (Mobitz from system the prior conduction (MI). from disease brotic AV third-degree progression to AV frequent block. Occasionally syncope; beat(s) without a in dropped Unexpected PR change interval. placement. Pacemaker (complete) the and AV Third-degree communication electrical between No block atria ventricles. Syncope, acute dizziness, cannon waves. failure, A hypotension, heart between QRS waves complexes. and relationship No P Pacemaker placement. disorder tachy-and impulse to conduction Sick of syndrome supraventricular in bradyarrhythmias. A abnormalities and lead generation supraventricular that consisting tachycardia-bradycardia heterogeneous sinus syndrome (SSS)/ intermittent may bradycardia; syncope, TIA, to palpitations, tachycardia stroke. 2° or pain, include dyspnea, and chest placement. pacemaker for indication common most The

2.1 AB T LE -2. Supraventricular Tachyarrhythmias

response Atrial physiologic Sinus and tachycardia exercise. pain, to Normal fear, pulmonary hyperthyroidism, also infection, 2° to volume Can contraction, be embolism. or shortness Palpitations, of breath. bpm; P QRS > 100 complex. waves rate normal before Ventricular every the Treat underlying cause. myxoma Sepsis (AF) f Acute Ischemia Ethanol disease CHF. Anemia/Atrial brillation Atrial AF— Chronic disease Rheumatic Thyrotoxicosis heart Pulmonary hypertension, AF— PIRATES: with present chest may of breath, palpitations. shortness pain, but asymptomatic, or Often exam Physical reveals pulse. irregular irregularly irregular No response. QRS P waves, discernible with variable and

CHAD2 of using risk Estimate score. stroke

(to amiodarone). control > rate β-blockers, Anticoagulation 48 digoxin, if CVA); hours prevent (CCBs,

(< transesophageal if or shows of if weeks 3–6 cardioversion onset (TEE) INR left with only clot, Initiate warfarin echocardiogram atrial 48 after hours) satisfactory new no or (2–3). treatment for more warfarin. the information chapter See on Hematology

T AB LE -2. 2.1 (continued) Supraventricular Tachyarrhythmias

for Atrioventricular breath, syncope, that shortness Circular Same movement as lightheadedness. A angina, of P reciprocating of Palpitations, an retrograde impulse AVNRT. often wave is between AV tachycardia the

Atrial times of Circular utter movement around the rate f a per activity electrical minute. of atrium at 300 with syncope, lightheadedness. present Usually but can palpitations, asymptomatic, and can “sawtooth” be of rhythm; waves P appearance seen. Regular 240–320 degrees with Atrial bpm rate varying usually of is blockade. control. rate and Anticoagulation AF to criteria. according Cardiovert pacemakers Multiple atrial atrial pathways; hypoxemia. COPD, reentrant Multifocal tachycardia or May be asymptomatic. 100 morphologies; rate the underlying Treat P-wave β-blockers bpm. > for unique or more Three or suppression and effective). (not atrial very verapamil pacemakers rate of disorder; control breath, angina, AV node tachycardia Palpitations, in A of Atrioventricular Rate and AV circuit Carotid atrium (AVNRT) ventricle junction the 150–250 reentry nodal massage, the depolarizes nearly shortness simultaneously. reentry syncope, lightheadedness. or is in often Valsalva, or bpm; shortly wave adenosine after. buried P QRS arrhythmia. can hemodynamically if stop the unstable. Cardiovert

(AVRT) the seen node and QRS. normal a after through a tract. bypass atrium Wolff-Parkinson-White Seen syndrome. in

(not tachycardia in Rapid ectopic sinus the node). pacemaker atrium Paroxysmal atrial lightheadedness. breath, of Palpitations, shortness angina, syncope, > with wave before 100 bpm; P unusual normal Rate axis QRS. each an underlying Adenosine activity. be can atrial used unmask to

AB LE -3. T 2.1 Tachyarrhythmias Ventricular

ventricular beats foci. Ectopic (PVC) from contraction arise Premature ventricular electrolyte and hyperthyroidism. abnormalities, Associated with hypoxia, asymptomatic, but may Usually to lead palpitations. QRS by preceded Early, P a not wave. wide by usually pause. a PVCs followed are compensatory the cause. Treat underlying β-blockers give other occasionally symptomatic, antiarrhythmics. If or with (VT) be structural CAD, heart disease. Can tachycardia Ventricular associated and MI, ventricular angina, VT hypotension, lead syncope. tachycardia often sustained and to can palpitations, Nonsustained is asymptomatic; VF. Can to progress consecutive wide regular PVCs; or dissociation. rhythm; more Three in a AV QRS complexes rapid lidocaine, and antiarrhythmics procainamide). Cardioversion amiodarone, (e.g., and brillation CAD Ventricular Associated disease. f (VF) with structural heart cardiac (together arrest with with asystole). Also associated blood of absence pulselessness. pressure, Syncope, erratic Totally tracing. wide-complex cardioversion Immediate electrical ACLS protocol. and to proarrhythmic response Associated congenital deafness. pointes QT de syndrome, long with Torsades medications, and hypokalemia, associated present Can typically cardiac sudden dizziness, syncope. palpitations, with with death; and Polymorphous between QRS; 250 rates with 150 bpm. VT and drugs. Correct offending withdraw hypokalemia; cardiovert magnesium and Give initially if unstable.

LE 2.1 AB -4. T of and AHA/ACC CHF Classifcation Treatment

heart disease) B MI, ventricular (e.g., of history symptoms A a with systolic CHF. have structural who of had valvular disease Patients or dysfunction, never left β-blockers. ACEIs, who with of symptoms tolerance). disease prior CHF of fatigue, ↓ breath, Patients have (shortness structural exercise current or heart salt includes digitalis, Treatment restriction. dietary diuretics, ACEIs, β-blockers, and maximal medical despite therapy. at rest with CHF of marked symptoms Patients C D

of no signs who because at of high are CHF have or symptoms of identifed or of risk abnormalities CHF. functional Patients factors, and structural risk but who no the developing presence

Manage risk smoking, hyperlipidemia, factors obesity, treatable abuse). alcohol (hypertension, exercise, DM, patients atherosclerotic in ACEIs can disease, with be vascular used hypertension. or

IV include Treatment transplantation, for heart care drugs, and hospice options mechanical assist end-stage patients. devices, continuous inotropic

T AB -5. 2.1 LE CHF NYHA of Classifcation Functional

-6. 2.1 T AB LE vs. Heart Failure Right-Sided Left-Sided

-7. 2.1 TAB LE and Comparison Dysfunction Systolic of Diastolic

of age. Patient 65 < Often years age > Often age. of years 65 Comorbidities disease. heart Dilated valvular cardiomyopathy, Restrictive hypertension. cardiomyopathy; or hypertrophic or disease renal PMI, Physical gallop. Displaced exam S3 gallop. Sustained PMI, S4 Pulmonary cardiomegaly. congestion, CXR heart size. Pulmonary congestion, normal waves, Q (< 40%). EF ECG/echocardiography ↓ LVH, EF normal 55%). (>

heart right-sided of common cause most heart left-sided The failure is failure.

for symptomatic relief no confer are benef mortality Diuretics t. and only

by Heart ventricular failure caused is end-diastolic and (< 50%) left systolic as volumes. a dysfunction ↓ EF defined inadequate ventricular afterload. caused or It is left contractility by ↑ law), systolic ventricular EF preload dilation low ↑ compensation to but the through leading and compensates (Frank-Starling myocardial The and ultimately hypertrophy for fails, work function. worsening heart and

rest and the and earliest nocturnal Exertional dyspnea. dyspnea is and orthopnea, dyspnea to most paroxysmal finally presenting symptom common progresses (PND),

nocturia, cough, extremity seen. edema, Cheyne-Stokes be abdominal may lower respirations, and/or Chronic fatigue, fullness

Look signs for 2.1-6). heart leftfrom to (see Table failure distinguish right-sided

is based symptoms. signs whose diagnosis is a clinical CHF on syndrome and

an lift, and an S3/S4 reveals left Exam sustained and elevated parasternal impulse, ventricular gallop.

of plumpness, vascular Cardiomegaly, hila. cephalization and pulmonary pleural prominent effusions, vessels, CXR:

dilation. EF ventricular ↓ Echocardiogram: and

BNP ↑ 500, creatinine, ↓ Lab abnormalities: > sodium.

precipitate Usually MI nondiagnostic, exacerbations. but AF ECG: acute or may

■Acute:

states). alcohol, causes disease, Correct CCBs, ischemia, drugs as myocardial thyroid underlying valvular such NSAIDs, arrhythmias, antiarrhythmics, and (e.g., and high-output

2.1-8). and loop Table with aggressively thiazide Diurese diuretics (see

TABLE 2.1-8. Diuretics Types of

diuretics ↓ acid, ↓ bumetanide, Furosemide, concentration; ethacrynic urine torsemide cotransporter; Na+/K+/2Cl− Ca2+ Loop Loop of Henle excretion. ↑ dehydration, hypocalcemia, gout. Ototoxicity, hypokalemia, ↓ distal chlorothiazide, diuretics HCTZ, of excretion. to leading ↓ ↓ NaCl capacity diluting chlorthalidone Early Thiazide tubule reabsorption Ca2+ nephron; hyperlipidemia, Hypokalemic hyperuricemia, alkalosis, metabolic hyperglycemia, hyponatremia, hypercalcemia. amiloride channels. and tubule antagonist; an Cortical Spironolactone Spironolactone, aldosterone block receptor triamterene K+-sparing agents amiloride collecting triamterene, is Na+ Hyperkalemia, sexual hirsutism, dysfunction. gynecomastia, body NaHCO3. Acetazolamide diuresis Carbonic inhibitors tubule anhydrase Proximal total convoluted NaHCO3 ↓ metabolic toxicity, neuropathy, sulfa NH3 Hyperchloremic allergy. acidosis, agents ow. Osmotic f uid Mannitol ↑ Proximal f leading to tubular tubule osmolarity, urine ↑ Creates edema, Pulmonary dehydration. and CHF. in anuria Contraindicated

Give ACEIs patients can tolerate all who to them. ACEIs, tolerate If a angiotensin an patient blocker receptor consider cannot (ARB). during is should but the patient started euvolemic. be not be used should CHF β-blockers once decompensated

acute mnemonic). (see Treat LMNOP pulmonary congestion with

Chronic:

conditions obesity) comorbid limit uid sodium diabetes, (e.g., Control intake. ﬂ hypertension, dietary and and

help together neurohormonal Long-term β-blockers prevent and remodeling ACEIs/ARBs heart. of the All these II–IV patients. New for ↓ Heart agents mortality class of Association (NYHA) York

prevent statin to events. further disease are heart ischemic ASA a and ischemic for recommended Daily

+/– can (loop volume thiazide) Chronic prevent overload. diuretics diuretic therapy

III–IV systolic NYHA diuretics loop left with patients in ventricular mortality ↓ dysfunction given and risk and Low-dose spironolactone heart with when class failure. ACEIs hyperkalemia. for Monitor

history AF mobile or a a events those embolic and previous with of with left ventricular Anticoagulate thrombus. patients with both cardiac (ICD) an defibrillator implantable CAD. in < and biventricular 30% an EF patients Consider

Loops calcium, save thiazides whereas it. lose

device cardiac require therapy mechanical that left assist medical a ■CHF ventricular to maximal unresponsive is transplantation. or may

ventricular ↓ normal function. with by Defined compliance systolic ventricle either active relaxation The impaired MI; or impaired (2° restrictive cardiomyopathy). (scarring prior aging, has and/or filling to passive from ischemia, hypertrophy) ↑, essentially pressure is normal EF or normal, cardiac output Left ventricular ↑. end-diastolic remains and

sudden dyspnea shortness and with and exertion, breath, on of unstable heart Associated arrhythmias, angina, failure, death. MI, stable

Table are first-line Diuretics therapy (see 2.1-8).

or ARBs, β-blockers, BP and via Maintain ACEIs, CCBs. control rate

Digoxin these in patients. not useful is

or Myocardial disease; restrictive 2.1-9). hypertrophic, (see categorized dilated, Table as

common cardiomyopathy. The most and diagnosis. EF) ventricular Left be dilation systolic must present for (low dysfunction causes postpartum genetic (coxsackievirus, endocrinopathies drugs alcohol, pheochromocytoma), factors, cocaine), beriberi). Chagas’ nutritional idiopathic, dysfunction, but are HIV, acromegaly, disorders disease, cases parasites), status, and Most (thyroid (doxorubicin, AZT, known 2° infection (wet myocarditis, include causes ischemia are and The hypertension. of cardiomyopathy two long-standing most 2° common dilated

LE 2.1 -9. AB T Diagnosis Differential Cardiomyopathies of

↑, variable ventricular Impaired ↑ relaxation cavity ↓↓ ↑ size fraction ↓, contractility diastole) Left or elasticity (EF) size Impaired ↑↑ ↑ thickness ↔ ↓↓ ↑↑ Major (end ↓ cavity ↑↑ or abnormality Ejection Impaired Left ventricular (end Wall systole) variable ↓ ↔

gradual symptoms. of presents Often CHF with development

of an mitral/tricuspid displacement left Exam regurgitation. venticular often S3/S4 impulse, the reveals or gallop, JVD,

diagnostic. Echocardiography is

show ectopy. ST-T QRS, ECG changes, low-voltage sinus and nonspecific may tachycardia, common. is LBBB

congestion. an heart balloon-like and enlarged, pulmonary CXR shows

use, the etiology (e.g., endocrine underlying all stop treat alcohol Address disorders).

with disease with ACEIs, symptoms and β-blockers, prevent progression of aldosterone Treat CHF diuretics, antagonists. and is anticoagulation thrombus ↓ or if thrombus Consider an risk intraventricular present. only to AF CCBs Digoxin avoid second-line agent; CHF. is a in

35%. an EF ICD if Consider <

left and results in relaxation dysfunction). impaired filling (diastolic LVH ventricular frequently outﬂow involves ventricular impaired left ejection and tract blood. obstruction interventricular Hypertrophy to septum, the leading of is healthy obstructive HOCM most of The in trait United cause cardiomyopathy patients hypertrophic in the inherited athletes form, as sudden young, and congenital autosomal-dominant common the death in (HOCM), an States. 50% is of hypertension of stenosis. causes hypertrophy Other and aortic include marked

may syncope, dyspnea, but may angina, present or be Patients death. cardiac with also asymptomatic sudden palpitations,

sustained a crescendo-decrescendo ejection S4 preload ↓ impulse, reveals squatting). Valsalva with systolic an maneuver, gallop, often a Exam that apical and ↑ (e.g., murmur

Valsalva exercise, ↑ ↓ maneuvers, contractility worsened dehydration). is Obstruction left filling myocardial vasodilators, by or (e.g., ventricular by

ventricular dynamic obstruction left blood ow. wall of shows and asymmetrically Echocardiography ﬂ an and is diagnostic thickened

signs LVH. ECG of may show

enlargement mitral to may 2° regurgitation. atrial (LAE) left CXR reveal

CCBs relief; symptomatic ■β-blockers agents. second-line are for initial are therapy

es dilated the of f signif setting rapid associated end overload An ventricular of in S3 gallop lling f cardiomyopathy. and is the uid with

death young, Hypertrophic of cause in the United is the most sudden cardiomyopathy athletes common in healthy States.

gallop es a cardiomyopathy. signif An S4 with noncompliant and hypertrophic ventricle stiff, associated

Surgical pacing, include HOCM myocardial valve for and options excision ICD placement, catheter mitral septum, of the partial or ablation replacement. dual-chamber

training. should Patients intense athletic and competition avoid

normal as diastolic or myocardium Defined (a near-normal elasticity systolic EF). of to significant leading impaired without dysfunction filling ↓ and caused sarcoidosis, by It (2° radiation by disease scarring (amyloidosis, is to doxorubicin). infiltrative or or hemochromatosis) fibrosis

(JVD, heart of symptoms heart often peripheral right-sided failure predominate. symptoms of and but failure left-sided edema) and Signs right-sided occur,

rapid reveals near-normal and be CXR, key MRI, a echocardiography is or diagnosis to and helpful, normal cardiac but filling early may catheterization EF. with

of fibrosis or evidence may Cardiac infiltration. reveal biopsy

frequently shows ECG LBBB.

options limited only. palliative are Therapeutic and generally are vasodilators pressure, to contraindicated. treatment ﬂuid Medical filling cautious anticoagulation if not of ↓ and use includes for diuretics overload,

include hypertension, obesity, for hyperlipidemia, male family smoking. and risk a history, age, factors DM, CAD gender, Major

substernal angina relieved of provoked consists triad or The that by nitrates. chest exertion by and of is rest classic pain

unstable and dyspnea on shortness angina, Clinical MI, sudden include of stable exertion, and death. arrhythmias, of heart breath, CAD manifestations failure, DM, male dyslipidemia, smoking, CAD, factors Risk abdominal history and premature obesity, of gender. include a hypertension, family

(O2 mismatch). 2° myocardial supply chest to demand ischemia Substernal and pain is vasospasm of angina by Prinzmetal’s (variant) but vessels. angina mimics pectoris caused coronary cardiac in is and with young the of absence ST-segment rest elevation early women the in morning classically elevation. associated affects at It enzyme

pressure substernal pain), by or heaviness or or rest and precipitated relieved of nitrates. described pain as (often usually or The stress classic triad pressure a exertion chest by without consists

Pain or and may lightheadedness. of left can and jaw, radiate arm, associated to the with nausea/vomiting, diaphoresis, be breath, neck shortness

generally is unremarkable. stable Examination experiencing patients of angina suggesting atherosclerosis and for peripheral bruits hypertension. and carotid Look

causes chest of out pain. pulmonary, cardiac or Rule GI, other

stress is but the on diagnosed ECG history from CAD. Angina ST-segment test alone, be changes with monitoring significant of exercise diagnostic may

to a reason, this in diabetics high ischemic necessary patient and population. is classically index maintain experience this “silent” for it events “atypically”; and present of suspicion Women

ASA, IV acute and O2 morphine, IV symptoms Treat IV and/or nitroglycerin, with and β-blockers. consider CCBs and ACEIs validated. also been of The has verapamil) nondihydropyridine (diltiazem, efficacy

a out by is cardiac suspected monitored enzymes. serial until ruled be MI must and with acute MI admitted Patients

ASA, are with chronic symptoms control Treat second-line β-blockers; only. for CCBs and agents symptomatic nitrates,

cholesterol, reduction Initiate hypertension). factor (e.g., risk smoking, replacement Hormone in therapy women. is postmenopausal not protective

transplant may patients elderly, clinically MIs. post–heart Women, the and diabetics, have atypical, silent

benef have mortality to ASA been t Only and a in the treatment shown angina. of β-blockers have

to caused A ischemia. spectrum acute myocardial or that disruption of vasospasm clinical plaque syndromes leads by

is by is new pain chest longer, with angina it to onset, responsive less stable patient less (i.e., history. occurs exertion, describes lasts accelerating occurs at from distinguished that or angina is is medications), Unstable rest; or It instability. signals based the plaque possible upon presence of infarction impending NSTEMI myocardial contrast, or I, by troponin troponin marked CK-MB. T, In indicates elevations necrosis in

Myocardial events risk TIMI stratified study) be to criteria adverse to the Table according determine should (see Infarction (Thrombolysis 2.1-10). Patients the in likelihood of cardiac

high-risk of ST may not but changes and markers, occlusions. associated be is on elevated ECG indicative Unstable are seen with angina cardiac

by is cardiac enzymes ECG. diagnosed NSTEMI and serial

the Acute stable same angina. is for symptoms treatment of as that IIb/IIIa abciximab) (e.g., heparin be Clopidogrel, and eptifibatide, considered. inhibitors enoxaparin, tirofiban, or also glycoprotein should unfractionated

refractory mm a ≥ chest of possible > TIMI Patients for or be 3, changes to (percutaneous therapy, should troponin [PCI] pain or a given medical coronary intervention ST CABG). scheduled 1 heparin with score and and angiography revascularization elevation,

onset, new accelerating, is Think unstable occurring or rest. at if chest angina pain

2.1 T -1 0. AB LE TIMI Unstable Score Risk for Angina/NSTEMI

OR REVASCULARIZATION DEATH, SCORE RISK MI URGENT POINT OR DEATH MI, CHARACTERISTICS

tobacco, + 24 41 12 history, ASA 4 cholesterol) Severe 1 angina mm Known ≥ 3 (≥ 65 deviation 1 5 1 seven 8 past 5 hours) 1 3 ≥ ↑ score—total days 1 use in cardiac 1 5 (0–7) CAD marker Presentation 50%) factors Age 19 2 0.5 History ≥ 1 > CAD 26 years (stenosis 6/7 hypertension, 3 points Risk within 20 0/1 7 (family episodes ST risk 13 DM, 2 3

and from glycoprotein score heparin), ≥ unfractionated inhibitors, early (risk IIb/IIIa enoxaparin angiography. patients more beneft 3) (vs. Higher-risk

2° enzyme ST-segment cardiac and cardiac as release Defined and to elevations prolonged ischemia necrosis.

described as can pain, left arm, Presents neck, tightness or that acute-onset with a chest to substernal pressure commonly or radiate the jaw.

lightheadedness, diaphoresis, include may and symptoms of syncope. shortness anxiety, nausea/vomiting, breath, Associated

papillary arrhythmias, peripheral muscle), edema, CHF new reveal regurgitation gallop). of S3 shock), and may mitral new (cardiogenic Physical (ruptured hypotension evidence (rales, exam

survival EF. ventricular The is of predictor best left

new for or ■ECG: LBBB. Look ST-segment elevations change V1–V2 infarction the wall. posterior in be can leads indicating in reciprocal ST-segment depressions also

hours Sequence → over ST-segment T-wave normalization normalization of → → several T Peaked changes: waves to T-wave → elevation → ST-segment inversion Q waves days. ECG

Cardiac sensitive; specific. is I more enzymes: CK-MB Troponin most is the take six chest Both can 2.1-4). to to (see up Figure onset pain rise after hours of

abnormalities: ST-segment

MI in elevation the with aVF RCA/PDA inferior involving is III, consistent and 2.1-5). and II, Figure LCA (see leads an ST-segment

leads LAD usually Figure MI (see involving and indicates diagonal an branches V1–V4 ST-segment the in anterior elevation 2.1-6).

ST-segment aVL, V5–V6 to in elevation I, lateral the MI a LCA. involving points leads and

leads infarct indicative be in in V1–V2 can posterior wall. “reciprocal change” of acute an depression ST-segment the

medications O2. β-blockers, morphine, clopidogrel, should be Six nitrates, considered: ASA, key and

give heart ACEIs, or the hypotensive. instead, β-blockers; not If do cardiogenic that patient give shock, the in provided is patient is not in failure

patient for angiography should Emergent STEMI. lesion thought the PCI if the be should responsible performed; undergo to be possible, and PCI for

of pneumonia. Common GERD, trauma), causes (costochondritis, angina, pain esophageal pain, chest include musculoskeletal disorders and

repolarization”). variant LBBB, Other multiple pericarditis, diffuse causes “early (often include and LVH, elevation (e.g., across acute normal ST-segment of a leads)

2.1 R F E IGU -4. acute after MI. an of Typical elevation pattern serum marker

= = = dehydrogenase I; LD1 cTnI chain. = troponin 1; kinase, = cTnT MLC MB isoenzyme; lactate T; creatine cardiac isoenzyme cardiac troponin CK-MB light myosin permission, JE (Reproduced, Tintinalli et al. from with Medicine: Comprehensive Emergency A 6th Guide, ed. Study Tintinalli’s New York: Fig. 2004: McGraw-Hill, 49-1.)

FIGURE 2.1-5. wall MI. Inferior

ﬂattening ST-segment acute pain, the leads V4–V6. in depression with T-wave leads ECG elevation demonstrated II, and aVL, I, with chest patient III, reciprocal in and acute In this ST-segment aVF and Stobo al. from permission, et J with (Reproduced, Principles The ed. of and Practice 23rd Medicine, Stamford, & 20.) 1996: Appleton CT: Lange,

FIGURE 2.1-6. Anterior wall MI.

acute This presented patient chest with pain. showed and waves. leads ST-segment and aVL hyperacute V1–V6, in acute T elevation The ECG from J (Reproduced, et permission, with Stobo al. of The Medicine, Principles and ed. 23rd Practice Appleton & 1996: 19.) CT: Stamford, Lange,

a stroke and 90 thrombolysis to PCI. within or or severe stroke, thrombolysis be or the be there are performed of PCI of hours, should tPA, patient three presents If shock), with within streptokinase heart ischemic cannot (e.g., history reteplase, no minutes, recent contraindications performed hemorrhagic failure, cardiogenic instead

to responsible should or PCI left setting not is main PCI, lesions the candidate diffuse immediately lesion the target vessels, disease, for with attempted three-vessel artery afterward. of CABG amenable thought be for disease a to good disease, coronary STEMI; be the In for discrete patient

performed). β-blockers, Long-term and includes was ASA, high-dose (if PCI ACEIs, statins, treatment clopidogrel risk Modify changes, cessation. and dietary factors exercise, tobacco with

of and Arrhythmia following common cause the cause lethal death of MI; most following complication is most acute the death common arrhythmia acute is MI.

include left and pseudoaneurysm, wall ventricular mural thrombi. or regurgitation), muscle VSD, reinfarction, complications rupture common papillary ventricular mitral pericarditis, (with Less rupture, left aneurysm

post-MI, an and pericarditis, process occurring fever, syndrome, pleural weeks with ESR. presents autoimmune Dressler’s 2–10 effusion, ↑ leukocytosis,

follows: post-MI is common as of complications A timeline

day: First and diuretics). with Heart (treat nitroglycerin failure

2–4 ST pericarditis Arrhythmia, depression). with elevation (diffuse days: PR

days: electrical activity), ventricular rupture (acute pericardial pulseless 5–10 wall regurgitation). mitral papillary alternans, rupture (severe Left electrical muscle causing tamponade

Weeks arrhythmia, aneurysm mitral elevation, Ventricular regurgitation, thrombus to months: formation). ST (CHF, persistent

disease) perform Unable (diffuse PCI to

disease Stenosis Triple-vessel main artery left of coronary

130 > > Total mg/ dL, are LDL mg/dL, 500 and triglycerides for mg/dL cholesterol HDL < CAD. risk factors 200 > 40 mg/dL, Cushing’s high-dose syndrome, and familial use, hypercholesterolemia. hypothyroidism, Etiologies diuretic disease, alcoholism, nephrotic obesity, use, disease, DM, include OCP hepatic

Most or have no patients symptoms. signs specific

of with (eruptive have lipemia high eyes), xanthelasmas the skin the deposits the (creamy fatty nodules or and in appearance (yellow LDL around retinalis over the xanthomas in triglyceride retinal may extremely skin vessels). Patients tendons), levels

ery of ■Conduct Dyslipidemia: for > years repeat fasting age sooner 20 five profile and or elevated. years lipid if ev patients a

serum hypercholesterolemia. > occasions diagnostic is cholesterol two different on ■Total 200 mg/dL of

-1 2.1 AB 1. T LE Guidelines Risk III Hypercholesterolemia for ATP of Stratifcation

arterial equivalents symptomatic > CAD 190 carotid risk peripheral = 100 disease, 130 disease, 130 aneurysm, > artery a > mg/dL 160 < 70) mg/dL 130 CAD aortic mg/dL mg/dL factorb factorsb equivalentsa < risk 160 mg/dL risk < (or mg/dL CAD mg/dL 160 > or abdominal 0–1 > diabetes. 2+ mg/dL risk > < 100 mg/dL = premature and hypertension, > a (men years). age 45 women HDL factors history Risk cigarette family (< years; > 55 CAD, of low b mg/dL), 40 smoking, mg/dL a > risk as factor removes An total risk “negative” and score. from the one factor 60 counts HDL

■LDL < HDL dyslipidemia. total even 200 if 130 is serum > mg/dL < is diagnostic of or mg/dL, mg/dL, 40 cholesterol

on 2.1-11). Based (see stratification Table risk a (considered (males), (males < relatives > 40 (females), and equivalent), first-degree early age 45 diabetes include 65). > 55 CAD age females risk Risk in factors hypertension, and 55 < mg/dL, HDL smoking, < CAD

known disease. diet in intervention a be patient and exercise a no trial 12-week should The of with atherosclerotic first vascular Commonly in 2.1-12. are lipid-lowering agents used Table listed

BP hypertension is The 140/< 90. < in goal uncomplicated < 80. is renal For with disease, patients or diabetics the goal 130/<

a diastolic systolic BP time Defined separated on a BP > in > as and/or mmHg (see Table based measurements three 90 2.1-13). 140 1° or 2°. as Classified

identifiable with Hypertension cause. no hypertension. of Represents 95% cases of diet, family smoking, advanced heart a and > or Risk a history race obesity, hypertension of high-sodium disease, age. include factors (blacks whites),

Hypertension complications is develop. asymptomatic until

for and exudates, kidney heart hemorrhage), be (LVH), disease). should damage the eye (proteinuria, kidney end-organ to Patients (stroke, brain dementia), chronic evaluated (cotton-wool signify bruits renal as may artery cause hypertension. of stenosis the Renal

and Conduct ophthalmologic, exams. abdominal cardiovascular, neurologic,

Obtain UA, and of damage. CBC, extent electrolytes BUN/creatinine, the to assess end-organ a

2.1 -1 2. LE T AB Lipid-Lowering Agents

cholesterol reductase in Atorvastatin, step pravastatin, inhibitors HMG-CoA lovastatin, synthesis. the Inhibit rosuvastatin simvastatin, rate-limiting (statins) warfarin ↑ triglycerides ↓ myositis, LDL, ↓ potentiation. LFTs, (f triglyceride Gemf leading and brozil lipase brates) ↑ Lipoprotein lipoprotein VLDL to stimulators ↑ lipase, catabolism. cholelithiasis, upset, ↓ GI myositis, LFTs. ↑ triglycerides, ↑ HDL inhibitors cholesterol border. (Zetia) Cholesterol at brush absorption ↓ Ezetimibe absorption the of intestine small Diarrhea, ↓ pain. LDL abdominal angioedema. cause Can from adipose hepatic ↓ fatty release Niaspan of tissue; ↓ LDL. Niacin synthesis acid Skin (can ↑ LDL GI ↑ pruritus, HDL, prevented upset, be LFTs. ↓ fushing ASA), paresthesias, with acid Bile acid acids colestipol, colesevelam bile lead resins ↓ Bind to LDL catabolism intestinal of from plasma. ↑ Cholestyramine, and bile stores LDL upset, LFT GI myalgias. ↓ abnormalities, Constipation, drugs the intestine. of other Can from ↓ small absorption

T 3. LE AB 2.1 -1 JNC-7 Classifcation Hypertension and Management of

Encourage indicated. 120 80 120–139 and antihypertensive drug Yes < 80–89 or < Prehypertension No Normal hypertension considered. ACEIs, or Stage or be 90–99 140–159 a diuretics CCBs, patients; most Thiazide may combination 1 β-blockers, Yes ARBs, for a diuretic or CCB). (usually an for ≥ ACEI, most Two-drug Stage a β-blocker, an 2 100 combination 160 patients plus or thiazide a Yes ≥ ARB, hypertension

extent basis end-organ on the Hypertensive damage, diagnosed are crises BP of measurement. not of the

younger 2° patients. of out hypertension, particularly Rule in causes

reduction). weight with smoking lifestyle (e.g., modifications loss, Begin cessation, salt the loss lifestyle effective single Weight modification. most is The 140/< healthy otherwise is in < BP patients goal 90. < in with The is diabetics renal goal disease with 80. or patients 130/< proteinuria

in to have in β-blockers ↓ (which been are effective Diuretics beneficial CAD) mortality for and patients hypertension. are inexpensive ACEIs, shown with and particularly uncomplicated African-Americans), (which another unless are medication a first-line comorbid 2.1-14). They agents (see condition Table requires

including cardiac of (ECG renal protein-to-creatinine creatinine, for Periodically end-organ ratio) complications, test and complications. (BUN, evidence urine hypertrophy)

Hypertension an organic to identifiable cause. 2° the Table 2.1-15 treatment diagnosis causes. common of See for and

in of A spectrum which BPs end-organ clinical presentations lead elevated to damage.

changes end-organ pain damage dissection), in (ischemia or (aortic back MI), with by chest status or (hypertensive encephalopathy). revealed pain mental Presents

to (headache, and urgency: elevated BP chest end-organ moderate with syncope) only basis damage. on mild pain, symptoms without an Diagnosed the Hypertensive of

as intracra- BP signs of impending symptoms with end-organ elevated significantly or emergency: Hypertensive ARF, such a Diagnosed by damage

4. -1 2.1 T AB LE Hypertension Treatment 1° Comorbid with of Conditions

diuretics, Heart failure antagonists. ARBs, aldosterone Thiazide ACEIs, β-blockers, ACEIs, β-blockers, antagonists. aldosterone Post-MI CVD diuretics, Thiazide High β-blockers, ACEIs, risk CCBs. ACEIs, Thiazide diuretics, Diabetes ARBs, CCBs. β-blockers, ARBs. kidney Chronic disease ACEIs, Thiazide ACEIs. prevention Recurrent diuretics, stroke

-1 AB LE 2.1 T 5. unilateral Hypertension renal 2° parenchymal 1° disease disease. Often Causes renal Common of of disease. the ACEIs, with Treat slow renal which progression patients 25 common of hypertension. Especially recent-onset > in < age with years artery and stenosis 50 Renal bromuscular patients). (usually in and patients) atherosclerosis in (usually f dysplasia Etiologies older younger include Doppler ultrasound. or artery with renal Diagnose MRA angioplasty be May stenting. with or treated therapy Consider as unilateral disease. ACEIs adjunctive or in temporary (In ACEIs can disease, of arteriole.) vasodilation by bilateral accelerate preferential the failure kidney efferent feasible. not Open is effective a option surgery is or second angioplasty if long-standing obese age, OCP 35 of Common use > women, years and in use. those women with delayed). OCPs (effect may Discontinue be gland sweating, tachycardia. and headache, Pheochromocytoma that leading and An secretes to epinephrine episodic adrenal tumor norepinephrine, levels catecholamine urinary or metanephrines metanephrine. plasma and Diagnose with tumor β-blockers. both after treatment removal of Surgical and α-blockers with Conn’s aldosterone-producing adrenal to an adenoma. often syndrome (hyperaldosteronism) 2° Most the triad hypokalemia, Causes metabolic and alkalosis. of hypertension, unexplained removal tumor. of Surgical tumor, ACTH-secreting tumor, or pituitary secretion adenoma or an ACTH-producing carcinoma. an ectopic Cushing’s adrenal to by cortisol an Due syndrome (See for more chapter the Endocrinology details.) of removal tumor. Surgical the chapter. See aorta Coarctation the of Pediatrics Surgical repair.

papilledema, changes ECG hemorrhage, edema. or suggestive nial or pulmonary ischemia of

basis on and/or the encephalopathy hypertension: papilledema. progressive Diagnosed failure of renal with ■Malignant

(e.g., oral (see of goal treated 24–48 ACEIs) hours β-blockers, Tables and BP with clonidine, lowering gradually urgencies: Hypertensive 2.1-16 over Can antihypertensives the with be 2.1-17).

IV over two of pressure first 25% (labetalol, with lowering mean prevent or no with hours Hypertensive goal hypoperfusion insufficiency. arterial cerebral by coronary Treat medications nitroprusside, the to more than emergencies: nicardipine) the

6. LE T -1 2.1 AB Antihypertensive of Major Classes Agents

K+ resistance. vascular fuid ↓ thereby extracellular Thiazide, and sparing Diuretics loop, volume ↓ hyperuricemia, (not Hypokalemia azotemia. hyperglycemia, with sparing), hyperlipidemia, K+ (β-blockers) β-adrenergic contractility nadolol, cardiac release. atenolol, metoprolol, ↓ carvedilol, labetalol Propranolol, timolol, renin blockers and depression. Bronchospasm severe (in CHF bradycardia, fatigue, impotence, exacerbation, active asthma), Centrally α2-adrenergic via receptors. system agonists sympathetic adrenergic Inhibit acting the central clonidine nervous Methyldopa, orthostatic impotence, hypotension, Somnolence, hypertension. rebound actions Prazosin, α1-adrenergic Cause by muscle. terazosin, on vasodilation of vascular blockers smooth blocking norepinephrine phenoxybenzamine Orthostatic hypotension. ↓ Dihydropyridines vasodilation; felodipine, cause cardiac may tone amlodipine), smooth ↓ also verapamil) output. (nifedipine, nondihydropyridines (diltiazem, CCBs muscle and Dihydropyridines: edema. Headache, peripheral fushing, ↓ contractility. Nondihydropyridines: arteries/arterioles. minoxidil resistance Hydralazine, dilating ↓ peripheral Vasodilators by Hydralazine: Headache, lupus-like syndrome. Orthostasis, Minoxidil: hirsutism. peripheral Captopril, Block aldosterone benazepril, fosinopril, reducing resistance salt/water enalapril, retention. lisinopril formation, and rashes, Cough, hyperkalemia. leukopenia, resistance effects, Block retention. irbesartan peripheral salt/water Losartan, aldosterone and reducing valsartan, Rashes, no leukopenia, and hyperkalemia cough. but ARBs ACEIs

effusion. lead pericardial to insults; pericardial acute Results may chronic from or

sac. of pericardial the Inﬂammation pericarditis. compromise Can output cardiac tamponade constrictive via or include TB, Most idiopathic, although neoplasms. SLE, infection, radiation, etiologies and commonly viral uremia, drugs, known open as MI May after heart also a Dressler’s surgery. MI or occur i.e., delayed after or within days syndrome) phenomenon, (either

2.1-17. TABLE Specifc Populations Patient Agents Antihypertensive for

with proteinuria Diabetes ACEIs or ARBs. CHF diuretics spironolactone). or (including β-blockers, ACEIs ARBs, long-acting Isolated Diuretics are preferred; hypertension systolic dihydropyridines. without activity; MI intrinsic β-blockers sympathomimetic ACEIs. Thiazide Osteoporosis diuretics. α1-adrenergic blockers. BPH

cough, pleuritic fever. pain, with present chest dyspnea, and May

in and with pain position worsen the inspiration. supine tends Chest to

rub, Exam BP pulsus friction (a systolic reveal paradoxus in pericardial on 10 and > elevated inspiration). may mmHg a ↓ JVP,

and echocardiogram MI and to rule ECG, out pneumonia. CXR,

ECG elevation (see inversions 2.1-7). and diffuse changes ST-segment Figure by T-wave followed PR-segment include depressions

may on thickening echocardiography. or be effusion evident Pericardial

(e.g., underlying for ASA/NSAIDs for cause viral corticosteroids/immunosuppressants for pericarditis, or pericarditis). Address symptoms dialysis for post-MI SLE, the ASA uremia) (e.g., days few MI, as Avoid after to wall rupture. within a corticosteroids they predispose can ventricular

requires without continuous effusions tamponade followed, needed. drainage Pericardial can but as of with evidence be pericardiocentesis, symptoms

output. sac, ↓ and to filling Excess the compromised cardiac ﬂuid ventricular pericardial leading in rate size The the is the than the effusion. related uid to more to of condition ﬂ of formation closely malignancy, pericarditis, trauma the Risk nipple). factors wounds (commonly stab SLE, include left to medial and TB,

anxiety, can tachycardia, shock rapidly ■Presents tachypnea to dyspnea, with and progress and that fatigue, death.

of Causes pericarditis—

cardiac tamponade: can triad diagnose acute Beck’s

E F -7. R IGU 2.1 Acute pericarditis.

in multiple consistent any PR-segment with discrete ST-segment depressions. not cular leads and Diffuse elevations territory vas coronary Gomella with LG (Reproduced, permission, et al. from Clinician’s Pocket Reference, 11th ed. Fig. New 2006: York: McGraw-Hill, 19-34.) distant JVD), and pulsus (hypotension, pressure, Kussmaul’s Beck’s reveal inspiration). sign tamponade a on a may of heart acute pulse (JVD patient triad ■Examination narrow with sounds, paradoxus, and

right right diastolic ventricular collapse. shows Echocardiogram and atrial enlarged, globular an CXR heart. shows

on ECG, alternans present diagnostic. electrical is If

uids. Aggressive volume expansion ﬂ IV with

be blood). Urgent nonclotting pericardiocentesis will (aspirate

Decompensation pericardial and warrant pericardiotomy balloon window. may

more now the valve) cause common of cause the most U.S. mitral recently, valve was heart adults; often rheumatic than the valvular aortic (which leading in fever disease affects Until mechanical is the degeneration. listed their along with in are Table Subtypes presentation, treatment. etiologies, 2.1-18 diagnosis, and

with atherosclerosis. Aortic commonly aneurysms most associated are 90% and Most are the originate > abdominal, arteries. renal below

asymptomatic discovered on incidentally study. Usually and or radiologic exam

a > hypertension, (males and gender disease, high age. Risk cholesterol, history, other vascular smoking, factors females), include family

bruits. abdominal demonstrates mass a or abdominal pulsatile Exam

radiates to abdominal hypotension that the tearing to pain Ruptured severe, and back. aneurysm leads

aneurysm ultrasound time. Abdominal an follow over diagnosis for or to determine anatomy. useful precise CT to may be the

5 patients, is for lesions appropriate cm. monitoring In asymptomatic <

but 6 > 5.5 the rapidly enlarging. if > (thoracic), Surgical smaller indicated is cm is lesion (abdominal), or cm repair

for ruptured aneurysms. or Emergent surgery symptomatic

false in entering lumen A propagates a hematoma in longitudinally. that intima and the transverse the that creating tear of a media, vessel blood leading to results a to 2° commonly hypertension. Most common aortic left the are the valve distal above origin The artery. most subclavian and of sites to greater than frequency often occurs of in 40–60 females. age, a Most with at in males years

commonly to atherosclerosis, is associated most linked often with aneurysm is Aortic while hypertension. aortic dissection

TABLE 2.1-18. Disease Valvular Types Heart of

the stenosis often seen Aortic Most elderly. in adolescence. symptoms and childhood in valves to lead and bicuspid can Unicuspid for years be stenosis. despite asymptomatic signif May cant death CHF to to Once from syncope years. f usually symptomatic, ve within angina progresses to valve indications Cx replacements): ACS—Angina, Syncope. for CHF, (also upstroke) a carotid split (weak, murmur PE: carotids. and paradoxically delated or single radiating et systolic S2 sound; tardus Pulsus to parvus the Echocardiography. Dx: Valve replacement. Balloon aortic can valve patients treatment. but nitive not to valvuloplasty bridge replacement def is Acute: chest Infective Aortic endocarditis, regurgitation aortic trauma. dissection, malformations, connective fever, disorders. Chronic: tissue Valve rheumatic syndrome. Causes: Marfan’s Aortic CREAM— Congenital Endocarditis, Aortic damage, root dilatation, dissection/ Rheumatic Rapid Acute: pulmonary of and cardiogenic onset shock, severe congestion, dyspnea. Chronic: and PND. onset Slowly on dyspnea of progressive exertion, orthopnea, sternal murmur), at murmur. PE: (Austin left Flint murmur apical rumble border, the and midsystolic diastolic mid-diastolic Blowing pulse), bob sign Corrigan’s Duroziez’s Musset’s with (water-hammer causes bruit). sign Widened (head (femoral heartbeat), pressure de pulse and sign Echocardiography. Dx: until severe replacement. Vasodilator ACEIs) for enough therapy warrant aortic to (dihydropyridines become symptoms or isolated valve regurgitation etiology continues rheumatic to Mitral The most fever. common valve stenosis be orthopnea, and range PND infective to Symptoms and dyspnea, arrhythmias. from endocarditis Opening PE: snap edema. and at murmur pulmonary apex; mid-diastolic Dx: Echocardiography. effective Antiarrhythmics valve (digoxin, symptomatic are cases. severe mitral valvotomy balloon for for replacement relief; and β-blockers) Mitral fever rupture MI. valve to after tendineae chordae rheumatic Primarily or regurgitation 2° and present Patients with fatigue. dyspnea, orthopnea, Holosystolic radiating PE: murmur to axillae. will disease. demonstrate the Echocardiography Dx: regurgitant can assess severity of f ow; angiography Antiarrhythmics nitrates ↓ diuretics preload). common (AF if LAE; and necessary is with to

dissection. the in back dissection; in interscapular Sudden descending anterior tearing/ripping pain ascending in chest pain

hypertensive. is patient typically The pericardial a blood from hypovolemia acute is coronary loss, consider involvement of If MI from tamponade, hypotensive, or arteries. the patient

aortic and indicative pulses measurements Asymmetric dissection. BP of are

of Signs a aortic pericarditis aortic the be may murmur is with dissection. may or tamponade a of regurgitation pericardial proximal seen; if valve involved heard be involved. or arch aortic may be are Neurologic deficits the seen if spinal arteries

(shows cardiomegaly, mediastinum, effusion). or pleural ECG, new left CXR of widening the standard imaging. is CT angiography gold of the

of provide the presence origins pericardial effusion, can vessels, the the aortic and of integrity. coronary the a of aorta, arch arteries, proximal thoracic TEE valve details

There of two for systems are dissection: classification aortic

I), descending confined ascending as (type confined to system: aorta (type the DeBakey or to II), Classifies both the and (type aorta III). aorta the involving ascending dissections descending

A Stanford dissection ascending type type and aorta Classifies of the system: as all as B. others

manage Monitor and medically and heart as rate necessary. BP

Do give thrombolytics. not

is ascending aorta, a If involves with control. rate and emergency; the can often heart the surgical dissections descending it managed be BP dissection

often Ascending dissections be can medically. treated are but aortic emergencies, surgical descending dissections

Clot or veins the large in the extremities pelvis. of formation triad states or OCP lower of (e.g., to classic endothelial ﬂ rest, extremities), lower pregnancy, plane valves use). The factors the bed incompetent in trauma venous stasis the and ights, (injury includes malignancy, Virchow’s from venous risk hypercoagulable extremities), (e.g.,

lower with unilateral extremity erythema, and Presents pain, swelling.

for sensitivity DVT). is foot passive (poor specificity with and dorsiﬂexion sign calf Homans’ tenderness

to Figure (see V/Q pulmonary Doppler may spiral used be CT ultrasound; scan for evaluate embolism 2.1-8). or

damage), hemostasis, hypercoagulability. (endothelial trauma triad: Virchow’s

used test possibility embolism can to rule the in negative low-risk pulmonary A be of out D-dimer patients.

2.1 -8. E IGU R F DVT of imaging and PE. for Algorithm diagnostic

permission, Fauci et AS al. (Reproduced, from with Medicine, Harrison’s ed. of 17th Principles Internal 2008: McGraw-Hill, New York: Fig. 256-1.)

with total PO unfractionated SQ IV warfarin heparin followed Initial a months. or anticoagulation lowmolecular-weight by for of 3–6 heparin

Consider patients contraindications with anticoagulation. an IVC to in filter

Hospitalized consisting patients DVT heparin anti-thromboembolic tolerated, should stockings, of receive as heparin. low-molecular-weight or and unfractionated SQ prophylaxis exercise

plaque. supply extremities of to blood by atherosclerotic the the Occlusion extremities affected. lower most The commonly are the extent obstruction, collateral the of blood ﬂ depend of ow. involved, and manifestations rate Clinical on and the vessels presence

that occurs intermittent walking leg relieved with (reproducible is always Presents and with claudication rest). pain with extremities. occurs disease the affects progresses, the pain As distal at rest and perfusion. 2° Dorsal develop foot may poor ulcerations to painful, limb ischemia. cold, foot numb characteristic A is of critical

Associated ↓ pulses, (buttock syndrome disease: with impotence). femoral male claudication, Leriche’s Aortoiliac

Calf Femoropopliteal absent. femoral are below artery disease: pulses the claudication;

embolization caused occur occlusions pulse. by distal commonly ischemia: heart; bifurcations last to from Most the often acute palpable the Acute at cholesterol (“blue atheroembolism toe May be to syndrome”). also 2°

atrophy, hair blood gangrene/necrosis. cyanosis, Lack chronic pallor, of and ischemia: loss, perfusion muscle ■Severe to leads

for bruits. Carefully palpate and auscultate pulses

usually of index, evidence provide systolic of brachial ABI) Measurement occurs (rest (ankle-brachial and objective pain 0.4). atherosclerosis ABI or can ankle with < an BP calcification A ABI the arteries. indicate of high can

stenosis and Doppler identify occlusion. ultrasound helps pressure readings normal. brachial Doppler ankle > that systolic are readings 90% are of

Arteriography digital angiography and necessary for surgical evaluation. subtraction are

hygiene and conditions tobacco underlying DM, cardiac factors); care. careful and foot Control other eliminate institute risk (e.g., develop helps Exercise circulation. collateral

clot may ASA, cilostazol, and thromboxane anticoagulants inhibitors improve symptoms; prevent may formation.

that is the rate success a Angioplasty stenting have variable occlusion. dependent on of area and

or Surgery treatment employed can (arterial bypass) amputation be conservation fails. when

vasoconstriction. B2-mediated 2° in arterial β-blockers to Avoid peripheral peripheral disease

results in Disruption the circulation peripheral infection the and of of chronic edema that extremities. lymphatic lymph involving surgery of node complication a dissection. Often to resulting edema. parasitic In infection lymphatic lead countries, in obstruction, underdeveloped can childhood. disease, such in lymphedema Milroy’s with system, malformations of can present the lymphatic as Congenital

patients the swelling extremity. present upper with unexplained Postmastectomy of

abnormalities cardiac with filariasis). Immigrants with of (i.e., no progressive the present bilaterally extremities lower swelling

with present progressive, bilateral swelling the extremities. of Children

Diagnosis clinical. is edema, and other such as cardiac Rule causes metabolic out of disorders.

at curative as no exists. management, Directed symptom treatment and Agents such ineffective contraindicated. relatively as diuretics are

limit therapy, accumulation ﬂuid may garments help. be and and massage mobilize Exercise, of pressure to

prompt with coverage ■Maintain infection. cellulitis gram-antibiotic vigilance for for

40%. Cardiac is up sudden of rates death associated to syncope cardiac with one-year

sudden, hypoperfusion. 2° cerebral postural to temporary consciousness A and tone loss of Etiologies noncardiac: or either are cardiac

lesions, tamponade, arrhythmias, dissection. Valvular embolism, aortic Cardiac: cardiac pulmonary

Orthostatic/hypovolemic (TIA, metabolic psychiatric. hypotension, syncope), vasovagal/micturition Noncardiac: neurologic stroke), neurocardiogenic syndromes (e.g., abnormalities,

potential Rule many out etiologies. prodromal associated investigated. and be should Triggers, symptoms symptoms,

causes of typically or absent with lack very a cardiac associated and/or exertion, changes symptoms, brief a of are of history history with Cardiac position, syncope disease. prodromal in of association

abnormalities), (arrhythmias), the Depending recorders Holter stress (structural diagnostic useful be or tests can on tools. (ischemia) monitors echocardiograms and event suspected etiology,

to Tailored etiology. the

Skin of 75 Disorders 75 the Terminology and 75 Layers Immune-Mediated Allergic Common

The layers: the tissue of skin three subcutaneous 2.2-1). consists and the (see Figure epidermis, dermis, skin of components describes 2.2-1 and appendages. the the the dermis, various epidermis, pertinent Table

used Table dermatologic manifestations terms common 2.2-2 of describe disease. outlines to frequently

types reactions. mechanisms hypersensitivity and the Table of outlines 2.2-3 follow. allergic immune-mediated Descriptions disorders and of common

in relapsing groups. that inﬂammatory age in infancy skin different is differently presents A disorder and common leads Figure lichenification characterized is that It pruritus 2.2-2). to by (see

the that rashes.” “itch is Eczema

is Atopic dermatitis commonly with associated rhinitis. allergic and asthma

are of Patients at bacterial risk infection. viral and 2° ↑

food, chemical climate, Triggers factors. or irritants, or physical emotional allergens and with contact include

2.2-1. FIGURE of the skin. Layers

permission, with Hardman et (Adapted, JG al. from Therapeutics, Gilman’s The 10th Goodman of and ed. Pharmacological Basis 2001: York: 1805.) McGraw-Hill, New

2.2-1. TABLE of Layers Components Skin

Mast muscle cells Merkel Smooth elastin, (synthesize ground Monocytes/macrophages cells substance) Keratinocytes and Fibroblasts collagen, Melanocytes cells Langerhans Nerves Vessels/lymphatics

Nails (nail plate, nail matrix, fold, bed) nail nail

Hair glands, sebaceous glands) (hair apocrine complex follicles,

2.2-2. T AB LE Skin Lesions to Terms Used Common Describe

in 1 surrounding fat (< Macule cm diameter). lesion from skin differs that in A color (< elevated that in 5 An Papule mm is lesion solid small generally diameter). small, circumscribed A differing (> in surface Patch from the surrounding in area 1 cm color diameter). (> mm elevated in lesion diameter). Plaque solid 5 An Cyst An material. epithelial-lined sac containing fuid or semisolid uid-flled, (< A very Vesicle small elevated 0.5-mm), f lesion. Bulla 5 vesicle large mm). (> A Wheal follows that localized usually hours. hive) An of edema disappears leakage (or vascular within and area the from epidermis. all Erosion depression of or loss superfcial of some A resulting the circumscribed, destruction dermis. and Ulcer A upper epidermis deeper of the depression resulting from corneum accumulation shedding akes. or stratum Abnormal Scale f of in blood, of A Crust or exudates. hardened dried deposit serum, purulent Thickening Lichenifcation epidermis. of the alone epidermis healing without (the heals a of A Scar dermis scar). the defect

LE AB T 2.2-3. Types of Reactions and Mechanisms Hypersensitivity

basophils, vasoactive mast of presensitized on release and Anaphylactic histamine). cells Antigen triggering amines Type (i.e., the cross-links IgE I and atopic: preformed Reaction of rapidly a after develops exposure as antibody. antigen result urticarial and local reactions, anaphylaxis, drug include f asthma, are. Examples wheal and (anaphylaxis). and First Fast and all B-cell, mediated. II, are I, Types antibody, or III or phagocytosis. IgG IgM Cytotoxic: “enemy” bind an II cell, complement) and Type on to (by leading lysis to antigen syndrome, include hemolytic anemia, and (erythroblastosis Goodpasture’s fever. autoimmune Examples disease rheumatic fetalis), Rh Cy-2-toxic. lead and to attack complex Antibody complement (MAC). membrane Type Antigen-antibody release neutrophils lysosomal complex: neutrophils; Immune III complexes activate which complement, attracts enzymes. rheumatoid include polyarteritis immune glomerulonephritis, SLE, and complex Examples nodosa, arthritis. III) Serum disease complex An days). immune to sickness: proteins produced which f (type are foreign in the ve antibodies (takes Immune complexes are to form fx they membranes, where complement tissue (leading deposited and in damage). More common than Arthus reaction. III) Arthus (type reaction. reaction: antibody-mediated subacute hypersensitivity A local Intradermal complexes induces which in antigen-antibody of the injection antigen antibodies, skin. form and by edema, of necrosis, complement. activation Characterized and thermophilic actinomycetes. hypersensitivity pneumonitis Examples include things three complex complement. as stuck antigen-antibody together: an Imagine immune glomerulonephritides and Includes many vasculitides. caused Most sickness now serum (not is drugs by serum). days proteinuria, lymphadenopathy Fever, antigen urticaria, 5–10 and after exposure. occur arthralgias, reaction. Arthus the cause complexes Antigen-antibody antigen then T Delayed release macrophage lymphocytes to (leading activation). Type Sensitized and type: lymphokines (cell-mediated) encounter IV transplant dermatitis contact Examples TB and rejection, ivy, include poison skin tests, (e.g., oak). poison last—delayed. 4th and Cell antibody it mediated, mediated; transferable not serum. therefore, not by is

as are follows: group manifestations Clinical age by

diaper and area. the face, scalp, weeping, pruritic patches Erythematous, Infants: on

patches and scaly, areas the Dry, in excoriated exural neck. ﬂ Children: pruritic,

fissured often hands. to and limited the Lichenification skin, dry, Adults:

FIGURE 2.2-2. Atopic dermatitis.

with erythema. red vesicles presenting toxicum papules/ Erythema of the surrounding eczema, newborn resembles with on seen ↑ eosinophils biopsy. be will and observation. typically in appears rash days after days; is typically is 7–14 This of gone usually f age ve treatment rarely benign

in fossae. antecubital and scaling the lichenification, are Hyperpigmentation, seen E, Kasper in AS, (Courtesy Robert et MD, al. DL, Braunwald of Fauci Swerlick, published as Harrison’s

ed. of Medicine, 17th Internal Principles McGraw-Hill, 2008.) York: New

made clinically. is Diagnosis mild IgE. ↑ and eosinophilia Patients have may drug out eruption, dermatitis, T-cell and cutaneous lymphoma. seborrheic rosea, contact pityriasis dermatitis, Rule

include measures avoidance Prophylactic application known and of use of moisturizers, nondrying triggers. soaps, of

topical pimecrolimus). effect of (avoid steroids in Treat immunomodulators with systemic (e.g., topical PUVA, and side profile), tacrolimus, light corticosteroids their

should 2–3 for longer than weeks. be corticosteroids not Topical used

been IV contact with results previously to type an and which the from that allergen hypersensitivity sensitized. A patient exposed reaction has allergen reexposed cross-reactive compound. to Dermatitis a or the is when the develops to patient in adults common More than in children.

can with Commonly fever, edema, lymphadenopathy. and presents pruritus also but and with present rash,

products elastic cosmetics, nickel, gloves allergens and Frequently implicated poison bands detergents, ivy, clothing). poison soaps, (e.g., latex containing oak, in include and rubber

plants involve with the clothing, jewelry, Characteristic distributions and where come into perfume, areas makeup, skin. contact nickel

with acuity the in dermatitis area of contact of begins its the The varying appearance antigen, with with the lesion. the

allergic becomes hours an with after Acute: Approximately the by erythematous, and tiny crusts. presenting contact, blisters skin 24–48 scale followed Lesions intensely are pruritic.

weak from episodic a allergen. Results exposure or Subacute: lichenification seen. less rash, an are some those is and “angry Lesions inﬂ ammatory of appearing” acute than

an exposure to from extended Results Chronic: allergen. acute with by erythema and fissuring, Characterized lichenification often with superimposed dermatitis.

also of spread shape T or of can by overall the the The circulating allergen over body Figure object mimics that exposing often lymphocytes. 2.2-3), rash (see via transfer but of via hands the the it 2° are Patients at of ↑ infection. risk

impression. clinical by Diagnosed be can treated. rash has allergen after patch A used the test been the causative establish acute-phase to dermatitis, includes atopic and seborrheic differential impetigo, herpes infection. HSV, zoster, The fungal dermatitis,

avoidance of Prophylaxis of the offending consists allergen.

Treat corticosteroids with to the or systemic and relieve wet compresses with debride as and topical skin. cool, needed

epidermis which contact them to that Langerhans molecules dermatitis expose and up involves and the carry of T cells, the pathogenesis through taken The nodes to allergenic by are lymphocytes. them passed lymph

FIGURE 2.2-3. dermatitis. Contact

the to and areas localized agent. serous with are with vesicles offending papules Shown of contact weeping above erythematous (Reproduced, with from RM. Hurwitz permission, Pathology Clinical-Pathological of the Atlas 2nd of ed. Correlation, Skin: Appleton & 1998: Lange, Stamford, 3.) CT:

with a Suspect dermatitis. young person seborrheic in severe HIV

by in and Pityrosporum disease a found that follicles. common ovale, sebum caused may hair harmless A generally be yeast folds, for midchest. and It nasolabial a oily the scalp, eyebrows, as predilection has skin areas with such

rash varies age: with appearance The of

diaper scale, Presents yellow and severe, Infants: with erosions, rash as blisters. a red A crust cap”) scalp. may thick (“cradle the on be seen

midchest, around ears, scaly patches eyebrows, Children/adults: and Red, fold, are seen nasolabial the scalp. The is in than seen infants. localized dramatic rash and less that more

psoriasis, severe seborrheic can develop an seborrheic with Reiter’s Patients psoriatic dermatitis and syndrome syndrome. dermatitis, HIV/AIDS or even of arthritis, severe overlapping

by clinical Diagnosed impression. contact out and dermatitis psoriasis. Rule

or Treatment for consists corticosteroids topical scalp, shampoos for topical sulfide and pyrithione antifungals areas. of zinc the other and/or selenium coal concerns despite tar still available shampoos carcinogenicity. are about Low-concentration

dermatosis and scales patches silvery due erythematous dermal hyperplasia. and inﬂammatory A inﬂammation to epidermal by T-cell-mediated characterized a of also have percent patients seronegative Five arthritis. or usually young adulthood, starts 2–4%. incidence condition is and its puberty The in

sharply The scales 2.2-4A). silvery is typical bordered with a Figure round, erythematous patch (see lesion

regions. are classically elbows, scalp, the knees, on found including and the lumbosacral surfaces, extensor Lesions

appear may small slowly very but may and Lesions conﬂuent. enlarge initially (guttate) become 2.2-4B). feature and spots,” nail “oil the or of lifting Psoriatic (see plate nails onycholysis, Figure pitting,

phenomenon). can by or by (Koebner’s be irritation local trauma Psoriatic lesions provoked complex which deposition, can cutaneous infection immune guttate triggers Streptococcal to lead psoriasis. lithium, and ACEIs, Some medications, induce β-blockers, such as also psoriasis. can

Psoriatic the with region knees, but as as also and affected. digits,” begins wrists hands be lumbosacral ankles arthritis may in usually “sausage the well the involvement usually are spinal . with HLAB27 patients Arthritic

it of form, common with electrolyte less a be serum is abnormalities, loss can and fever, life pustular psoriasis, When proteins. generalized, threatening, presenting

AB FIGURE 2.2-4. Psoriasis.

changes. Skin (A) surfaces with sharply plaques are scales classic located extensor the The commonly elbows, (e.g., demarcated silvery on knees). (B) Nail changes. pitting, witz Note (Reproduced, RM. from and Hur permission, spots.” with the “oil onycholysis, Atlas Pathology 2nd of of Skin: ed. the Correlation, Clinical-Pathological Stamford, Appleton 1998: Lange, 15, 18.) CT: &

usually diagnosis. Clinical sufficient is impression for

be (bleeding Classically Auspitz when useful. presents with can scale scraped), the but is sign biopsy

infiltrate microabscess) cell rete shows the thickened elongated granular epidermis, stratum of classically nuclei, (Munro’s layer, ridges, neutrophilic an Histology a in and sterile preservation absent a corneum.

or Treat agents, keratolytic including anthralin steroids PUVA. tar, combined with therapy, topical with with UV along for be Methotrexate cases. used may severe derivatives) Retinoids (vitamin also may A be used.

first and should Arthritis with if with NSAIDs then necessary. methotrexate be treated should ﬂ be Systemic induce as psoriatic can avoided, tapering corticosteroids ares.

as in psoriasis. and psoriatic biologic have proven severe agents effective TNF-α arthritis Recently, such inhibitors

edema is area. characterized localized Urticaria by superficial, intense in a > weeks). It can usually also 6 is (lasting acute be but chronic the cells from results I hypersensitivity response. of mast release prostaglandins) type substances condition (histamine, The from vasoactive in a

anaphylaxis. a in ■Hives itchy severity can life-threatening from few range bumps to

lesion elevated plaque or variable white is is in and typical or The reddish size. papule an that hours. and a Lesions widespread last are few

swelling, tongue swelling, more (deeper, extracutaneous reactions, swelling), include and allergic diffuse severe GI can symptoms, angioedema joint fever. In asthma, manifestations

insect urticaria a drug, virus, response is be trigger Acute may that a a stimulus. or bite, food, physical to Chronic urticaria idiopathic. usually is

clinical and report. Diagnosed by impression patient demonstrates edema. perivascular Biopsy determine can be cause. difficult It often the to

systemic with Treat antihistamines. Topical medications benefit. are of no

in patients drug reaction suspicion hospitalized and a Maintain for a are cutaneous high who rashes. develop lupus-like, many take including forms, lichenoid, reactions can vasculitic, vesicular. purpuric, and Such urticarial, may different cause same types in hypersensitivity reactions, drug can all and types of different patients. of sometimes four reactions the cause Drugs

not (i.e., a patient days or taken so drug new causative two 7–14 if have drug that day occur after is drug they probably reacts never a a before), Eruptions starting within agent. of exposure, a the

symmetrical, Eruptions relatively widespread, pruritic. are and generally the offending of are 1–2 Most removal following relatively within short-lived, weeks agent. disappearing

of macules the eruption, exception agent. which in (usually area reddish The genitalia, triggering is each fixed exposed the face, time or the same or drug patient is papules the that develop consists to extremities) often persistent brown there After a resolve, lesions is pigmentation. these

eruptions of complications Extreme erythroderma (TEN). include and toxic drug necrolysis epidermal

impression. by clinical Diagnosed Patients eosinophilia eosinophils on histopathology. and have may

Discontinue offending treat antihistamines. with agent; the symptoms

often pattern is many triggers targetoid reaction and has classic lesions A with cutaneous recurrent. that HSV by are triggered recurrent some lip. are of cases many idiopathic, Although infection the drugs, sulfa drugs triggers infections. anticonvulsants, are penicillin, (e.g., mycoplasmal Other and barbiturates, NSAIDs) common

lesions other has characteristic may The Figure (see target as 2.2-5), but lesion of well. be seen types appearance a

membranes, are The where disease seen. can on mucous erosions occur macules blister. clear develop start then and a erythematous that lesions become Typically, as centrally often palms soles affected. are and The

associated eruption). May precede symptoms, may (these systemic myalgias, fever, with headache, arthralgias including be and symptoms

form, and disease to uncomplicated the is minor the its In localized skin. two in mucosal at or Stevens-Johnson erythema syndrome, patients can TEN very ill to are least However, severe multiforme lead which with of surfaces. involvement

Diagnosed by clinical impression. cases multiple with labial recurrences. herpes sought of in A should history recurrent all be

necessary; treatment benefit. all is no that Symptomatic is systemic corticosteroids of are

major cases treated should treated cases can be be as with antipruritics; burns. Minor patients of In may HSV, suppressive the frequency with ↓ acyclovir rashes.

2.2-5. FIGURE multiforme. Erythema

pale Evolving with are a dull consisting of and seen a and target red a a ring. erythematous outer appearance zone, center, plaques papules darker Hurwitz RM. (Reproduced, from with permission, Clinical-Pathological ed. Skin: of Pathology Atlas the of 2nd Correlation, Lange, 24.) & Appleton Stamford, 1998: CT:

condition lose widespread scalded-skin of be SJS staphylococcal another sheets in skin. (SSSS), and with patients may which TEN syndrome confused seen usually in infectious of SSSS is 6 and has children etiology. age < years an a usually by adults caused seen is generally is and drug reaction. SJS/TEN in

with erythema Patients a may (as falseVDRL have in nodosum SLE).

of TEN on a two life-threatening immunologic drug-induced diseases reaction. points caused that different are spectrum SJS often mucocutaneous and exfoliative constitute by the of involves whereas area of < BSA. surface The of epidermal SJS separation > 30% (BSA), 10% TEN body involves considered is BSA 10–30% overlap. of of often Involvement SJS/TEN

tenderness, rash, prodrome, be preceded ﬂulike drug May erythema skin multiforme, or a a maculopapular painful mouth by lesions.

drugs, to medications Often NSAIDs. history as seizure quinolones, of penicillin, (e.g., such allopurinol, carbamazepine), corticosteroids, with phenytoin, associated exposure or cephalosporins, a sulfonamides, new

erythematous, Exam macules targetoid reveals mucosal erosions with or widespread atypical cutaneous lesions. severe epidermal conﬂuent Nikolsky’s sign and and often epidermal The a show become detachment. lesions

and mouth, often Mucous and eroded become well. eyes, as hemorrhagic the of genitals membranes

eosinophils the shows of mononuclear perivascular papillary degeneration the and dermis. Biopsy infiltrate some the basal SJS: layer of with in epidermis may Subepidermal blisters seen. be also

lymphocytic TEN: full-thickness cell-poor infiltrate. a with epidermal sparse shows there is necrosis eosinophilic perivascular infiltrate; Biopsy

SSSS biopsy, only damage. epidermal TEN demonstrates damage, vs. SSSS: superficial TEN shows whereas full-thickness On

burns. graft-versus-host therapy, transplant), (usually The after includes and also reaction marrow differential radiation bone

same as Patients including complications 2° burn victims, difficulties, the disturbances, infections. electrolyte have thermoregulatory and and maintenance electrolyte ﬂuid includes balance. and Treatment skin of coverage in Controversial of systemic stages the corticosteroids or early include IVIG. TEN SJS/ treatments mortality. risk of high a There is

diseases chronic Coccidioides, colitis, panniculitis reactions infection Crohn’s and various OCPs), antibiotics, disease, TB), inﬂ Yersinia, sulfonamides, A drug Streptococcus, ulcerative sarcoidosis, Behçet’s include disease). (e.g., whose triggers (e.g., (e.g., ammatory

slowly and legs on Painful, spread, turning (see patient’s the appear nodules lower erythematous Figure or gray. brown 2.2-6) pain. and present may Patients with fever joint

2.2-6. FIGURE nodosum. Erythema

on pretibial areas. and Erythematous located are commonly plaques nodules ful heal but pain are ulceration. spontaneously and without Lesions indurated Hurwitz from permission, with (Reproduced, RM. Clinical-Pathological 2nd the Correlation, of Atlas of Pathology ed. Skin:

& 1998: CT: Stamford, Appleton Lange, 132.)

by clinical Diagnosed impression. shows Histology septal panniculitis. nonspecific

risk, include should to Workup ASO and bowel an patients in symptoms. series GI PPD small out CXR in test who with a rule IBD a rule out a high patients to sarcoid, are titer,

the factor treat underlying Remove triggering where disease possible. and the be multiforme. may lead can NSAIDs to but used erythema

mucous an autoimmune condition life-threatening erosions to A leading skin intraepidermal characterized widespread the painful blister by of membranes. and adherence, against responsible are molecules desmoglein loss keratinocyte attachment. leading of directed for to Antibodies cellular middle-aged Patients are generally (40–60).

mucous is typically membrane to ulcers, mouth skin with involvement, involvement. with progression Initial presentation generally may an accompanied and often with but 2° only crusting, be infections. presents intact seen, by blister erosions, Rarely, weeping,

Along with sign clinical and skin to a the a Nikolsky’s confirm produce natural skin adjacent rubbing with ability diagnosis. by picture, biopsy to uorescence blister) a blister (the immunoﬂ the

split the free-ﬂ Biopsy acantholysis in oating shows (intraepidermal blister). keratinocytes with are uorescence confirmatory and for ELISA antibodies. antidesmoglein Immunoﬂ

is treatment generally required. Long-term used high in corticosteroids systemic side introduced corticosteroid combination doses to ↓ with are at steroid-sparing Initially, early effects. agents

and include agents azathioprine. Steroid-sparing mycophenolate mofetil been Recently, disease. rituximab and IVIG recalcitrant for have successfully used

leads that membrane. An separation blistering the epidermal acquired at to basement disease commonly It of most patients age. 60–80 in years seen is pathogenesis zone basement superficially the involves bullous which antibodies the membrane are pemphigoid in lies Its against antigen, that developed (BMZ). that complement eosinophil provoke degranulation and inﬂammatory lead activate reaction complexes to and Antigen-antibody an

IGU E R F 2.2-7. Bullous pemphigoid.

can bullae seen. and Multiple serous partially be tense hemorrhagic with TB. from permission, (Reproduced, Fitzpatrick Synopsis Dermatology, ed. Atlas of Clinical Color & 4th 2001: York: New 100.) McGraw-Hill, BMZ. separation at the nearly epidermis. roof are normal their because blisters of stable consists The

lesions. erythematous often Presents preceded blisters firm, on arise by that urticarial skin, stable with . sign is Nikolsky’s Figure and erosions The (see 2.2-7). form blisters crusts is commonly case are membranes than in less the pemphigus. involved Mucous

clinical to picture. the Diagnosed according eosinophil-rich Skin often an infiltrate. a biopsy blister, shows with subepidermal the immunoglobulin dermal-epidermal at and uorescence C3 and complement linear demonstrates Immunoﬂ IgG junction.

corticosteroids. Systemic early prevent applied help can blister to corticosteroids Topical formation lesions. when

due surfaces of A to with recurrent infection HSV. eruption vesicular painful, mucocutaneous the HSV-1 HSV-2 oral-labial lesions. genital usually lesions, usually whereas causes produces into giant spreads through epidermal causing them cells, virus The to fuse cells. inﬂ local swelling. and The erythema to ammatory host leads response

The contact, initial nerve dormant in remains after direct the herpesvirus ganglia. which by passed infection local is are longer 1° more severe recurrences. generally than and episodes

Onset or by of is edema tissue. pain involved prodromal discomfort, can burning, also and with tingling, malaise, preceded but present fever, lymphadenopathy,

Recurrences are to areas by mucocutaneous innervated involved nerve. limited the

on 2.2-8A). Recurrent presents a (HSV-1): “cold crusted as of consists herpes Figure the an erythematous cluster oral sore,” Typically vesicles which common base (see of fever. by triggered and sun often is It

by 1° Recurrent blisters Unilateral but and characterized of base, erythematous (HSV-2): pain a on cluster infection. systemic herpes an the involvement less and genital with than

Diagnosed clinical primarily by the picture. Figure diagnosis. smear 2.2-8B) (see giant presumptive cells on Tzanck Multinucleated a yield

VZV or for same Tzanck, is appearance has ﬂ so direct diagnosis. culture the uorescent staining needed definitive antibody on

HSV, consisting knees, scalp. papules herpetiformis and the from on buttocks, neck, of and differs elbows, vesicles pruritic Dermatitis dermal is seen IgA on papillae. Granular condition it). (15–25% celiac have patients of with disease celiac is may The associated and a gluten-free diet. dapsone Treat with

2.2-8. AB FIGURE Herpes simplex.

infection. (A) 1° before Grouped on and erythematous pustules the to progress resolving. may base vesicles on patient’s an lips mucosa oral (B) smear. Tzanck diagnosis presumptive infec giant from HSV multinucleated of The provide cells ﬂuid a vesicular tion. distinguish infection. VZV The cannot HSV Tzanck smear and between (Reproduced, Hurwitz with from permission,

RM. the Correlation, Pathology of ed. Atlas Skin: of 2nd Clinical-Pathological Stamford, Lange, 145.) Appleton CT: & 1998:

↓ immunocompromised or patients) and or both severe frequency (IV IV cases recurrences. for of acyclovir severity for the Oral the outbreaks suppressive with therapy used patients multiforme. with those Daily year be acyclovir, in famciclovir per or erythema > for 6 valacyclovir, may or

of somewhat Acyclovir in duration but shedding effective viral prevent reducing the recurrence. is does ointment not

remaining AIDS with ulcers antiviral therapy. persist, resistant to can HSV In patients, can lasting > be Symptomatic an 1 HSV infection illness. month AIDS-defining considered

VZV by herpes varicella transmission two direct zoster—with or occurring different diseases, droplet respiratory via contact. and causes the hours has crusted. have and eruption days, appears before 10–20 an 24 until lasting contagion period of lesions incubation with beginning VZV

■Varicella:

prodrome headache, the hours A the consisting myalgia malaise, fever, occurs onset 24 of rash. and before of

crusting appear to 2–3 from on over evolving crops central then red and grouped (“dewdrop over. petal”) of days, rose vesicles a in Pruritic lesions period a macules

time, over all given their entire any At stages patients have lesions body. of membranes The are spared. the scalp, but involved, and are face, trunk, soles and mucous palms

is such more complications severe, as adults, with pneumonia systemic chickenpox encephalitis. In and often

Zoster:

distribution. zoster with a Herpes of cropping dermatomal recurrence in up specific along VZV lesions the nerve’s represents the nerve, are an usually Outbreaks Figure grouped pain base by and then blisters preceded intense erythematous as (see 2.2-9). on local arise

disseminated immunocompromised patients, local systemic diseases disease, that In disease, lead to can and varicella. zoster cutaneous mimic severe severe neuralgia. may with patients develop zoster postherpetic Older

the Diagnosed picture. by clinical

self-limited in healthy children. Varicella is vaccine A infants, and disease is for and children, for routinely used is prevention. adults available

Adults be acyclovir. should treated with systemic

most with zoster, is of the for Although cutaneous speed this patients control acyclovir pain may course important disease.

poxvirus patients. AIDS young in infection and common most that children A is in physical It is spread contact. by

is rash composed central papules, ■The frequently umbilication. tiny of with waxy giant see or In face are children, trunk, If on lesions the 2.2-10). (see found extremities, molluscum you Figure are adults, In genitalia HIV. contagiosum, on think they commonly found the

and the region. perineal in

FIGURE 2.2-9. Varicella zoster.

base is unilateral The grouped characteristic. on dermatomal vesicles erythematous an of the distribution

2.2-10. FIGURE contagiosum. Molluscum

on The the is eyelid ﬂeshy, dome-shaped, characteristic. papule umbilicated child’s RM. permission, duced, Hurwitz from (Repro with Pathology of Skin: Atlas Clinical-Pathological of the

ed. Correlation, 2nd Lange, CT: 149.) 1998: Appleton Stamford, &

AIDS on appear quite lesions often In and large. become can the patients, face

asymptomatic they become are irritated. or Lesions inﬂamed unless

the of the and picture, and clinical contents the by confirmed by staining papules. expressing Diagnosed bodies. large for or inclusion identification Giemsa or of the Wright’s allows stain molluscum

or Any freezing, to lesions. the is acid curetting, effective, trichloroacetic method local destructive applying including over to untreated and spontaneously children. in years are resolve months Lesions often left

HPV and different occur mucous of skin, can types and other membranes, caused by are Warts epithelia. many on and squamous Although HPV malignancies. 16 (especially of to 18) some usually subtypes benign, lead by contact. direct Spread is to hyperproliferation cells. leads HPV infected of

warts most prevalent infection. HPV Common are the they seen occur anywhere. often Although on hands, most can the them appearance. and to palmar giving rather than atter downward grow surfaces, outward, warts into skin On a the ﬂ plantar tend

or genital nodule region. classic on the papule The wart or penis, a cauliﬂower-like is glans the vulva, the perianal appearing and generally oral, Warts genital, appearing white, mucosa. even are and membranes on on laryngeal velvety mucous HPV. transmitted genital with by infants are warts to Laryngeal mothers

picture. clinical the by Diagnosed in Acetowhitening visualizing helpful can mucosal be lesions. a any until not HPV latency and sometimes long is at birth There years period, lesions acquiring children later. manifesting with

by centers cryotherapy, curettage, on the tissue Treatment keratolytics. or acid of destruction treated imiquimod, podophyllin, 5-FU. acid, or with Genital are warts trichloroacetic locally the malignancy. evidence HPV of monitored cervix on histologically must be and for lesions cytologically

local A by children A that occurs is in group streptococcal organisms. both and infection primarily superficial, and caused weeping staphylococcal is direct transmitted by It contact.

are types: There two

type: crusts face 2.211). pustules honey-colored the Common generally an base; and Figure erythematous appears by (see on on Characterized

blisters. type: characterized Usually large by stable Bullous acral;

caused into SSSS. almost evolve always S. can and Bullous is by aureus impetigo glomerulonephritis. acute impetigo complicated be can Streptococcal by streptococcal

2.2-11. FIGURE Impetigo.

is strep? by group condition another caused skin A What plaque. presents small turns a the which cheek into Erysipelas, painful shiny as red that a patch on red raised, of a or trauma pharyngitis. Patients have history often Treat with penicillin.

around are mouth. with most found the and crust pustules nose commonly superficial golden-brown a Dried Hurwitz from permission, (Reproduced, with RM. Pathology of ed. the 2nd Correlation, Skin: Clinical-Pathological Atlas of 165.) 1998: & Appleton CT: Stamford, Lange,

tongue. appearance; strawberry “Sunburn Scarlet with goosebumps” fever: by pyogenes. S. Caused Penicillin. Treatment:

the typhi: Salmonella disease. papules 10–20 plus gallbladder on in pink of spots”) groups trunk Small (“rose chronic carrier state. for Cholecystectomy Treatment:

tooth. from the a submaxillary/ spaces bilateral infected angina of results Ludwig’s cellulitis is that an usually sublingual It asphyxiation. death presents and mouth with and warm lead a from can to dysphagia, fever, red, drooling,

the picture. by clinical Diagnosed

antistaphylococcal with antibiotics with Treat activity. patients. hasten agents prevent often spread other recovery antibiotics Topical sufficient, to can and systemic but are

along infection that An brownish-red with scales patches folds. presenting Corynebacterium, by appear major fine caused as characteristically skin is more among It common diabetics.

exam lesions. reveals light Wood’s coral-red uorescence of ﬂ filamentous staining Gram reveals gram-, rods.

erythromycin. Treat with is erythromycin.) treated with (Remember: erythrasma

involving muscle tissue, to the or connective the addition deep, tissue, local infection in skin. subcutaneous A or damaged systemic of commonly a source an caused streptococci from or A area infection. from It skin group originating is staphylococci of by common is Community-acquired cause. increasingly MRSA an stasis, drug diabetes, compromise. venous and Risk factors immune include IV use,

hot, tender swollen, red, with skin. Presents Fever and chills also are common.

antibiotic and clinical may the determine by in Diagnosed wound culture treatment. diagnosis for aid help sensitivities picture; cultures Blood bacteremia is when be suspected. obtained should of and MRSA. are sensitivities case Culture in important abscess, and urticaria, out dermatitis, necrotizing Rule contact osteomyelitis, fasciitis.

systemic conditions, hand with cases evidence mild concerns. involvement, is DM, extremes days 7–10 age, of toxicity, antibiotics Treat if other IV of with or comorbid or orbital of antibiotics there oral for or

by severe infection a followed plane anesthesia. causing pain fascial Deep along caused perfringens. pyogenes Infection by or S. is Clostridium trauma but of or a not recent history surgery affected the is to always elicited. area often A

and of Presents onset with trauma at the sudden or surgery. of swelling site recent pain progresses often to Pain anesthesia.

days. course quickly erythema area of to An the spreads hours of over leading Margins skin, near and to insult, site purplish normal dusky the necrosis. or ultimately into becomes of skin move out

can appearance layer; initially deep if open, easily the to subcutaneous quickly fascia). layers Necrosis of fingers the have in pass and the undermining is two reveal gloved skin fascia spreads of necrotic skin the (infection can yellow-green between

volume necrosis, planes, bullae, important production, The signs, pain, discharge, intravascular lack most gas signs and tissue burrowing fascial through rapid loss. severe putrid tissue inﬂammatory are of a classical

air radiographs tissue. scans Local in show CT or lesion the Biopsy can be edge the from diagnostic. of

emergency. A surgical aggressive critical. surgical and debridement is Early

the organism Streptococcus the G of is If choice. involved, is principal drug penicillin Clindamycin line. second is

For third-generation anaerobic a give metronidazole coverage, or cephalosporin.

hair of follicle. Inﬂammation the Pityrosporum occasionally such by caused be Although infection caused Candida by typically gram-bacteria, albicans folliculitis may as and Staphylococcus, ovale. with or Streptococcus, yeast It in be patients ingrown may common from (most hair). curly mechanical, hairs arising also with

opening a a pustule as penetrating that the tiny of usually Presents and follicle it. appears hair hair at a has follicle When furuncle, the or is abscess, develops. hair deeper, a infection

disseminate more carbuncle. and lesions and follicles painful than are larger adjacent a folliculitic may Furuncles to form to with are at or diabetes immunosuppression ↑ Patients risk.

is the AIDS whom pruritic disease and Folliculitis critical in can a problem resistant intensely to therapy. be in patients,

picture. clinical Diagnosed the by

necrotizing to scrotum the fasciitis and form gangrene that of is perineal a localized is area. Fournier

to leads tub folliculitis.” “hot

does erythromycin sun not cause with exposure. Ironically, erythema It is tetracycline serious cause and that can doxycycline photosensitivity!

systemic antibiotics. cases mild antibiotics treat used require severe can but disease, to be Topical must incised, out MRSA. drained, rule and cultured Large lesions to be shave. be who prone are hairs to should to advised Patients not ingrown

adolescents. common is skin disease An among endogenous that of the pathogenesis Propionibacterium sebaceous or acnes involvement of hormonal sebaceous activation the follicle, The follicle, and of causing involves development in comedo the inﬂammation. plugged glands, cosmetics). (e.g., (e.g., medications by lithium, occlusion corticosteroids) Comedones or topical caused be may by

There are of lesions: stages three acne

little closed in Comedo: but (“whiteheads”); present ammation. large with May (“blackheads”) or inﬂ be open quantities

nodular. a comedo ammatory: creating ruptures, can Inﬂ be large that The pustule and

heals, Scar: scars may inﬂ develop. As ammation the papules at scarring. Picking exacerbates

along behind epidermoid are develop and Two can the acne: types of occur cysts the ﬂuctuant which eyebrows and pustules, which cysts, large, ears. cysts, inﬂammatory in

develops Acne years. at typically and puberty for first several persists have females. than cystic more acne are severe, are to likely Males more Women on to in fewer their and 20s have painful featuring lesions tend chin. a that cyclically comedones the with ﬂares menstruation, variant may stimulation lesions. Androgenic contribute to these

by the picture. clinical Diagnosed

comedones topical (Retin-A) and benzoyl peroxide. Treat tretinoin with

Inﬂammatory tetracycline, topical should (e.g., with clindamycin) erythromycin). or erythromycin, systemic antibiotics lesions be (e.g., treated agents

and 90% improved marked in > acne acne. of of leads (Accutane) has Isotretinoin severe to patients improvement treatment greatly the

associated and however, transient in be cause cholesterol, depression. triglycerides, also Isotretinoin may and and with elevations it LFTs, teratogen is, may a

required monthly are and Patients blood cholesterol, thus pregnancy), serum to are check monitored and to triglycerides. quantitative isotretinoin LFTs, tests (to carefully rule on get out β-hCG are a Monthly contingent refills completion blood testing dermatologist. on evaluation of and by

region sacrococcygeal the near in top cleft. of the natal that the usually occur Abscesses true cysts. Their not not are name such not and as be cysts appropriate, contain may hair, all all to a region role. the plays trauma Repetitive microbes, a is especially condition complicated folliculitis thought an Bacteroides. perineal abscess start that as The by to becomes commonly men often 40, most 20 and ages women. affecting the It more occurs than between of

and cellulitis. associated cleft abscess Patients present warm, with indurated is tender, can an with that uctuant, be and at ﬂ drainage the purulent sometimes natal or may but are Systemic cysts fistulas. symptoms develop into uncommon, perianal

Risk hairy clefts, lifestyle. and natal obesity, sedentary include a factors and deep

Diagnosed by the clinical picture. abscess. Rule out perirectal and anal

of of by followed sterile the of anesthesia Treatment drainage packing local consists and wound. under the abscess incision allowed intention. should heal Abscesses by to be 2°

needed are is coverage and cellulitis if aerobic anaerobic are unless prescribed, required. both not present; is they Antibiotics

the Good can shaving sacrococcygeal skin prevent recurrence. and hygiene of help local surgeon. follow with should Patients a up

ovale part (morphologic variants normal orbiculare). by ora Pityrosporum yeast of furfur, Malassezia ﬂ the Pityrosporum are a that and is skin Caused organism as can such and overgrow factors the well and conditions skin as humid contribute. but host a as sweaty is what oily pathogen, on unclear the become It leads skin surface to Cushing’s are syndrome risk and also immunosuppression factors.

with of chest Patients back. on color, usually present small, the varying patches scaly or

be by virtue as with Lesions melanin thickened or interference may scale. production, a result they be hyperpigmented of hypopigmented of may

reveals potassium that “spaghetti meatballs” and by and hyphae of (KOH) confirmed clinical pattern spores. impression, by hydroxide of preparation a scale and Diagnosed

application once by lesions Treat for topical one followed weekly sulfide with prophylaxis. selenium for week, daily

infection” caused called “thrush,” or caused can albicans. by “yeast is Commonly but by most Candida any species commonly C. candidiasis be patients, infection armpits, as it below the immune-competent breasts. areas the a typically presents membranes in the skin In skin mucous superficial folds, such vagina, moist and or as of sign often of thrush in immune not is is a Oral among but uncommon adults a system. weakened it children,

antibiotic have use, a Patients diabetes. use, steroid or of often history

vary affected: site to according Symptoms the

cannot Oral off. white with scraped easily be Presents candidiasis: painless plaques that

as seen erythematous often of skin pink, macules that converge, with folds. satellite Presents Candidiasis lesions circular, skin: smaller the in nearby,

inguinal infants, be diaper seen can the the often and folds. infection In in area along

the by Diagnosed clinical picture.

of of KOH or area. the scraping swab by affected preparation Confirmed a Candida that and become cells leaves hyphae the dissolves untouched visible. candidal such but pseudospores the KOH skin

Oral swish and Oral swallow. ﬂuconazole; nystatin candidiasis:

candidiasis: Topical clean keep and (skin) Superficial skin antifungals; dry.

Diaper Topical rash: nystatin.

a Dermatophytes (i.e., and in live infection. skin, and only tissues keratin hair) with cause of common the nails, are Epidermophyton. Microsporum, include and Causative Trichophyton, organisms for organism rather symptoms. immune dermatophyte, the many itself, to than The responsible of response is the the reservoir Pets are for a Microsporum. circulation, include ↓ immune compromise, chronic athletic skin of activities). Other and factors (e.g., maceration diabetes, from risk peripheral

a subtype: sharp, a border, with as ■ Presentation according Tinea pruritic often Presents scaly, clearing. irregular with central eruption to corporis: varies with be following children May seen in patients pets. in immunocompromised contact or infected

between as Presents skin toes foot”) with the (“athlete’s interdigital chronic soles. Tinea on pedis/manuum: scaling a scaly or as the thickened, erosions is involvement of typical. Asymmetric the hands

scrotum) Tinea sparing cruris chronic with pedis. itch”): associated (typically the A of groin tinea that usually the infection (“jock is

to eruption Tinea diffuse, similar (“ringworm”): dermatitis. A seborrheic capitis scalp scaly

KOH scales Diagnosed by picture; clinical showing by prepared in confirmed the hyphae.

be can treated or topical with systemic Patients antifungals. systemic be must Tinea with treated drugs. capitis

blood specific and depending their the on species. of off on live Lice body, parts lives The and hair; as louse lives its clothing body scalp eggs lays on body. head nits bites the attached and louse to only in the the pubic on lives pubic hair. The louse contact and sharing through by other the or garments. bedclothes body of are Lice spread lead pruritus. to They secrete that local toxins

infection of excoriations severe pruritus, lice risk. a with the is experience 2° Patients bacterial and often epidemics are of head common. Classroom lice

Body those with living conditions. people seen or inadequate lice in hygiene in crowded are with turn their body their contain crablike because shape) anticoagulant bites in blue. “crabs” (called saliva, so squat, Pubic of their lice often

be hairs can clothes. in or Lice seen on

with removal (RID) nits. lice: OTC Treat pyrethrin and of Head mechanical

body, lice: Wash bedding thoroughly. clothes, and Body also Treating the or topical may pyrethrin permethrin with body required. be

RID. Pubic lice: Treat with

lays scabiei, tiny into Sarcoptes skin eggs. corneum a after which a surface, Caused female stratum the the on digs mates the passage that and by her arthropod pruritus allergy once an that ↑ The to leads intensity burrowing to in

association lateral ■Venous treated Found be near can edema. lower or the wound dressings): in ulcers medial with stasis Other with specialized malleolus, often (all extremity ulcers: and (Unna compression compression or stockings) with elevation. Treat boots

Found of insufficiency heel and the on toes. tips ■Arterial ulcers: Typically painful. very

points. at of the on foot the toes, Found pressure and ■Neuropathic underside ulcers: usually painless. Typically

the its or develops. products mite Scabies contact. are close through spread mites

with intense especially hot night at after and present showers. Patients pruritus,

hands, affected commonly and The genitals. the sites most are axillae,

with mite’s the track seen On erythematous, papules. be exam, along can sometimes excoriated bacterial infection 2° common. is

history members in of A several family pruritus suggestive. is difficult. the be mite by looking may an this under microscope, The is tunnel often and but scraping intact identifiable

the contacts Patients their should down, from 1–2 applications with overnight well. be treated treated as be permethrin 5% of should neck and also effective. is ivermectin Oral provided. treatment treatment, weeks for so should may Pruritus symptomatic after be two persist

Result ischemic on the that necrosis to continuous skin of from following area. microcirculation restricts pressure area an lie spot most too one long. commonly bedridden for in patients who in Ulcers are seen lack ↑ formation. ulcer or An of of likelihood the fat underlying prominence bony who are mobility risk. at or also ↑ Patients cutaneous lack sensation the urine or Incontinence stool facilitating macerate ulceration. of may skin,

of graded Ulcers damage: degree are by

redness. Characterized Grade by persistent I:

Grade II: by Marked ulceration.

Grade III: destruction as skin structures of muscle the or fat. Involves such beneath

history by and appearance. clinical the Diagnosed

and is patients beds that and pressure. routinely moving involves Prevention special distribute using key bedridden wound lesions Once ulcer with routine be can an treated low-grade including dressings. has care, developed, hydrocolloid High-grade surgical lesions debridement. require

tissue. of necrosis as body Defined subtypes: are There and gas. dry, wet, three exclude of does subtype others. presence not the one The are Etiologies as follows:

tissue, from gangrene: atherosclerosis. Dry to blood typically ﬂow Due insufficient to

infection, usually bacterial with ora. Involves Wet gangrene: ﬂ skin

gangrene: infection. Gas to Clostridium perfringens Due

Early and the a ﬂ of are pallor ache, signs Dry gangrene: dull esh. cold, dry, and toe) As a sets necrosis tissue shriveled. becomes bluish-black, (usually the in, risk vasculopathy, are Diabetes, factors. smoking and

or gangrene: with blistered pus. bruised, tissue Wet swollen, The appears

dark recent Typically injury of around site swelling turns and Gas with pale occurs that skin a at surgery, presenting or the red. with injury then gangrene: and healthy producing exposes are tissue, tissue that gas of separates infection. rapidly it to Bacteria destructive and A medical emergency.

by clinical impression. Diagnosed

amputation debridement, of Surgical is with treatment. if necessary, the mainstay be surgery. given Antibiotics to alone adjuvant ﬂow, but not should by as of inadequate suffice they blood do an virtue

can C. hyperbaric to which oxygen, treated be toxic is perfringens. anaerobic gangrene with Gas the careful should should care and foot Susceptible maintain patients avoid trauma.

(see intertriginous hyperkeratotic in with and hyperpigmented (genital Figure of and the axillary appearance is the zones a 2.2-12). in especially nape which the regions condition the and neck) velvety A skin

obesity. HAIR-AN DM, disease, Cushing’s Associated with syndrome, and paraneoplastic adenocarcinoma (usually also be a GI). May sign underlying of

Dx: Clinical appearance.

Tx: with May but not be treated. treated topical typically retinoids, Patients weight. encouraged be to should lose

dermatosis mucous involving A the membranes. skin chronic inﬂammatory and induced infection. with by can HCV The be intensely associated be and can pruritic, is condition drugs,

Hx/PE:

with ﬂat-topped, papules. polygonal Presents violaceous, especially stripes), Lesions mem- the (white on may mucous striae Wickham’s have

Pruritic, “P” Phenomenon. and the Persistent, disease: Penile, Planar, Lichen Purple, Puzzling, Polygonal, planus Koebner’s Perioral, is

2.2-12. FIGURE nigricans. Acanthosis

armpit epidermal dark feathered and with the Velvety, edges. of prominent thickening skin is seen fold brown Wolff permission, (Reproduced, et from with K al. Fitzpatrick’s Color & Atlas

ed. 5th of Dermatology, Synopsis Clinical 2005: New McGraw-Hill, 87.) York: Koebner’s phenomena 2.2-13), well of at as site that Figure branes prominent trauma). as (see the appear (lesions genitalia, often they where The lesions the on appear ulcerated. initial are

resolve more a 6–18 ■Although over chronic course. spontaneously months, have with cases involvement oral those most

of band T epidermal-dermal to reveals layer. lymphocytes junction Dx: the with basal Histology pattern”—i.e., a the a at damage “lichenoid

Mild can treated with Tx: cases be topical corticosteroids. may systemic be severe For disease, used. corticosteroids oral Tretinoin helpful gel be may mucosa. on

disorder chronic A units. of pilosebaceous fair disorder female and among is a common skin. with has those predominance more The is Its unclear. etiology

an have ushing various and generally substances. to ﬂ are middle-aged Patients abnormal often response

with seen erythema is Early telangiectasias. facial in central the disease, Later, develop. pustules papules may and

(sebaceous the findings and include gland hyperplasia rhinophyma nose). keratitis of ocular Associated

2.2-13. FIGURE Lichen planus.

are conﬂ of Flat-topped, polygonal, violaceous sharply papules and uent. color defined grouped

(Wickham’s striae). white fine surface reveals is lines shiny and The (Reproduced, sion, permis with et K al. from Wolff Fitzpatrick’s Atlas & Synopsis 5th ed. Color Clinical Dermatology, of

McGraw-Hill, York: 2005: New 125.)

the picture. Diagnosed by clinical not and but older involves with an acne in Rosacea age confused can origin follicular be group. is

especially normally microscopic on hair ↑ are found high of numbers examination scrapings. In can and by percentage seen a in patients, facial skin harmlessly area) be of Demodex mites skin of in the facial (which follicles, the live

topical topical with low-potency Treat corticosteroids or metronidazole. severe systemic may be disease, used. antibiotics In more can oral short-term treated cases metronidazole. with Extremely severe be

acute is dermatitis pink scaly. and that An Its because adults. but mini-epidemics herpesvirus or unknown, been tends 7 it occur has to reaction human (HHV) with a it represent hypothesized viral is among in to young 6 infection etiology to a

■The peripheral patch a diameter several scale. lesion is that herald erythematous in with a and is initial centimeters

papules weeks a 2.2-14). fine later, paper” 2° Figure “cigarette with symmetric (see presenting Days with a exanthem multiple tiny, to scale appears, Papules “Christmas on pattern” giving the patient’s classic arranged are back. a skin tree lines, along

extensive, are more and disease generally among African-Americans. the asymptomatic, Patients be chronic may although pruritic,

tinea confirmed and be impression (the herald rule exam out to KOH clinical fungus by mistaken may Diagnosed patch by for corporis). includes differential eruptions. ordered), should syphilis guttate be The also drug 2° psoriasis, and (RPR

and topical in skin systemic weeks, Patients lubrication, be necessary. treatment antihistamines occasionally but antipruritics, may heal 2–3 without usually Severe a be systemic short treated with can corticosteroids. cases of course

disease unknown. of depigmentation pathogenesis A whose is neurologic, The autoimmune, be or may both. mechanism

otherwise patches normal develop on demarcated, sharply skin, Patients on or ■ depigmented or hands, small, genitalia. face, often macules the

2.2-14. FIGURE rosea. Pityriasis

and erythematous trunk to paper”) plaques on and scale a The oval are extremities. covered white found with often (“cigarette often are round fine proximal the a often patch herald Plaques by preceded are larger (arrow). permission, (Reproduced, RM. from with Hurwitz Pathology of Atlas the 2nd Correlation, ed. Clinical-Pathological of Skin: & 13.) Stamford, Appleton 1998: Lange, CT:

These large sometimes of in expand, patterns, segments include dermatomal spots skin. then to

usually some patients disease and depigmented. with progressive, chronic completely becoming is The

these antithyroid DM, disease but present of antibodies, patients Many seldom diseases. anemia) serologic have (e.g., with markers autoimmune pernicious response develop with may antimelanocyte that Patients to leads an melanoma malignant immune vitiligo.

and clinical with Diagnosed by picture, demonstrating of histology the absence melanocytes. history total piebaldism, cleansers to postinﬂ out melanocytes). to ammatory are Conditions rule (pheno-lated toxic include scleroderma, and exposure hypopigmentation, toxic

or helpful. to and systemic may Topical or be PUVA sunlight psoralens exposure Patients must skin sun because inherent depigmented lacks protection. sunscreen wear uniformly Dyes bleached and a white skin, may the or skin makeup color to the be be may to produce used chemically color.

patients after all in A skin tumor, appearing age very common almost 40. The etiology is unknown. When factors. a suddenly, seborrheic they many production due be tumor keratoses may part growth of epidermal of erupt paraneoplastic syndrome to no have Lesions but problem. a malignant be may cosmetic potential

openings plaques brown follicle prominent with Figure exophytic, papules (see as 2.2-15). and waxy Present have often numbers a appear appearance. great Lesions “stuck-on” and in

Lesions may external either or the or axillae. groin, in especially keratoses, breast, trauma, spontaneously or “Seborrheic become by irritated on.” look StucK and Irritated lesions redder. are smoother SKs,

the histology confirmed epidermal Diagnosed of by picture; horn by can basaloid hyperplasia (prominent benign, openings). pseudocysts cells showing be follicular clinical with (focal cell keratosis, melanocytes), Rule (SCC), squamous basal actinic (BCC). carcinoma ↑ lentigo in carcinoma and out cell

Cryotherapy curettage or curative. is

situ. SCC precursor in of A caused to Lesions exposure sunlight. are by

2.2-15. FIGURE keratoses. Seborrheic

on by Multiple and “stuck-on” papules seen back, a the nodules brown, characterized appearance. warty are permission, with from TB. (Reproduced, Fitzpatrick of & Synopsis Atlas Color

ed. 4th Dermatology, Clinical McGraw-Hill, 2001: 195.) New York:

have patients, face a arms) sun-exposed on appear and and areas Lesions (especially lesion. the affect primarily older who rarely solitary thick (see that crusted and with a scale become can light Figure erythematous are 2.2-16). They to find be to be difficult palpation. may Early and visualize may easier lesions by

by Diagnosed clinical impression. Biopsy over a seldom dermis. is sun-damaged intraepidermal shows atypia necessary but in carcinoma of form cell The squamous situ. includes Bowen’s differential a disease,

to lesion. be topical destroy the 5-FU, imiquimod can Cryosurgery, or used topical or If curettage is appropriate. suspected, followed carcinoma excision is by biopsy to Patients advised should protection. be use sun

FIGURE 2.2-16. Actinic keratosis.

a white above The an discrete rough and scale. erythematous base patch has with Hurwitz RM. permission, (Reproduced, from 2nd Skin: Atlas Clinical-Pathological of ed. Pathology the Correlation, of 1998: Appleton 359.) & Stamford, CT: Lange,

as potential tumor, death. for the metastasis The skin common most well destructive with second effects as and locally predispose to UV and common carcinogens, therapy, but radiation chronically factor, exposure SCC. (as presence in most osteomyelitis) causative to light developing is patients draining infectious of sinuses chemical the also prior the with arising keratoses. older actinic occur in sun-damaged from skin, adults Most SCCs

a have ■SCCs have a (see Figure variants single often 2.2-17). patient forms, multiple will of variety and

FIGURE 2.2-17. cell Squamous carcinoma.

the crusting erythematous this of plaque. and Note ulceration erosion Most nodules ulceration. or are exophytic lesions with RM. with permission, Hurwitz (Reproduced, from Pathology Skin: the Atlas of ed. Correlation, Clinical-Pathological 2nd of Lange, 360.) 1998: Appleton & Stamford, CT:

tumor, may rapidly benign regress look more a develops but Keratoacanthoma, like SCC epithelial and spontaneously. can is that usually similar to SCCs. Treatment of

keratoses on and ■SCCs are lips rarely do more but metastasize, to actinic the that those so. that from arise arise likely ulcers on more lip occurs far commonly the SCC than on BCC. does

Diagnosed suspicion and necessary is biopsy, for diagnosis and planning. confirmed accurate which by therapeutic appropriate clinical by

membrane penetration basement the cells intraepidermal growing Histology atypical of dermis. with keratinocytes, shows into epidermal malignant by the are histologically. graded SCCs

excision. Surgical with or high potential radiation Lesions require chemotherapy. additional metastatic may

potential. metastatic no most malignant has growing destructive The but locally slow common skin virtually and tumor, BCC is light risk Chronic is UV main exposure the factor. or areas nevus are basal cell arsenic of on lesions non-sun-exposed Multiple syndrome. inherited exposure suggestive areas. appear Most the lesions face on other sun-exposed on and

growth varying BCC depth with 2.2-18). types many of ulceration, There degrees pigmentation, Figure are of and of (see

2.2-18. FIGURE Basal cell carcinoma.

is an nodule above with Seen telangiectatic translucent ﬂeshy, surface. erythematous, a RM. from (Reproduced, Hurwitz permission, with of Correlation, Clinical-Pathological Skin: ed. Atlas Pathology the of 2nd 362.) Lange, CT: & Stamford, 1998: Appleton

resembling basal by of Diagnosed biopsy showing the islands of confirmed impression; clinical proliferating epidermis. layer the epithelium by dermatitis, benign hypopigmented The differential tumors, includes psoriasis, disease. melanocytic Paget’s and nevi, melanoma,

include curettage Options and cryotherapy, Mohs’ therapy, electrodesiccation/cautery, excision, deep surgery. superficial and radiation 95%. rates > are Cure

world. the incidence throughout disease; most been The has common increasing life-threatening dermatologic of nevi, nevi, sun number (especially exposure) include the intermittent or and of short, exposure in congenital bursts Risk dysplastic and factors intense of melanocytic childhood with an presence nevi. ↑ Immunosuppression risk. also ↑ mole syndrome. the (FAM-M) atypical inherit with and Some familial melanoma melanoma patients a predisposition to several 2.2-4). (see There Table subtypes are

usually melanomas normally basal begin melanocytes found. epidermal Malignant in where the are layer,

in lesion increasing phase situ). diameter (typical presenting horizontal-intraepidermal, maligna is of ﬂat with or a in that is The growth but first melanoma lentigo growth there phase with is vertical dermal a Later, invasion.

ulcer size/shape/color/contour/surface Figure 2.2-19). contour of pigment, by nodule and in and changes border, are Lesion (see formation, include suggestive noted characteristics irregular patient irregular and melanoma that the

TABLE 2.2-4. Melanoma of Types

Arises Lentigo a in lentigo. maligna of Usually the on skin found sun-damaged face. younger the presenting in affects adults, and spreading women. trunk Superfcial men in Typically on on legs the it A to the early, epidermis. still ned identify phase prolonged disease relatively growth when the horizontal helps is conf phase ulceration have or Nodular appear nodule as rapidly with Lesions a reddish-brown and a hemorrhage. growing vertical rapid growth hands and pigmented Begins the slowly as spreading, feet Acral a lentiginous on patch. commonly African-Americans. most seen Type Asians in and a lesion without Amelanotic clinical Presents as pigmentation. identify. diffcult to Extremely

FIGURE 2.2-19. Melanoma.

color this of the and border plaque. large variation, diameter Note asymmetry, irregularity,

RM. Hurwitz (Reproduced, permission, with from Skin: Pathology Clinical- Atlas of the of

ed. Correlation, 2nd Pathological CT: & Lange, 1998: 432.) Appleton Stamford, lesion. 10% no metastatic may melanoma known with 1° and ■Malignant melanoma patients have of metastasize, (between its hematogenous almost the regional nodes), nearby spread (via every body). and local distant lymph skin), lesion in be to the regional lymphatic (to or organ may Metastasis or original

essential. recognition and are Early treatment for examined are be spreading and that criteria, suspicious adults mnemonic). according lesions identify for should melanoma (see nevi which All dysplastic superficial melanoma ABCDE the to

malignant The is an change. of onset pruritus also early sign of excisional performed lesion. any should biopsy on suspicious An be is determined Malignancy histologically.

Breslow’s (TNM) tumor-node-metastasis millimeters) melanomas Table (depth by are of by thickness (see measured staging Malignant and 2.2-5). invasion staged in Clark’s to another 2.2-6). prognosis level classification Table depth system linking is (see melanoma

2.2-5. TABLE TNM Melanoma of Staging

AB LE T 2.2-6. Level Characterization of Melanoma Clark’s by

the Lesions margins. to skin with confined are treated excision by does staging useful dissection ↑ survival. not for node but Lymph is and therapy are but not to be likely used Chemotherapy may successful. be radiation

melanomas. high at after potential for the development to are subsequent risk but the melanoma relapse several low patients melanoma years; at early with of Malignant are risk has relapse for essential. surveillance is Patient thus

Kaposi’s A is attributed herpesvirus proliferative has to a sarcoma–associated called HHV8, that also been which herpesvirus, (KSHV). disease vascular

several are of There types KS:

macules papules extremities. variant the and vascular plaques on by lower and characterized coalescent is The multicentric classic occurs patients preponderance Jewish descent. It Mediterranean in usually of of with Ashkenazi elderly, a cases or in the

KS) patients. KS cases occur disseminated in and in More immunocompromised (endemic African

HIV-associated remains HIV-associated KS of aggressive less it advent the most HAART, Epidemic common although is form the common malignancy. since an of disease, and the

with biopsy by spindle staining. are confirmed tumor showing clinical impression, which cells HHV-8 Diagnosed cells) (elongated history and by cells can also confirmation. The presence be protein viral the for LANA detected tumor diagnostic in of

palliative. is Treatment technically recommended. surgery be cryotherapy; is with lesions may treated Local radiation or not treated systemic with chemotherapy is disease or or Widespread paclitaxil, (anthracyclines, internal IFN-α).

cells. rather fungus, Not proliferation a a neoplastic T but progressive of slow, to in be gather immunostimulation epidermis. leads T to Its cells related chronic is pathogenesis the that to helper thought appears to risk. Industrial irritating chemicals exposure ↑ to in chronic common more women. than and disease is The in men is

early pruritic. nonspecific, and The that is is often plaque palpable lesion a psoriatic-appearing

no affecting < Stage involves papules, BSA with I 10% limited involvement. plaques, and nodal patches

or Figure II often Stage skin lymph palpable conﬂuent more reddish-brown characterized is limited generalized 2.2-20). by or with nodes skin multicentric, one involvement tumors or with nodules (see skip patients Rarely, the and plaque stage with directly present tumors.

Stage is III generalized characterized erythroderma. by

FIGURE 2.2-20. Mycosis fungoides.

face leads nodular facies. a infiltration Massive leonine to the of with Fitzpatrick permission, (Reproduced, from TB. & Dermatology, ed. of 4th Atlas Clinical Synopsis Color 541.) McGraw-Hill, York: New 2001:

biopsy-lymph IV organ Stage by internal characterized spread. is nodes or

Patients node. of without have tumor involvement the actual dermatopathic lymphadenopathy may involved, organs be internal including and the liver, spleen. can nodes, the However,

in is is of and by T-cell the peripheral Sézary’s cutaneous syndrome lymphadenopathy. circulating phase leukemic characterized Sézary cells blood, the lymphoma and erythroderma,

with cells the or immunologic electron typical (cerebriform features microscopy Sézary and clinical histology, lymphocytes). Diagnosed Lutzner by and showing characterization

resistant dermatitis early dermatitis, is histologic lesion for clinically that and The so to diagnosis is any from indicated is chronic indistinguishable treatment.

have clinical type is the of tumors showing histology Once useful present. evolved, cells for

I PUVA. steroids, chemotherapy, with Stage or Treat disease: topically retinoids,

antibodies, interferon, Stage or chemotherapy. systemically retinoids, Treat II monoclonal disease: with

Photopheresis mainstay for of treatment the is many patients. For option. effective an more or extensive is advanced radiation therapy disease, combined. often modalities are Treatment

117 114 TYPE METABOLIC DIABETES 2 DIABETES of MELLITUS Glucose TYPE 114 Metabolism MELLITUS Disorders 115 1 SYNDROME

destruction deficiency to abnormal to Due metabolism. β-cell and fuel insulin leading autoimmune pancreatic

unexplained polyphagia, polydipsia, Classically nocturia), and polyuria (especially weight loss. with rapid, presents also Patients may present with ketoacidosis.

young or nonobese adults. affects children Usually

Associated HLA-DR3 with -DR4. and

diagnosis: of is the following make the one At to required least

occasions. A two separate mg/dL (> on ≥ 8-hour) 126 of fasting plasma glucose

glucose ≥ plus symptoms. of plasma A 200 random mg/dL

≥ testing two-hour separate are glucose two 200 results of a occasions mg/dL initial glucose after test equivocal. if on postprandial tolerance the of A

(see (80–120 and glucose the range blood Insulin self-monitoring mg/dL). normal in 2.3-1) Table of the in of in particularly very be light the Higher ↑ tolerated, 200 levels hypoglycemia. blood young, of can (≥ glucose mg/dL) risk

goal years. HbA1c exams, checks, < annual HbA1c children), a microalbuminuria and BP foot in Routine 2–5 lipid 8 frequent (with every checks, screening, annual profile dilated-eye testing a

TABLE 2.3-1. Types Insulin of

3–5 hours NPH types (detemir) 2–4 hours immediate in 10–20 minutes of hours minutes NovoLog hours (e.g., 70% 0.5–1.5 1.0–2.5 hours No 1.0–1.5 1–3 injection regular). 5–10 5–15 preparations 2 + minutes 5–8 and 30% No 20 hours peak to a = hours hours Apidra 18–28 discernible longer-acting minutes regular peak 6–10 Levemir 70 30–60 together hours (aspart) Combination coverage hours provide 1–4 NPH (glulisine) Lantus 20–24 insulin hours hours 6–8 NPH/30 hours same shorter-acting 2–4 discernible (glargine) and (lispro) Regular hours mix hours extended the Humalog

and complications the DM. treatment-related chronic, outlines 2.3-2 Table acute, of

insulin in as that characterized may β-cell insulin is metabolism resistance that best dependence. to of and burnout varying degrees dysfunction lead glucose A

2.3-2. TABLE DM Complications of

treatment overnight. other growth caused of hormone Dawn of and hormones ↓ Early-morning secretion ↑ and insulin by Complications hyperglycemia effectiveness of phenomenon (GH) to closer Move P.M. bedtime treat. insulin to Diabetic in complications 1 (DKA) hyperglycemic occurs type commonly Hyperosmolar most crisis Acute ketoacidosis Hyperglycemia-induced state that DM. (HHS) (including trauma, infections, precipitated or Often stress with or noncompliance by therapy. insulin alcohol) by MI, and respirations, May present breath abdominal fruity, a vomiting, Kussmaul odor. pain, with acetone and many abnormalities changes. develop also electrolyte severely with dehydrated may Patients status mental are bicarbonate < f of uids, or the Treatment pH includes insulin, event disease is underlying and initiating 7), potassium, (if process. treatment high or acidosis mental changes, as 600 profound mg/dL) ketones. plasma extremely absent and small and without dehydration, (> status hyperosmolarity, glucose with Presents can stress be often and DM; by infections) type acute (dehydration, Occurs precipitated in 2 fatal. ﬂuid electrolyte Treatment and and replacement includes aggressive insulin. initiating event. the Treat Appears Diabetic (nonproliferative, has Macrovascular least Retinopathy nephropathy been Chronic Neuropathy complications years. at 3–5 proliferative) present diabetes complications for when retinal exams, laser and measures and therapy Preventive photocoagulation neovascularization. control for eye of hypertension, hyperglycemia include annual by hyperfltration microalbuminuria. glomerular by Characterized followed and Preventive ARBs ACEIs or BP/glucose control. measures include trauma, leading Peripheral, symmetric, pain, neuropathy burning sensorimotor ulcers. to infections, diabetic and foot with analgesics. foot and care preventive Treat and dysfunction dysmotility, complications emptying, gastric include due hypotension. to orthostatic autonomic delayed Late impotence, esophageal vascular cerebrovascular, Cardiovascular, and disease. peripheral is diabetic cause of patients. Cardiovascular disease in death common most the is mg/dL. 100 LDL BP ↓ < to 130/< 150 goal mg/dL; to < 75; ↓ The < triglycerides low-dose also ASA. should on be Patients started

morning. hormones, surge in leading of turn hyperglycemia to a in leading counterregulatory the to hypoglycemia Nocturnal ■Somogyi effect:

secretion hyperglycemia. ■Dawn early-morning Nocturnal GH to phenomenon: leading of

hyperglycemia. with typically of symptoms Patients present

often than with complications. DM, present Onset 1 patients is and more insidious of type that

the Nonketotic poor be seen glycemic may control. in setting of hyperglycemia

truncal); a strong (often obesity has in occurs older adults genetic predisposition. with Usually

type are same those as Diagnostic 1 the for DM. criteria

Follow-up testing:

risk every years. with Test at retest no factors: years three age; Patients of 45

impaired but with 110 retesting. Follow glucose < mg/dL up frequent dL): Patients fasting with mg/ 126 (>

levels glucose is blood tight 80 of treatment control—i.e., The levels 7. and from HbA1c glucose goal 120 to < ranging mg/dL following: include the Treatment measures

Diet, and weight loss, exercise.

Oral (monotherapy combination or uncontrolled): agents if

secretagogues. Insulin glyburide, (glipizide, and glimepiride): Sulfonylureas are gain weight and effects. Hypoglycemia side

is whose mechanism and similar that of of Short-acting agents (repaglinide action sulfonylureas. to nateglinide): Meglitinides

sensitivity insulin. peripheral Metformin: hepatic gluconeogenesis; ↑ to Inhibits upset, weight lactic loss, include and, effects GI rarely, Side acidosis. in age) years 80 disease. and (those elderly of renal with Contraindicated patients the > in

Thiazolidinediones (the sensitivity. ↑ “glitazones”): insulin and edema, Side weight gain, include hepatotoxicity. potential effects

↓ of α-glucosidase inhibitors: intestinal carbohydrates. absorption side to effect Rarely atulence. used ﬂ the of owing

1 the DDP-4 that degradation down of peptide (GLP-1). breaks (sitagliptin): enzyme endogenous Inhibit the glucagon-like inhibitors

oral with (alone in conjunction Insulin agents). or

Incretins agonists. GLP-1 (exenatide): Injected subcutaneously. ↑ glucagon and of secretion Delay food; absorption secretion. ↓ insulin Side effects nausea (rarely) include pancreatitis. and

acid hypercholesterolemia derivatives LDL glucose Statins (goal hypertriglyceridemia. fibric 100); for and for < control

usually 130/80; < Strict first-line ACEIs/ARBs BP are agents. control to

of years patients disease for age. risk of (ASA) at for cardiovascular > 40 or agents Antiplatelet those

nephropathy, for neuropathy, disease, screening cardiovascular and Regular retinopathy, smoking cessation.

outline an for 2.3-2 DM. Table See of complications the of is presence all factors. the equivalent for cardiovascular Note that regardless the of highest disease risk to of diabetes risk other

syndrome resistance insulin Also as syndrome X. known or an a of event. mortality from and risk CAD with ↑ Associated cardiovascular

glycemic impaired BP, obesity, control, high with Presents dyslipidemia. and abdominal

Three out of must be criteria of met: five the following

men in Abdominal > (↑ inches in and women. inches obesity girth): waist > 35 40

≥ 150 mg/dL. Triglycerides

women. mg/dL mg/dL in and < 40 men in < 50 HDL

drugs. ≥ antihypertensive of BP 130/85 administration mmHg or

glucose 100 mg/dL. Fasting ≥

cholesterol and weight aggressive BP lowering, control. loss, Intensive slow Metformin the to diabetes has of population. in been high-risk this onset shown

Thyroid Function Testing of

following ■TSH include single also thyroid TFTs function. The (see Table assessing measurement: test the 2.3-3): best for levels hypothyroidism; thyrotoxicosis. levels to lead TSH TSH to lead 1° low High

of Determines the and iodine level iodine (RAIU) scan: by thyroid. the uptake uptake ■Radioactive but in limited in thyrotoxic role a malignancy. has Useful determining differentiating states,

AB 2.3-3. T LE Function Abnormalities Thyroid Common

disturbances, the abnormal. In 1° itself gland endocrine is malfunctions. the 2° endocrine In HPA disturbances,

postpartum adenoma, amiodarone, molar toxic multinodular ↓↑↑Graves’ postviral goiter, toxic thyrotoxicosis, pregnancy, disease, hyperthyroidism 1° thyroiditis. with hypothyroidism ltrative external lithium, thyroid supplementation, inf (radioactive iatrogenic thyroiditis, factors radiation, iodine ciency, ablation, phase amiodarone), of iodine 1° excision or hypothyroid ↑↓↓Hashimoto’s inadequate thyroiditis, disease. def

is acute, and brillation, of storm life-threatening thyrotoxicosis f fever, delirium. present may an that form Thyroid with atrial intensive Admit to care.

use. steroid include estrogen states not should administration, infections, TBG-elevating nephrotic syndrome, be treated and that anabolic pregnancy,

adequate measurement: test. T4 Not an Total screening bound Ninety-nine globulin (TBG). to is thyroxine-binding circulating of T4 percent Total altered levels proteins. be levels can T4 changes in by binding of

free TBG index (T3RU): correct Used with for in total to changes total T3RU). the = resin T4 or T4 T3 T3 × levels uptake thyroxine (e.g.,

more useful hormone measurement: for levels; unstable thyroid thyroid states. for test preferred screening T4 The Free

any goiter overproduces cause) and including toxic hormone, called T3/T4 Graves’ in thyroid disease, causes of multinodular to due adenomas. which thyroid Refers levels Plummer’s of disease), (also the (↑ toxic thyrotoxicosis to

insomnia, weight nervousness, ↑bowel palpitations, and Presents abnormalities. frequency, with heat menstrual loss, intolerance,

goiter, atrial hyperactive lag, moist sinus tremor, and or exes. brillation, warm, f skin, Exam reﬂ fine lid tachycardia reveals Graves’ Figure pretibial are only disease thyroid seen myxedema, 2.3-1). bruits and Exophthalmos, in (see

test choice not and rarely, T4 level, and, serum is initial T3 (unless followed elevated). TSH T4 by levels TSH low is The free is of 2.3-3. See Table

AB IGU R E 2.3-1. F disease. Graves’ Physical signs of

Graves’ (A) ophthalmopathy. (B) Pretibial myxedema. Resource digital [ the library permission, with Pathology reproduced, (Figure [PEIR] Education http://peir. 2.3-1A from Instructional

at Birmingham. Alabama, the of University reproduced, 2.3-1B Greenspan from GJ. permission, with Figure FS, Strewler Basic 5th Endocrinology, Clinical and ed. Stamford, 1997.) CT: Lange, & Appleton if iodine drugs is thyroid also antithyroid therapy (methimazole not ablation; 1° radioactive may be or is propylthiouracil) used indicated. radioactive 131I is Thyroidectomy rarely indicated.

of Give symptoms for while the adrenergic hyperthyroidism. propranolol awaiting resolution

Administer to ablation have in hypothyroidism surgery. patients or levothyroxine who undergone prevent

is hypothyroidism most the Hashimoto’s (see of 2.3-3). thyroiditis Table cause common are Anti-TPO . antibodies second most cause The is iatrogenic. common ↓ mental to hypothyroidism severe refers Myxedema status, other hypothermia, with symptoms. and coma parasympathetic 30–60%. is Mortality

Presents menstrual gain, constipation, cold and weight weakness, intolerance, with hoarseness. fatigue, depression, irregularities, delayed Exam relaxation skin may of dry, edema, cold, puffy DTRs. accompanied by and reveal bradycardia,

2.3-3. See Table

(e.g., Uncomplicated Administer disease): levothyroxine. hypothyroidism Hashimoto’s

IV not been and levothyroxine hydrocortisone Myxedema IV adrenal Treat with has (if insufficiency coma: excluded).

thyroid of the Inﬂammation gland. include or chronic, autoimmune Common granulomatous, drug-induced (lymphocytic, radiation-induced, amiodarone) subtypes and postpartum, Hashimoto’s), subacute thyroiditis. (e.g.,

malaise URI accompanied The thyroid symptoms. by subacute presents a tender and with form are associated Other painless with forms goiter.

(typically uptake thyrotoxicosis followed ↓ during RAIU by dysfunction with on the hypothyroidism), thyrotoxic Thyroid phase.

levothyroxine hypothyroidism. β-blockers for hyperthyroidism; for

cases. with corticosteroids or treat self-limited; usually Subacute thyroiditis is severe for oral with NSAIDs

TSH Graves’ patients receptor in seen with are disease. antibodies

is Popular The Papillary: most

levels medullary Check if cancer suspected. calcitonin is

Thyroid an very show ↑ and with nodules incidence are common age. Most are benign.

initial Usually presentation. on asymptomatic

and nodules cancer). are family with present history (dysphagia, associated symptoms and a hyperthyroidism local (especially medullary dyspnea, choking thyroid Hyperfunctioning cough, sensation) with

nodules of malignancy with An “cold” and firm and 20 < fixed 70, radionuclide ↑ history scan, history age risk rapidly irradiation, or thyroid associated on (especially is nodules, growing neck medullary solitary a sex, hoarseness. cancer), family male nodules > of a with

for anterior Check lymphadenopathy. cervical be Carcinoma xed. 2.3 f and frm (see 4) Table may

carcinoma 2 multiple cancer. thyroid thyroid is neoplasia associated Medullary familial endocrine medullary type with (MEN) and

aspiration ne-needle is a sensitivity high The best f nodule has (FNA), malignancy of method for and assessing moderate specificity. which

exclude hyperfunction). (TSH to TFTs

Ultrasound it if usually or nodule is cold determines a hot the and or (cancers solid radioactive scan solid). whether cold determines is cystic; are nodules biopsied. are be not Hot and should cancerous never

2.3-4. TABLE Thyroid Carcinoma of Types

of 75–80% cancers. Represents Papillary thyroid The female-to-male 3:1. is ratio cells. in Slow growing; hormone–producing thyroid found Ninety worse survive those diagnosis; elderly years 10 is the more after of with large in tumors. prognosis percent patients or patients or in for cells. 17% thyroid thyroid of Follicular producing cancers; hormone– found Accounts Ninety worse or longer elderly the patients prognosis is diagnosis; in large tumors. of those or patients 10 percent with years survive after is of prognosis related cancers; 6–8% to degree Responsible C cells; thyroid of in for the calcitonin-producing invasion. found Medullary vascular least 10 percent surgery. patients Eighty years of after at survive cancers; metastasizes. 2% and rapidly for enlarges thyroid Accounts Anaplastic of < for survive patients > years. 3 percent Ten of follicular mixed contain papillary pathologies. a may Tumors and

treatment. a or FNA: physical with Follow suppression Benign of levothyroxine exam/ultrasound trial

treatment; following is for resection follicular adjunctive first-line Malignant ablation Surgical lesions. is FNA: appropriate excision radioiodine

wait for Indeterminate and pathology. the surgical Remove FNA: final by excision nodule

and a types. follicular Medullary than poorer cancer prognosis has thyroid papillary Anaplastic cancer poor prognosis. thyroid has extremely an

autosomal-dominant with inheritance. Associated Subtypes are as follows:

Pancreatic Zollinger-Ellison (Wermer’s MEN parathyroid VIPomas), cell (e.g., and type insulinomas, islet adenomas. syndrome, hyperplasia, pituitary tumors syndrome): 1

hyperplasia, the of thyroid, Medullary gland syndrome): (Sipple’s type 2A MEN hyperplasia. carcinoma or parathyroid pheochromocytoma adrenal

pheochromocytoma, thyroid, neuromas), 2B: of type (mucosal carcinoma Medullary ganglioneuromatosis and oral marfanoid habitus. intestinal MEN the

common by > metabolic microarchitectural bone below low peak disruption, SDs mass. 2.5 bone normal and mass disease bone density bone with mineral characterized A especially often 65. age and Most postmenopausal risk after Asians, (30%) women (17%), with doubling thin, affects Caucasians

in of a presence vertebral fracture. even the Commonly asymptomatic

2.3-2). minimal (loss of hip fractures, Figure fractures height (see and and/or kyphosis), following radius fractures compression vertebral reveal thoracic distal may Exam progressive trauma

most Bone pain fracture likely to osteoporosis. rather is osteomalacia than unrelated

(e.g., an risk. dysfunction, use ↑ associated estrogen-depleting conditions thyroid all or steroid amenorrhea, are intake, eating excessive of disorders), with alcohol a Smoking, history and caffeine

and The level), gold SDs commonly from (bone osteopenia DEXA: femur, standard; significant bodies, normal mineral < radius. proximal density the most vertebral in peak 2.5 distal reveals

Markers not urinary Labs: rule and can facilitate (↑ men). CMP, and are CBC, serum causes equivocal diagnosis testosterone 25-hydroxyvitamin bone routinely turnover D, 2° TFTs, in cases used; (in N-telopeptides with deoxypyridinoline) but of out

bone is is Global only after lost. X-rays: 30% > density demineralization apparent of

most thin fractures in common women. the of Osteoporosis cause pathologic is elderly,

IGU F R 2.3-2. E Radiographic osteoporosis. in findings

compression). DL al. (Reproduced, with from et permission, Kasper Harrison’s Principles of

ed. 16th Medicine, Internal York: McGraw-Hill, New 2269.) 2005:

calcium D. supplementation and with Prevention vitamin

weight-bearing and Smoking bone density. cessation maintain exercises help

ibandronate, zoledronic to calcitonin stabilize (e.g., (e.g., raloxifene), Bisphosphonates and density. acid), alendronate, modulators be used mineral may selective and receptor resorption prevent intranasal bone risedronate, estrogen

the perimenopausal short-term replacement treatment symptomatic indicated in be therapy may for period. Estrogen

patients with Recombinant risk. be PTH in of may highest used the level

bone by ↑ turnover. rate an Characterized of both bone, of pattern. to resorption “mosaic” lamellar and formation a excessive Causes leading excessive bone individuals. due infection latent Suspected to viral in genetically susceptible be to of Found age, men of to years and women 4% with one-fifth in in of and > patients. 1° associated up hyperparathyroidism roughly 40

bone loss but Usually nerve in may hearing (leads of of asymptomatic, entrapment to cases). with headaches, pain, 30–40% or or skull deformities, fractures, joint present aching

2.33), changes findings. (see on history, radiographic lab and Figure characteristic clinical Based

IGU 2.3-3. F R E disease. Radiographic findings Paget’s in

bone. woman Skull disease a Paget’s of of 58-year-old with with from permission, (Reproduced,

al. DL Kasper et ed. Internal 16th Principles Harrison’s of Medicine, New 2005: York: 2280.) McGraw-Hill,

Imaging: is scan bone sensitive most Radionuclide test. the

include urinary serum pyridinolines alkaline ↑ be calcium with and phosphate may phosphatase Labs: levels; Abnormalities helpful. normal Must differentiated bone disease. metastatic from be

majority are asymptomatic patients no require and treatment. The of

cure no There disease. for Paget’s is to and bone can be for slow pain. NSAIDs arthritis acetaminophen are Bisphosphonates osteoclastic resorption; used given and calcitonin

fractures, to (up 1%). Pathologic complications, cardiac osteosarcoma

parathyroid and are percent Eighty adenoma due hyperplasia. 1° a cases single of 15% to to chronic phosphate most to cause kidney common in osteodystrophy. 2° renal leads which disease, is The retention an when to occurs hypercalcemia. 3° hyperparathyroidism progresses hyperparathyroidism in 2° resulting chronic unregulated state,

and are mild fractures), (fatigue, sleep pain, (abdominal anxiety, include Most and (bone may (nephrolithiasis), nausea, pancreatitis), abdominal but disturbances). be myalgias, signs depression, asymptomatic, overtones groans arthralgias, stones psychiatric symptoms pain, cases and PUD, bones vomiting,

insufficiency with Chronic associated and are also renal hyperparathyroidism. 1° gout

mg or mass, serum criteria 50, bone nephrolithiasis/renal age markedly urine 400 calcium ↓ > elevated Relative hypercalcemia, hours. calcium < and insuff include profoundly ciency, surgical life-threatening in 24 hyperparathyroidism for

Labs hypophosphatemia, hypercalciuria. and reveal hypercalcemia, inappropriately 2.3-5). PTH Intact (see Table to relative calcium ionized is ↑ cases. deficiency may Vitamin obscure D mild

necessary. not adenoma, localization radionuclide may parathyroid an always although scan is localization of with A help

ruled < PTH out, diagnosis with is pg/mL carcinoma but also be present. the and hyperparathyroidism is unless likely usually 25 most must is alternative Cancer and thiazides Lithium hyperparathyroidism. exacerbate may

Parathyroidectomy if certain patient symptomatic criteria the is are if met. or acute setting renal in fuids the of heart failure), hypercalcemia, bisphosphonate, For IV give a calcitonin. loop and (with diuretic IV or

hydrochloride, are phosphate salts, status. Oral and (aluminum hyperparathyroidism 2° and phosphate calcium of regardless patients used carbonate) hydroxide, dialysis dietary binders with in sevelamer restriction lanthanum

and well adjunct as Cinacalcet ↓ helpful renal end-stage PTH as in calcium and disease. be may phosphate a

acutely vomiting. altered is pain coma abdominal status, Hypercalcemia the presenting nausea with with most and complication, severe nephrolithiasis, or bone disease, mental and

endogenous from adenoma is as of syndrome most common ACTH central hypersecretion pituitary Cushing’s a or of cause (known Cushing’s disease, The hypercortisolism). endogenous adrenal carcinoid of and cell cortisol bilateral causes include adrenal cancer). from hyperplasia, small adenoma, tumor, cancer) secretion ectopic ACTH (e.g., lung adrenal neoplasia (e.g., excess Other secretion iatrogenic, treatment most with The from resulting is corticosteroids. exogenous commonly condition

AB T 2.3-5. LE Functions Mechanisms of PTH and

calcium parathyroid of bone phosphate. cells and resorption of Chief ↑ calcium distal tubule. resorption kidney the in convoluted ↑ of of resorption ↓ kidney phosphate. (cholecalciferol) by ↑ 1,25-(OH)2 stimulating D production vitamin 1α-hydroxylase. kidney (PO4)3–. ↓ PTH ↑ Ca2+, and (PO4)3–, serum serum ↑urine and stimulates osteoblasts. PTH both osteoclasts PTH free ↑ in serum secretion. Ca2+ ↓

with with facies, purple moon hypertension, thin hump.” hirsutism, Presents “buffalo skin disturbances, and striae, obesity, wasting, central psychological muscle

acne, growth, excessive (2° Exam to diabetes weakness, and symptoms oligomenorrhea, depression, infection. proximal glucose growth ↑ to of intolerance), hair reveals retardation, susceptibility the Headache seen of increasing cranial size with also or pituitary mass. nerve are deficits

also as 2.3-6): Table Diagnosis (see is follows

a salivary persistently suppression. following screen: evening dexamethasone a A.M. with free elevated An considered test or abnormal suppression is or overnight 24-hour overnight urine if elevated is cortisol cortisol cortisol Begin low-dose

likely. If ACTH disease are is Distinguish ACTH ectopic causes: ACTH-dependent ACTH-independent or Cushing’s elevated, late-afternoon from levels

hypokalemia and also glycosuria, may Hyperglycemia, present. be

Surgical hypersecretory the (pituitary, resection of source adrenal).

considered. radiotherapy also Pituitary be may

benefit. ketoconazole, of (e.g., aminoglutethimide) of Blockers may be steroidogenesis adrenal

therapy of the hormone deficiencies Permanent after lesion. treatment 1° correct replacement to

condition adult to benign due An GH pituitary adenoma. a with gigantism. excess Children present with GH production

hands, ■ of with and enlargement of features. Presents jaw, the feet coarsening facial and and hypertension, diastolic carpal May arthritis. syndrome, tunnel lead dysfunction, to

2.3-6. T AB LE Cushing’s Syndrome Laboratory Findings in

with For unknown prefer DI ice-cold reasons, beverages. patients

a adenoma. compression by the hemianopia chiasm optic from pituitary Bitemporal may of result

diabetes. or also intolerance may GH to lead glucose Excess

MRI shows pituitary a the sellar of Imaging: lesion.

1 Labs: a elevated remain GH (GH (IGF-1) levels test). glucose will oral (↑with baseline Screen acromegaly); despite insulin-like suppression; by the reliable with an growth is factor levels diagnosis not test glucose confirm suppression measuring

resection tumor. of or beam external the surgical Transsphenoidal radiation

be suppress GH can used to secretion. Octreotide

can receptors cases. GH be to in refractory Pegvisomant block used

functioning is most Prolactinoma the pituitary common tumor.

drugs irradiation, include causes Other craniopharyngioma, and pathologic (e.g., dopamine), cirrhosis.

manifested oligomenorrhea, Hx/PE: infertility, Hypogonadism amenorrhea. is or by be bitemporal prominent. may gynecomastia, hemianopia or Galactorrhea,

The serum 200 is Dx: level typically mg/mL. > prolactin

Tx:

(f bromocriptine. agonists or Dopamine Cabergoline rst-line therapy):

failed, or field Surgery: defects. Should desires be patient in future of setting pregnancies, has the considered medical the when visual when treatment

ADH as nephrogenic to Failure a dysfunction. urine or result central concentrate of Subtypes follows: are as

fails to The DI: ADH. Central pituitary secrete posterior injury, infection, tumor, and (Sheehan’s cerebral syndrome), include traumatic Causes ischemia disorders. autoimmune

kidneys DI: to The to circulating ADH. Nephrogenic respond fail diseases Causes and (e.g., demeclocycline). lithium, include renal drugs

with and Presents polyuria, with dilute polydipsia, urine. thirst persistent

access are may present with unlimited water, to Patients hypernatremia typically if dehydration, given and normonatremic. they but

excrete a volume a ■ During deprivation urine. patients high of test, dilute water

central ADH, analog to distinguish a Desmopressin from nephrogenic be synthetic acetate can (DDAVP), of DI. used

and challenge will ↑urine DDAVP Central ↓urine osmolarity. DI: output

will DDAVP urine significantly challenge Nephrogenic output. not ↓ DI:

a in show may or mass central pituitary DI. hypothalamic MRI

Treat the cause. underlying

intranasally DDAVP orally. or DI: Central Administer

intake the and water treatment. Salt are DI: Nephrogenic restriction 1° reabsorption mild depletion and to used water. to salt and stimulate promote of are Thiazide volume proximal diuretics

serum that hyponatremia cause release from results of of euvolemic ADH common A osmolality. independent stimulated

(e.g., carcinoma), pulmonary pneumonia), ectopic tumor production/paraneoplastic syndrome sarcoid, (e.g., disease cell drugs small head CNS (e.g., or disease injury, (e.g., surgery. with antidepressants), tumor), antipsychotics, Associated

↑ADH mOsm/kg the a cirrhosis, of serum in hypovolemia). of > urine concurrent on absence the 50–100 basis a reason with Diagnose osmolality physiologic hyposmolarity for (e.g., CHF,

the hypo-Fluid patient mEq/L sodium not volemic. the that Urinary demonstrates is restriction ≥ is 20

treatment. of cornerstone SIADH

f the address cause. and underlying Restrict uid

mEq/L) give (< 110 significantly is hyponatremia is hypertonic seizing), cautiously severe (e.g., saline. patient comatose, symptomatic If if or the

ADH Demeclocycline in serum sodium can duct. by antagonizing the normalize help the of action collecting

of disorder. depends underlying treatment on Chronic correction the

be (a Tolvaptan treat cases. chronic refractory agonist) to vasopressin can used

or be 2°. May 1° as and ■ destruction are autoimmune leading disease), deficiencies 1°: Etiologies follows: cortical adrenal by to caused mineralocorticoids glucocorticoids. (Addison’s of commonly ■Most a Autoimmune occur as may part of destruction

of management: 4 adrenal The crisis S’s

0.9% Salt: saline

Steroids: hydrocortisone mg h 8 100 q IV

illness underlying Search for the

when giving in steroids diagnosing a Do delay patient AI. not with

testicular ovarian premature syndrome polyglandular DM, anemia). type vitiligo, pernicious 1 autoimmune failure, (hypothyroidism, failure,

causes 1° include other deficiencies, AI TB, and hemorrhage, congenital adrenal infections. enzyme ■Other of

↓ to production pituitary; Caused long-term the often most 2°: by due ■ cessation of ACTH glucocorticoid treatment. by

Most are nonspecific. symptoms

loss and are fatigue, common. Weakness, with anorexia weight hypotension, manifestations, are salt seen. also craving GI and

Hyperpigmentation to seen ↑ friction. exposure Addison’s of in disease, in (due areas especially sun secretion) ACTH or is

or hyponatremia Labs and show (1° eosinophilia 2°).

Hyperkalemia AI. specific is to 1°

in Hypercalcemia seen one-third up to cases. of is

is Diagnosis levels: confirmed with plasma cortisol

stress period is during μg/dL) a 20 cortisol levels Low of high confirmatory. (< physiologic plasma

μg/dL excludes 20 random level A plasma diagnosis. cortisol > the

synthetic 20 Confrmatory plasma cortisol diagnosis. A level with stimulation test excludes μg/dL test: ACTH the >

if 1°. mineralocorticoid Glucocorticoid replacement, with replacement

50% adrenal to correct initiate needed; and provide resuscitation. electrolyte abnormalities crisis, In hypoglycemia; dextrose volume as correct

surgery, major steroids ■↑ trauma, during of (e.g., periods stress infection). tapering AI Avoid by 2° steroids slowly.

sites tissue of medulla the found extra-adrenal in or A adrenal tumor in secrete either catecholamines. chromaffin that Hippel–Lindau be syndrome, MEN or syndromes. neurofibromatosis, associated von 2 with May

tremor, tachycardia, chest hypertension, intermittent anxiety. pain, headache, Presents palpitations, Hx/PE: with diaphoresis, and may anesthesia. be by precipitated Crises

Dx: often MRI CT suprarenal demonstrates mass. a or or metanephrines plasma-free with metanephrines. 24hour urine normetanephrine) (metanephrine Screen and sometimes helpful. is scan MIBG

Tx: resection. Surgical Preoperatively, α-adrenergic rst β-blockade by control followed f to control use hypertension, to tachycardia. blockade will Never give lead hypertension. stimulation β-blockade to otherwise, first; unopposed α-adrenergic refractory

cortex. zona from the excessive from of secretion of Results glomerulosa the adrenal aldosterone adrenal adenoma due can It but also (70%) is unilateral adrenocortical from result hyperplasia (Conn’s syndrome). to usually

muscle headache, Presents and with hypertension, polyuria, weakness.

severe peripheral are cases. Tetany, seen edema paresthesias, in and

have hypertension without Patients diastolic edema.

depletion Labs as ratio that hypomagnesemia, not metabolic fails an ↑aldosterone/plasma volume volume renin (from with ↑ activity and appropriately with from hypersecretion expansion). renin alkalosis, hyposecretion of that suppress does hypernatremia, mild as well show hypokalemia, to

mass. CT MRI or adrenal may reveal an

adrenalectomy tumors open correcting or Laparoscopic adrenal (after and BP for potassium).

aldosterone antagonist. hyperplasia Treat spironolactone, bilateral an receptor with

disorders that ciency. A lead def family inherited cortisol of to cortisol are Most 17-OH to (autosomal to elevated progesterone). 21-hydroxylase precursors leads production (e.g., with cases recessive) defciency due that ↓ cortisol deficiency mineralocorticoid cases, severe salt develop. wasting may In with include 11and 17-hydroxylase Other causes deficiencies. to synthesis, of leading Cortisol overproduction adrenal deficiency stimulates ACTH androgens.

in when Presents in life. later female and virilization genitalia with ambiguous infants manifested

male puberty and later macrogenitosomia hypertension life); by deficiencies). in (with precocious (if 11and infants; in characterized 17-hydroxylase manifested Also

blood and Diagnosed high of urine. in cortisol precursors and by found androgens levels

repletion. Medical: fuid Immediate salt and resuscitation ↓ to adrenal Administer ACTH androgens. cortisol and severe Fludrocortisone appropriate for deficiency. is 21-hydroxylase

in be the case ambiguous required in genitalia Surgical: female May of infants.

treatment late-onset information adrenal of chapter to and hyperplasia. congenital diagnosis for Gynecology the Refer the on

Assessment 132 of Disease Frequency

Studies Assessment 132 of Diagnostic

134 of Assessment Risk

135 136 Survival Treatment Measures of Effect 136 Curves

of Screening Recommendations 143 Causes 144 Reportable Death 141 Diseases

in population a of the specifc a the moment is time. disease number at cases existing in of The prevalence

in disease-free develop that the number over incidence time. a The of of cases disease a of period population is new the

persisted for cases various a are incident that have population Prevalent reasons: in cases

× disease duration Prevalence = of Incidence Average

in presence disease examined of A prevalence in study the point a population at given time. one people in a interest for a is of are which

as follows: The are advantages studies prevalence of

all effcient an a cases examining noncases means and once. be assessed population, allowing They to of at provide

testing. for as can diagnostic basis be used They a

They which to where. can and services used to plan be offer health

disadvantages Their following: the include

because is in at time. relationships determine only One single causal a information point cannot obtained

be risk disease measured. directly cannot incidence or of The

tests to a 2.4-1). no ascertain is use Physicians diagnosis, falsely may or be a often perfect, because Figure result to (see but given try test to administer specif whether thus test, sensitivity consider a city. and its should When its one deciding both

a result. the a ■Sensitivity will that probability disease test is have a patient with sensitive therefore people miss is A the will at ruling people disease out. with good rarely test and

study. with is cohort a measured with prevalence Incidence measured prevalence study; is a

prevalence a decreases, HIV increases that disease of of infection). the disease (e.g., mortality the As

for cross-sectional prevalence name a a Another study study. is

2.4-1. IGU R F E Sensitivity, specificity, and NPV. PPV,

a the ■Specificity patient a without probability disease that have is result. will a test fact they therefore determine has do A ruling specific is and someone people the will disease good at when in in. that rarely test not

sensitive both often be city. and must sensitivity trade-off ideal between specif is specifc, a and The test but made

disease. signif desirable cant a is sensitivity is particularly a for missing there High when penalty when a also necessary workup, It it diagnostic to differential. reduce in broad a is early is desirable Example: ELISA HIV infection. for test initial An

false-results or High confrming specificity for situations prove in a may harmful. useful which diagnosis likely for is blot confrmatory test. Example: A Western HIV

physician, Adel, for the You book. in Mary phone local search your Example: MD,

the named be as would individuals results. “Mary” be a Mary test, anyone included sensitive Adel would all named Identifying likely in is However, numerous physicians as also would c, not be specif other included. it allow physicians not High with out the f name. this listed mnemonic Remember one “Snout”: to SENsitivity rst would rule

named only to individuals especially not full individuals is since IV” Identifying name declined. be Adel are Lucy specifc, the very with Adel “Mary likely Mary is her overlooked is she not by name. if she be sensitive, listed However, as it complete not may allow the name. would physicians Remember SPecifcity full with mnemonic listed “SPin”: rule High one to in this

use result been been of predictive has result probabilities): Once and a administered a available, interpreted must test be made (or has that patient’s post-test values through

the that value probability disease. The with result (PPV) patient test is has truly a a positive the predictive higher its more the PPV. a The test, specifc test of higher disease. The the disease the the that prevalence, higher for PPV the

patient with the have truly does test the negative disease. probability that The result is predictive a not (NPV) a value the sensitive more test, its higher a The NPV. the The the the test the disease of NPV prevalence, lower for that higher disease.

test opposed a express to likelihood (LRs), which Another the test more likely in use to ratios involves diagnostic of diseased people: result is a given the how as way or less performance of describe nondiseased much

test Diseased with result a Sensitivity people

Nondiseased a city − specif test with result people 1

disease. OUT tests rule Sensitive SnOUT: disease. Specific tests IN SpIN: rule

the is sought of of is tests having value test population). at-risk patients disease to being with diagnostic likelihood Because to a advantageous an ↑ by an predictive affected prevalence, apply disease it the (i.e.,

has If test does of of not probability LR disease. the 1, change pretest an a it 10, 45% likely. it disease makes If more LR the is is is If LR the likely. disease less 0.1, 45%

a − sensitivity Diseased 1 result test people with

test Nondiseased a with Specif result city people

of study. a over COworkers you being set see think If time, followed COhort

also as studies or are studies known longitudinal studies. incidence Cohort

a patient. in predict to may factors Knowledge risk future of be disease used given of likelihood the (in be or removing not does distant (immediate disease). ↓ disease) causes necessarily of factors may the factor markers which causal risk disease or Risk Risk discover of variety to following: including a factors diffcult be reasons, for the can

period, long with exposures have risky disease may latency and remote A a forgotten.

common exposure so A to may be risky its hard discern. that is impact

conclusions from Disease draw may is to hard incidence it events. and infrequent low, be

any is hard exposure Risk to associated individual out. parse small with and

between is a risk factor and a relationship constant There seldom disease. a close,

whether prospective to The way disease a is best study. risk ↑ an determine with exposure actually then factor and exposure The relates would the in assessment be ideal which study for researcher risk controls an it incidence. experiment risk disease to Doing expensive. prohibitively and however, as may so, be well unethical as consuming, time intrusive, cohort are to risk. or determine observational Instead, used as studies studies case-control such

of outcome. assembled, study, all disease), a could cohort have of whom the group In that potentially outcome the but (i.e., people experience none of is a interest of whom or exposed each of possible are cohort risk members the as classifed For the either unexposed. factor, in events two All are of the over the cohort groups. rates outcome time, compared and exposure then are followed members

of as studies Advantages follows: cohort are

logic the follow exposed, people (if as the disease? they clinical question the They will get same are ).

incidence. the directly They determine way are to only

They a assess be relationship used to exposure given many of the diseases. to can

elicited a In without from outcome. is studies, exposure prospective known bias

such studies include The following: of the disadvantages

time can and be They expensive. consuming

the start of factors the at disease to few assess the exposure only the recorded study. of Studies the relationship

many used diseases. subjects thus be They rare cannot to ineffcient require study and and are

from present cohort be to may be Cohort into and records the in future—or cohort which the past the they present. studies is and followed a is which prospective—in followed in retrospective, a may identifed assembled

cohort in essentially are reverse. studies studies Case-control in possible measure frequency two to then comparative and studies, the factor selects exposure a In back (controls)—and with such in to of two risk the one groups. (cases) looks a groups—one without researcher disease time

depends on variables study The controls, the extraneous of which dealt in appropriate cases and manner measured, case-control manner (confounders) with. selection and in validity is a exposure of the are which

should the terms factor for same of opportunity of in be (i.e., should Cases risk members they and be exposure). exposure comparable base population equal of controls with an opportunity

explicit be newly criteria using should for diagnosed Cases diagnosis.

fashion be Exposures unbiased as assessed possible. should as in a

cation through be subjects subjects. Confounding stratif of the by ↓ or matching may Multivariable helpful may context. this in analysis be

follows: are of as such Advantages studies

Studies use groups, expense. reducing thereby small

and They rare can be risk can factors. easily study multiple examine diseases used to

the following: include Disadvantages

disease prevalence, Studies to rather subjects because by disease a used (an be relative odds incidence, estimate relative with of nature investigator risk, artifcially without cannot determined can ratio or risk). than numbers by and the the are calculate

or owing inaccurate to data be Retrospective recall may biases. survivorship

compared individuals with study. that cancer, intake breast If think among case-control breast alcohol individuals with is cancer of without

number among week. finger Absolute this hospital of The staff injuries risk:

There to and several ways are risk. express compare include following: These the

the incidence Absolute risk: of as disease. Defned

a The top (or from causes. the incidence on difference): disease Attributable additional is that of exposure, risk risk risky other incidence to of due background

unexposed of exposed in risk Incidence = Attributable – disease Incidence in

disease to ratio): person Expresses much in exposed an to get unexposed risk risk person. Relative is likely more comparison (or how an useful and association the when the disease is etiology. exposure disease, making This one indicates strength considering it of between

in ■ is case-control used ratio: of relative Odds risk that studies. estimate An exposed likely that risk person disease tells than odds disease. with a factor a been someone it more how to without is has The ratio much the a The

(number scissors). Attributable staff not did scissors) risk: use who who injuries staff of among injuries of among – (number used

of of injuries not who (number staff ÷ used among use scissors). (number scissors) injuries Relative did staff risk: who among

E 2.4-2. IGU R F vs. odds risk (OR). (RR) Relative ratio

Figure relative risk it the the lower approximates more closely incidence, 2.4-2). disease (see

ratio a is is = person person that Odds exposed diseased that Odds exposed Odds nondiseased a

injured that staff ÷ staff ratio: used that scissors) Odds uninjured (odds scissors). (odds used

associated has a been to diagnosis Once the describe it be able important prognosis. is established, to time follow-up event can once is analysis cancer). the from only diagnosis, or of presentation, start during Survival (e.g., average used or (e.g., outcome summarize to recurrence one that to treatment) occur any of death measured time-to-event if of death) survival (see 2.4-3) (or cohort outcome is of the patients, The Figure a usual probability a in curve with Kaplan-Meier describing not de with the survival is the method

from creasing over die time drop the Probability censored) (are or out event as study. patients of

− of = 1 probability Odds

a to treatment used Studies judge disease. are typically best for the standard as the other controlled randomized, a be well evaluation is such (e.g., trial, an types double-masked Although gold studies may of for observational used

IGU F R 2.4-3. E Example Kaplan-Meier of curve. a

the intervention). exposure is which in in question a study, therapeutic series/case descending controlled trials, treatment quality, order published meta-analyses, case and studies options include of randomized regarding reports. In

or are A in randomly a controlled to an trial which study is experimental, treatment subjects prospective group. assigned randomized control two the comparable. that are groups Random truly assignment helps ensure standard group The the may care. of treated placebo a be accepted with with or control patients nor physicians double-masked, patients is group. may which of know in which masked not in, single-masked, in one study The or treatment are be group their the know which which neither two they in do in who ways: treatment gold studies Double-masked studying are effects. standard the for

follows: are controlled randomized trials of Advantages as

They involve bias. minimal

They demonstrate to the potential causal relationships. have

include Disadvantages following: the

intensive. costly are time and They

consent Informed be obtain. may to diffcult

interventions surgery) amenable are not (e.g., masking. Some to

all to allow standards controlled. be Ethical cannot variables

that process systematically ned from to the any Def truth. differ causes results as bias. data minimize potential studies to Good seek and analyses the following: of Types include bias

determinants of Occurs are outcome. Selection bias: in or groups differ participants samples that additional from selected when other surgeon unexpectedly studies. Examples: resulting receive signifcant surgery, outcomes positive select A without patients in compared conditions comorbid to previous to may a Similarly, is more a a program, likely be that about of prevalence self-select to the giving breast than may impression family entering reality. of mammography cancer in higher individuals concerned history

groups. data-gathering Measurement differ methods between Occurs bias: when measurement or CT by group another by while assessed is Example: group assessed MRI. is One

with bias: is variable Confounding and bias). negatively), both (either positively the third variable or associated a the falseassociation independent variable Occurs inducing (type dependent I when a population. experience the area of in may an cataracts a Fishermen Example: incidence general higher than you in those exposed work. give to will which sunlight fsherman cataracts; are rather, the outdoor their a However, in it is itself becoming fshermen not

or the Recall in of retrospective between factors two bias: outcomes. past recall groups difference a from Results Example: than of be past more recall individual chemical patient to with A episodes cancer exposure. may healthy a motivated

detection in bias: from giving appearance course of Lead-time of Results when is fact disease, prolonged the natural earlier not survival an altered. cancer used Example: detects and screening ve f A test that new widely

prevent minimizes studies bias. Randomization and observation double-blinded bias confounding;

from are of to are bias. the randomized masked particularly susceptible that better studies effects whereas and are Studies bias, protected observational

study. validity Confounding a internal the of reduce variables

may disease. years impression longer are the with the earlier living that give patients

overestimation of Length detect to of progressive the slowly rapidly bias: leading of miss but ones, diseases when a tests ■ number progressive beneft screen. Occurs the disproportionate screening patients for Example: program. cancer prognosis is of better new implementation after A celebrated a with screening less be generally aggressive. tend disproportionally this detects test slow-growing to However, which tumors,

with bias error random unsystematic variation studied chance reduction, Even in owing data. unavoidable to is are follows: errors Types of as

error: (α) Type I

fact the a of difference (i.e., between not as groups in a there there false-conclusion). when saying that is is effects probability Defned treatment in

alone. happened differences probability chance p-value The estimate could effects by is an treatment in the of a study in have that are < 0.05 differences with associated statistically signif p Classically, cant. a

error: (β) II Type

(i.e., in falseconclusion) difference fact when saying treatment difference as a Defned exists. is probability the there that in effects no of a

is is will that a Power truly study one difference probability fnd there. statistically when a the signif cant of the number relates It directly to subjects. 1 = II – Power (β) type error.

a effect the statistical of statistical shows power. the and that size (CI) signif of (p-value) confidence interval The expressing the cance is way follows: as CIs are interpreted

one CI, size, which there to is that the of point 95% effect the is 95% chance closest true be is interval. to If likely interval the a contains a using the near estimate the center

with women like a disease. You Example: to would specifc estimate of percentage the 10% f of A –1% 3000 would 21%. a a of whereas 95% provide 9%–11%, of sample of would 30 10% result nding CI women from a sample a yield CI a women from of power more case a is larger, the narrow interval. producing The frst size because sample has women the even that disease! the In latter state have with cannot you case, 95% certainty general in

relative are difference), corresponding of value includes CI to statistically treatment 1.0 a the the If zero risk results (i.e., signif cant. not the

wide, If is the power is low. CI

levels measures ■There prevention: 1° disease. incidence of prevention: the Includes ↓ three to of are

on it prevention: that the or when progression. is disease mild, slow Focuses identifying implementing early, or and measures halt disease asymptomatic can 2°

↓ presence disease. of resulting Includes prevention: from mortality or measures that 3° morbidity the

TABLE 2.4-1. Types of Vaccinations

Measles, fever, (nasal polio rubella, Live (Sabin), inﬂuenza mumps, spray). yellow attenuated (killed) polio (injection). Cholera, inﬂuenza, (Salk), HAV, rabies, Inactivated inﬂuenza tetanus. Toxoid Diphtheria, HPV, pneumoniae, pertussis, meningococcus. HBV, Streptococcus Subunit S. pneumoniae. Conjugate Hib,

chemoprevention, a be screening. counseling, of accomplished by immunization, may Prevention combination behavioral and has following characteristics: A screening the good test

sensitivity specifcity. and has high It

has a It high PPV.

is easy inexpensive, administer, and It safe. to

than treatment without screening. is Treatment screening after subsequent more effective

which by and mimicking triggering fght to are future response work in memory an formed and Vaccines any immune cells infections recognize infection. formulations, in different vaccine as Table There are indicated several 2.4-1.

through and 2.4-6. for adults children Figures 2.4-4 outlined are Recommended schedules in vaccination

reduce breast fat dietary intake woman risk alcohol her or cancer. of to of A reduces 1° prevention: developing

for screen A prevention: 2° breast woman to mammogram obtains cancer. a

cancer. surgical woman intervention undergoes for breast 3° A prevention:

Pertussis Tetanus, Diphtheria,

recommended of Range

Mumps, Measles, Meningococcal A Rubella Hepatitis Varicella

R F IGU 2.4-4. E children 0–6 for of years Recommended vaccinations age.

and the Atlanta, (Reproduced for Georgia.) Control Centers Prevention, from Disease

R IGU E 2.4-5. F vaccinations age. for of 7–18 children Recommended years

Georgia.) Disease Range of (Reproduced and from ages recommended Control Prevention, Centers for the Atlanta,

yrs years then 60–64 19–26 or years Human years forTd Measles, doses years 3 GROUP 1 A* 2 booster; (Td/Tdap)* *Covered Hepatitis 1 years doses withTd doses by diphtheria, * Hepatitis 2 Compensation Meningococcal* (HPV)* (polysaccharide) Pneumococcal VACCINE 1 1-time 2 dose doses * papillomavirus (females) AGE rubella boost Tetanus, 1 B* 27–49 >65 every Varicella 2 Injury mumps, Substitute more dose doses pertussis Program. the 1 dose dose 50–59 doses or or doses Influenza* Zoster 3 1 Vaccine (MMR) ofTdap 10 factor dose who 1 indications) have if on every For ann category y immunity of u requirements lack in Td lifestyle, evidence the 10 this is who lack or the age (e.g., prior No all infection) no of risk booster yrs (e.g., of other and occupational, vaccination documentation recommendationRecommended present some other medical, persons all of meet evidence or basis

E IGU F 2.4-6. R vaccinations Recommended adults. for

Atlanta, Centers for from the Prevention, Georgia.) Disease Control (Reproduced and

2.4-2. AB LE T Behavioral Change Stages Counseling in of

ignorance problem. of Denial Precontemplation or the has about not even A thought 51-year-old cessation. smoker conﬂicted change. to or and Ambivalence emotions; assessing Contemplation barriers benefits her considers 43-year-old treatment cocaine for A addict addiction. crack with changes; change. Experimenting information small collecting about Preparation to ask doctor about addict quitting. visits 28-year-old his heroin questions A action goal. direct toward achieving a Taking a A treatment addiction rehabilitation enters 33-year-old to facility narcotics. of prescription for behavior; temptation. Maintaining avoiding new a to reinforcement against to gain visit Anonymous relapse. Alcoholics meetings and 41-year-old continues A support be Maintenance immunosuppressed ■Live not patients. to Action should vaccines administered maternal-fetal Such risk a vaccines also are transmission. of in contraindicated pregnant women owing theoretical to

prevent drugs use to Defned the of disease. as food statin include aspirin prophylaxis supplementation Examples for healthful of and heart minerals; disease; and and treatment vitamins β-blockade. hypercholesterolemia; with perioperative water for

as 2.4-2). to patient (see and In or of education their Table the to stage should change as his suggestions offering counsel, her physicians tailor well individual to Counseling likely most successful to be when change thereof. it willingness accommodates is or patient’s lack the

modality. screening and by Tables recommended outline group and measures age health 2.4-4 care 2.4-3

LE 2.4-3. T AB Methods Health Age by Screening

hemoglobinopathy BP, least before (at screening, level screen birth), years and/or age). birth), lead weight, vision six and TSH of (at Height time T4 and Birth–10 phenylalanine (at (at birth), hearing one years level and risky (if or chlamydia screen behaviors, serology abuse. and (GC) BP, including weight, active), rubella test, vaccination years substance Height screen Pap sexually gonorrhea for (women 11–24 only); two (every alcohol BP or and mammography, blood cholesterol fecal abuse rubella for or depression. vaccination test Pap (every (FIT), test colonoscopy, (FOBT) exam, fecal and sigmoidoscopy and five only); (women pelvic serology or test years immunochemical occult 25–64 years), bimanual screen years), Height weight, screen or women; screening, or (DEXA) years Height osteoporosis 65 for FOBT weight, sigmoidoscopy depression. and and scans hearing vision for test, and BP, colonoscopy, ≥ Pap abuse alcohol FIT,

LE 2.4-4. T AB Health Methods Screening Modality by

≥ ≥ age (or age years 40 for every years 10 Once 50 of high-risk in of years patients patients). known of The dysplasia. modality history a if there is preferred five screening virtual and can to initial every colonoscopy exam. as years be used is standard colonoscopy comparable an CT

21 once onset no liquid-based every years two than Pap three after later of with 30; age to years but intercourse, test. within every Once vaginal up age year The 2–3 > once ↑ years tests. age women can every for cytology to be of 30 with three interval years

and years 20s three age of 30s, 40 in years (controversial). every year female females Offer and to every patients to or more

recommendations cancer Different medical various regarding have screening. societies a for a National Refer to www.nci.nih.gov/cancer_information/testing. site of recent Web recommendations: Institute’s the summary Cancer

Flexible patients). years sigmoidoscopy high-risk ≥ 40 years (or 50 years for in Colonoscopy ≥ age five every age of of Once patients patients). in FIT years Once (or FOBT ≥ ≥ for year of every patients years age age high-risk or 50 40 of age; every in of years years 1–3 patients once ≥ age. patients pelvic of years Once in exam Bimanual 20–40 40 yearly 50 patients age; age in once (controversial). every in of Pap yearly test 1–2 of 40 years Once ≥ years Mammography ≥ patients years as postmenopausal test; screening bleeding. Not Endometrial tissue indicated recommended sampling a for test. screening Not recommended a CXR as exam Insufficient evidence. Skin year years 50 to years at of every high-risk 40 others patients at age (controversial). to DRE Offer and Offer years at (controversial). patients others age of 40 PSA at years and to to high-risk every year 50 exam Clinical breast

cause States in mortality lung United cancer is leading the of The cancer. third are and common men respectively, most cancers in cancers and second breast colorectal the both Prostate cancers prevalent most women, and sexes. with in lung and ranking in 2.4-5 Table age United lists of death causes by the the principal States group.

TABLE 2.4-5. Leading Group Age Death of by Causes

All diabetes. disease, stroke, cancer, respiratory Heart chronic disease, lower ages injuries, anomalies, Congenital low disorders to birth year complications. 1 SIDS, weight, maternal related < cancer, congenital Injuries, heart years 1–4 anomalies, homicide, disease. Injuries, years heart 5–14 disease. congenital cancer, homicide, anomalies, suicide, Injuries, cancer, homicide, disease. heart years 15–24 suicide, homicide. HIV, cancer, disease, Injuries, 25–44 heart years suicide, chronic injuries, heart lower 45–64 diabetes, disease, stroke, Cancer, years disease. respiratory disease, lower disease, disease, ≥ 65 stroke, chronic respiratory diabetes. Heart cancer, Alzheimer’s years Health National Center Statistics, Health for Services, of www.cdc.gov/nchs. Human from and the permission, with Department Adapted,

that law, mandated the level, by of diseases to be is and must public state list reporting state. the disease varies reported authorities By at health slightly notifable report that voluntarily the of diseases CDC The CDC. a states nationally to list has Table not These diseases those listed 2.4-6. to are include limited but in

2.4-6. LE T AB Common Diseases Reportable

HCV. AIDS, gonorrhea, HIV, chancroid, chlamydia, syphilis, STDs Mountain Tick-borne disease Rocky ehrlichiosis, spotted fever. Lyme disease, bioweapons Potential plague. smallpox, Anthrax, inﬂ rubella, disease HBV, disease. HAV, H. measles, polio, uenzae (invasive), pertussis, Vaccine-preventable meningococcal varicella, Diphtheria, mumps, tetanus, legionella, toxin–producing shiga E. Cholera, typhoid. Water-/food-borne coli, trichinellosis, salmonellosis, shigellosis, botulism, listeriosis, giardiasis, disease brucellosis, rabies. psittacosis, Zoonoses Tularemia, cryptosporidiosis. VRSA, syndrome, SARS, leprosy, shock toxic Nile virus, TB, coccidioidomycosis, Miscellaneous West

Interest Conﬂict Malpractice Confidentiality 149 149 150 of

obligated medical as Clinicians care. Respect respect in honor individuals for and autonomy: are preferences patients their to to with given the to and A risks consent Example: before proceed is benefits of procedure. presents resection the her surgeon to tumor patient

Physicians to act a responsibility patient’s have Beneficence: interest. the best in and physician stands a of trust fiduciary, special responsibility As patients. the to in a relationship patient may ict autonomy conﬂ for Respect beneficence. with facility foot. rehabilitation does gangrenous adamant thus she a is Example: go woman want amputation not a refuses potentially of to An that elderly and to to complications. prevent is necessary life-threatening procedure The to has act in The best patient’s responsibility physician a interest. the

The “Do strong avoidable to a harms no harm.” duty. avert Nonmaleficence: responsibility is an informed make may to the and risks, However, an the of an proceed. autonomous intervention patient consent benefits outweigh if potential decision discomfort the that Example: his may outweighed dialysis, be accepting undergo sustaining patient good choose of to by A would greater life.

notion to equal should as expressed With regard be patients, persons that treated fairness Justice: is the equally. individual a care productive and a health resource, access is to for healthy care life. important and greater an individuals Health quality gives chance arena. for policy in ongoing Fair health clinical an of this distribution and challenge resource is the

(including its no by Defined about along (without nature benefits, and discussion intervention of a willing potential as patient the risks, with a alternatives medical treatment). acceptance adequate the coercion) intervention indications, of with a after physician

time. their any may Patients at minds change

required Informed is consent procedures unless: for significant

treatment Emergency required. is without presents collision, Examples: cardiac patient a indicated with vehicle unconscious DNR/DNI cerebral after a arrest. or patient status An previously undergoes motor edema

maker). from can decision-making lack a capacity decision (consent surrogate obtained be Patients significant disturbances. present Patients with or Examples: may dementia psychiatric or until demonstrate legal surrogate they decision capacity generally adequate require Minors decision-making age. makers of are

for situations treatment in is life-threatening Consent implied parents cannot when contacted. be

for Emancipated minors not medical care. do require parental consent married, are Minors emancipated the emancipation. are services, sought financially legal their or and independent in are have they parents armed of if

care sexually consent knowledge. may transmitted for without Minors parental consent infections to or preg for abortion and the States. across drug United concerning and nancy, contraception, vary services dependency and treatment Rules alcohol the on patient. informing parents the the interest services based leave confidential of use the physician, of decision of about states to (Some adolescent best states limit Other disclosure.) his/her is ■Refusal child as threat). immunizations (e.g., serious of pose do not to treatment threat a the treatment: to those has for well-being A not as decisions refusing serious refuse parent considered a long child’s right the the If child, treatment physician is in best decision a seek the not wishes. interest order to a of may a parental against court provide basis if emergent jeopardizes the can In child’s withholding be treatment initiated treatment of on legal the situations, safety, precedent. parental requests seriously the physician of collision vehicle provides life withhold six-year-old measure. despite in blood child transfusion to a a Example: injured to a A motor such save

transmitted infections parental Minors to sexually for without consent knowledge. may care or consent

in held decisions make court a legal Competence: a of accountable be law. and to capacity person’s Refers to decision-making the assessed is below). used the Competence term with and interchangeably often is (see by capacity courts

relevant a deliberate and consequences, ability of understand being refers A its made. patient values the to rationally communicate about one’s to to that the the and severity the relation Decision-making in medical information, a medical term appreciate capacity: of situation choice, decision This can assessed by the be physician.

varying the decision of capacity Decision-making involved. the as complexity understood is with best fracture-related between Example: needed pain liver is of of choose The medication needed pain. that two a about for transplantation types decision different capacity level from to for

cannot patients patients, refuse Incompetent as courts, incapacitated to the decide temporarily or or assessed treatment. accept by refuse cannot An with altered patient intoxicated supplementation. Example: mental thiamine status

patients In general, treatment. to the or discontinue decision-making refuse right who have capacity have can Example: Witnesses Jehovah’s products. refuse blood

treatment or of disease the or withdraw terminal life-sustaining event to Living maintain, state. Addresses in a a persistent patient’s vegetative wishes withhold, will: (do DNR not and orders. not resuscitate) include Examples DNI intubate) (do

health lacks decision-making if Legally maker capacity. care (DPOAHC): for a decision Durable care health of power designates patient surrogate attorney a ﬂ exible living More will. than a decisions wishes. should with make person’s Surrogates consistent stated the

physicians, decisions (spouse, members friends, parents, in siblings), close personal DPOAHC or made and that will family should no by children, order. be or adult If adult exists, living

Friend, absence In or Personal DPOA, of Spouse, CHIPS the Sibling, a For living the will Parent, in Person: the Spouse physician. CHIldren,

DNR/DNI not treat.” mean not orders “do do

futile their cannot physicians. treatment from demand Patients

from the A that patient’s family require information a cannot withhold patient. doctor

Withdrawal Care of

to the Patients right or life-sustaining treatment. withdraw have and makers forgo their decision

withdrawing indicated. treatment and benefit exist is No that a ethical is considered to one between no distinction withholding not offers that This medications as include ﬂuids, and nutrition, such ventilation, may antibiotics.

If for that purpose, to the is if intent palliative death. to and then hasten and treatment suffering, ethical it even administered medications suffering titrated to patient’s are a relieve considered pain provide it relieve is may patient within a in prescribes physician A offer Example: is pain. who expected midazolam to order day mal and die distress grand relief from seizures the to to acute of a

agent with to a the Euthanasia of intent is end the administration lethal life.

Ethics the is states. Code by illegal and opposed is AMA in of all It Medical

Patients should be euthanasia and request evaluated inadequate pain depression. for control comorbid who

end to to prescribing patient it who his/her lethal will life. a Physician-assisted agent a own suicide is self-administer Oregon. the except currently is in state This of illegal

Physicians further under on family following provide the and a circumstances: for grounds may of member’s the ethically to refuse request treatment futility obligated not intervention are

rationale pathophysiologic is There no for treatment.

already has failed. given A intervention

currently is intervention failing. Maximal

Treatment not achieve goals the of will care.

their have right Patients treatment about options and prognosis, know (full disclosure). to medical a status,

patient. that patient’s family doctor cannot the information a A from withhold require

undermine or capacity would the may be the decision-making informed to withhold if only patient their a (therapeutic case requests patient or told severely information disclosure not doctor determines A in privilege). rare harm when the physician that

Physicians in inform obligated treatment. to their are mistakes patients medical of made

family not and contact known, error the physician series with errors the If facts. is as reveal should the specific this communicate of or with more the investigations maintain promptly patient

inform affect in patients the about are clinical Physicians it patient’s treatment. involvement to purpose of a will the research and considering entire the study obligated protocol as design the research study to protocol. possible benefits, the and alternatives includes research This the risks,

informed institutional risks in the completed the review involvement of benefits be board An research and consent must study. approved form overseeing in any protocol, for describing the possible research (IRB) participation research by clinical

be without a divulged by patient to patient’s medical physician a about and confidential disclosed his/her condition expressed and are patient Information consent. cannot information

A may to (e.g., confidentiality the companies). right patient waive with insurance

situations: It legally to ethically necessary following the and confidentiality is override in

intended protect warn duty intent notify (e.g., Physicians a have reasonable through Patient to decision): to violent the victim, the police). crime victim commit a means (Tarasoff

patients. Suicidal

and abuse. elder Child

officials people risk). at to identifiable and infectious diseases Reportable public warn (duty

knife and notify the Gunshot police). to wounds (duty

drivers. Impaired automobile for requires three A drive in the one his motor seizures, week Example: licensed drivers seizure be department to that state for at of least months. patient hospitalization begins vehicles free although after

find a their in physicians personal two another interest in matter. given and obligations by situation Occurs when professional interests themselves inﬂuenced are having interest). own care may is to (financial company drug A a stock interest) in patient that a Example: he (patient pharmaceutical his produces physician prescribing

or meetings). audiences Physicians scientific interest (e.g., of to parties journal affected of articles institutions, patients, conﬂicts disclose should existing

a suit D’s: under elements civil of The include the four essential negligence

patient. has The Duty a to the physician

occurs. duty Dereliction of

There to Damage is the patient.

of Direct the Dereliction damage. cause is

the “beyond reasonable is criminal of which is a the Unlike proof preponderance evidence.” suit the “a in malpractice burden a of of suit, a burden in doubt,” proof

157 the CANCER GASTRIC SYNDROME 156 ULCER GASTRITIS ZOLLINGER-ELLISON 158 and of DISEASE PEPTIC 156 157 Duodenum Stomach Disorders

CARCINOID 162 159 161 the Bowel Disorders DIARRHEA 164 MALABSORPTION BOWEL IRRITABLE OBSTRUCTION BOWEL SYNDROME 159 ILEUS 163 162 LACTOSE SMALL 165 166 SYNDROME INTOLERANCE MESENTERIC APPENDICITIS 162 of ISCHEMIA Small

COLITIS Large 166 RECTAL BOWEL of Bowel 170 the ISCHEMIC OBSTRUCTION AND Disorders CANCER 167 LARGE DISEASE COLON DIVERTICULAR 166 167

(odynophagia) (dysphagia) esophagus. pain of with or abnormalities the due oropharynx swallowing or swallowing to Difficulty

location: according Presentation varies the to

esophagus. the from Oropharyngeal the difficulty passing material oropharynx with to dysphagia: Presents more than Usually liquids solids. involves Zenker’s gravis, and include Parkinson’s diverticula. disease, can Causes be muscular stroke, prolonged myasthenia or and neurologic intubation,

than Esophageal progressive. Usually more and most rings, obstructive (strictures, causes for solids liquids dysphagia: Schatzki webs, generally involves carcinoma) is and scleroderma, (achalasia, solid spasm) esophageal with Motility both dysphagia. liquid present disorders

(e.g., Examine masses defects. tumor) and anatomic goiter, for

Cine-esophagram. dysphagia: Oropharyngeal

swallow Esophageal dysphagia: manometry, monitoring. endoscopy, followed by and/or pH Barium directly proceed an endoscopy suspected, lesion with obstructive biopsy. to is If

Upper endoscopy. Odynophagia:

dependent. Etiology

infectious Table diagnosis, etiology, and outlines treatment esophagitis. the of 2.6-1

motility of unknown by is high-amplitude normal etiology. periodically ■A contractions interrupted disorder nonperistaltic peristalsis which in Also nutcracker esophagus. as known

2.6-1. AB T LE Esophagitis of Infectious Causes

glossitis webs Esophageal associated anemia and are with syndrome). (Plummer-Vinson iron deficiency

illness. is esophagitis an AIDS-defining Candidal

thrush plaques Yellow-white mucosa. to Oral albicans adherent the Candida Oral Fluconazole HSV giant with PO on biopsy. nuclear inclusions ulcers Small, ulcerations; multinucleated cells deep CMV intranuclear Retinitis, superfcial IV on colitis ulcerations; inclusions Large, Acyclovir biopsy. Ganciclovir IV

one-third of esophagus upper muscle. lower the the musculature two-thirds the is smooth The that skeletal, is of whereas of

mimic Malignancy achalasia may (pseudoachalasia).

Presents chest with and pain, dysphagia, odynophagia. Hx/PE: nitroglycerin. of hot Often liquids; ingestion cold by or by precipitated relieved

show Dx: may a esophagus. corkscrew-shaped swallow Barium manometry reveals Esophageal simultaneous contractions. high-amplitude,

symptomatic Tx: for channel surgery myotomy) severe, (CCBs) and for Nitrates blockers symptoms. relief; (esophageal incapacitating calcium

disorder of esophagus esophagus. the sphincter and the motor impaired peristalsis relaxation (LES) by in the esophageal loss distal of of of two-thirds characterized lower the A absence Thought of ganglion from myenteric to the plexus. loss inhibitory the or result in cells (Auerbach’s)

dysphagia, and are Hx/PE: chest loss, pain, symptoms. of common regurgitation nocturnal cough weight food, Progressive undigested

Dx:

dilation swallow esophagus distal the esophageal reveals “bird’s 2.6-1). beak” tapering of with (see Figure Barium a

incomplete peristalsis and esophagus. relaxation the resting of shows body pressure, in Manometry LES swallowing, ↑ LES ↓ upon the

endoscopy. out by ruled Mechanical obstruction causes be must of

provide short-term LES may of CCBs, toxin the injection of botulinum relief or symptoms. into Nitrates, Tx: endoscopic or dilation (Heller) are myotomy treatment surgical definitive balloon options. Pneumatic

2.6-1. FIGURE Achalasia.

dilation esophagus. tapering Barium a reveals of esophagram beak” esophageal the distal with “bird’s from TR. PF, (Reproduced Waters DeMeester management. and motor surgical their disorders Foregut Clin 1235, permission North from © with Elsevier.) Med 1981, 65: Am

esophageal common achalasia). (after The second disorder most motility

the outpouching is muscle Cervical cricopharyngeal called diverticulum. Zenker’s through third the in and middle also esophagus. can occur the of Diverticula distal

Patients pain, dysphagia, Hx/PE: chest regurgitation food. of undigested and halitosis, complain of

swallow Barium outpouchings. will Dx: demonstrate

diverticulum. If surgical Tx: excision with symptomatic, of the treat Zenker’s cricopharyngeus the the myotomy diverticulum, to high-pressure of is relieve For required zone.

(SCC) States, Squamous type worldwide, esophageal most cell prevalent Australia. of Europe, the common is while cancer carcinoma most and the adenocarcinoma United is in associated The (columnar is latter chronic esophagus 2° of GERD). esophagus distal Barrett’s metaplasia the to with

for been Alcohol risk as and use SCC. have smoking major identified factors

to is Hx/PE: dysphagia, common. solids initially and later to liquids, Progressive and bleeding, Weight are loss, also GI seen. vomiting odynophagia, GERD,

Dx: study with the narrowing shows into protruding of irregular lumen. esophagus border Barium the an EGD diagnosis. and the biopsy confirm ultrasound endoscopic are used for CT staging. and

is and the is Chemoradiation surgical definitive Tx: but the poor. treatment, resection prognosis high-grade also Surgery offered is for dysplasia. Barrett’s Patients and not require of who stent candidates quality may placed surgery improved endoscopically esophageal palliation for an are for life.

LES commonly into relaxation. gastric the Symptomatic most of a reﬂux of contents result esophagus, transient as an Can LES, due to incompetent hernia. or be gastroparesis, hiatal

occurs with or sitting, improves worsens and heartburn that Patients antacids, present minutes standing. meal, a after commonly 30–90 with reclining, often with Substernal chest to distinguish from other causes. pain difficult can be

and brash”), be unexplained clues. globus, Sour cough, can (“water taste hoarseness morning

Exam present. disease is a is normal usually scleroderma) unless (e.g., systemic

The and clinical history impression important. are

trial often of and first. lifestyle is medical empiric attempted modification treatment An include look for monitoring. manometry, Studies hernia), barium (to swallow esophageal and may hiatal pH 24-hour

cell use. esophageal alcohol Squamous and is with associated cancer tobacco

a because metastasizes Esophageal the serosa. lacks cancer esophagus early

Risk include pressure ↑ (e.g., hiatal GERD for factors pregnancy). hernia obesity, intra-abdominal and

asthma. can cough-variant GERD mimic

garlic, nicotine. alcohol, mints, onions, with chocolate, should caffeine, GERD and avoid Patients

the with Type the anemia of B12. to vitamin for gastritis of absorption factor pernicious associated is necessary lack intrinsic A due

be complicated initial patients (to rule adenocarcinoma), dysphagia/odynophagia). (e.g., unresponsive ■ esophagus empiric should disease in and anorexia, symptoms long-standing suggestive biopsies performed Barrett’s out EGD therapy, of are loss, or to weight with whose

meal LES head-of-bed that nocturnal tone. of Lifestyle: Weight size, ↓ meals reduction avoidance loss, elevation, and of and substances

with with (cimetidine, intermittent in lansoprazole) Pharmacologic: PPIs with ranitidine) antacids use (omeprazole, mild, symptoms. and patients symptoms; patients Start or frequent antagonists H2 in receptor chronic are severe erosive preferred for or disease. PPIs

significant Surgical: Nissen refractory severe disease, may offer or For fundoplication relief.

gastric Esophagitis, upper esophagus. stricture, aspiration contents, of GI Barrett’s bleeding, esophageal

Herniation chest through portion a upward the of of into stomach a opening. the diaphragmatic are There common types: two

of hiatal junction displaced above (95%): hernias the are Sliding gastroesophageal The a stomach the diaphragm. portion and

while herniates of hernias the hiatal gastroesophageal remains junction (5%): below Paraesophageal The the neighboring fundus portion into the a mediastinum. diaphragm,

May Hx/PE: asymptomatic. be with Those sliding with GERD. hernias may present

frequently an also incidental by diagnosed Dx: finding or CXR; barium Commonly swallow on EGD.

Tx:

GERD and therapy hernias: modifications Medical lifestyle ↓ Sliding to symptoms.

stomach of of Paraesophageal gastric hiatus) prevent to Surgical gastropexy hernias: to the rectus the (attachment sheath is recommended closure and volvulus. the

Inﬂammation the stomach lining. of Subtypes as follows: are

lesions infection, due CNS H. NSAID from alcohol, and to that injury). often use, pylori illness stress are severe Rapidly burns, Acute gastritis: superficial developing, (e.g.,

autoantibodies parietal to is in Occurs and cells. ■Type to the (10%): Chronic gastritis: due fundus A and disorders, autoimmune pernicious anemia is other with as Causes such associated thyroiditis. risk ↑ Also of adenocarcinoma. the gastric

be H. by Occurs infection. may NSAID in B use or pylori (90%): caused ■Type antrum and the of PUD gastric with but Often ↑ risk cancer. associated asymptomatic, and

may complain pain, hematemesis, of epigastric may asymptomatic Patients nausea, be vomiting, melena. or or

the Upper visualize gastric endoscopy can lining.

H. be pylori antigen, indicate detected can (which H. or test, infection), by endoscopic breath biopsy. not current antibodies pylori IgG exposure, serum infection stool urease

of intake agents. offending ■↓ blockers, help. sucralfate, Antacids, and/or H2 may PPIs

infection. H. pylori omeprazole) treat Triple (amoxicillin, therapy clarithromycin, to

Give ulcers (e.g., stress prophylactic for H2 patients ICU or to blockers PPIs risk patients). at

particularly second cause most and malignant is worldwide death Korea and common in of the is This tumor common cancer-related Japan. Tumors two generally which exhibit types: are adenocarcinomas, morphologic

arise gastric Intestinal intestinal Thought cells. type: mucosal of metaplasia to from and and factors (antioxidants), in low in gastritis. and colonization, high chronic diet pylori fresh nitrites salt include H. a Risk vegetables

with and Tends be differentiated type: Diffuse not to associated poorly

gastritis. or pylori infection H. chronic on seen pathology. factors ring are largely signet are cells unknown; Risk

appetite. of Early are Hx/PE: loss indigestion and signs loss, Advanced pain, abdominal or upper present bleeding. with GI weight cases generally

is carcinoma and individuals. examination of discovered Dx: largely with gastric endoscopic serendipitously is high-risk Early asymptomatic

rests tumor. the treatment Tx: and entirely removal Successful detection on of early surgical < advanced Five-year disease. survival is 10% for

by and/or Damage to acidic or impaired ↑ gastric mucosa duodenal gastric the contents. defense caused mucosal in duodenal and > 90% H. ulcers. a role ulcers causative of pylori plays of gastric 70% risk NSAID, include factors Other corticosteroid, alcohol, tobacco use. and affected than more Males are females. often

or ulcers), burning with to periodic and duodenal pain presents meals eating, dull, improves can back. radiate epigastric (especially ■Classically with hours worsens that chronic the after 2–3

tumor. Gastric a adenocarcinoma Krukenberg called to ovary that the is metastasizes

node). (an Gastric node supraclavicular cancer Virchow’s enlarged may with present left lymph

After Greater, from a Decreases. Gastric whereas is a meal, Duodenal pain pain ulcer

GI from are source. 5–7% GI bleeds upper lower Roughly of an

Rule syndrome PUD Zollinger-Ellison gastrin that are cases serum refractory out and medical to in with GERD of levels management.

who NSAID require therapy for arthritis). patients help (e.g., with Misoprostol PUD can

or of blood stool (melena nausea, emesis), hematochezia). complain in may hematemesis or Patients (“coffee-ground” also the

Exam guaiac. varying there if tenderness epigastric reveal of is stool may active degrees bleeding, a and,

of perforation a peritoneal present or rebound can rigid guarding, An abdomen, tenderness, acute signs with irritation. other

diaphragm); perforation assess (low the ↓ rule to out or to (free for bleeding CBC under air GI AXR hematocrit).

(10% out bleeding Upper to barium or gastric with confirm gastric ulcers); active to biopsy adenocarcinoma and endoscopy PUD rule is an swallow alternative. of

testing. H. pylori

prior syndrome must used to or use screen serum refractory (patients be discontinue to recurrent testing). Zollinger-Ellison gastrin can In cases, PPI for

Acute:

out Rule guaiac, NG with active stool lavage. rectal hematocrits, and bleeding with a exam serial

needed hematocrit and surgery as treat patient’s and IV BP hydration, Monitor PPIs, complications. IV the for and with transfusion, endoscopy,

surgery indicated. is likely, If is emergent perforation

Pharmacologic:

pylori infection. and acid production, Involves H. mucosa, protecting eradicating decreasing the

mucosal or misoprostol protection. prostaglandin analog) disease antacids (a Treat bismuth, with sucralfate, mild with and for ↓ to acid used may H2 be secretion. antagonists PPIs or receptor

Patients (amoxicillin, should pylori confirmed H. omeprazole). receive therapy triple clarithromycin, infection with and

use Discontinue agents. of exacerbating chronic disease Patients therapy. severe recurrent with may require or symptomatic

surgery: and Endoscopy

that GI symptomatic gastric either ulcers series barium therapy adenocarcinoma. > an are refractory rule for 2 should have to upper out Patients or endoscopy with gastric medical with to months

approach). cases vagotomy surgical may surgical (the selective procedure as cell parietal preferred most Refractory require and such a

anterior obstruction, Hemorrhage erode gastric gastroduodenal intractable ulcers), pain. that perforation (posterior the ulcers artery), outlet into (usually

that duodenum condition characterized to gastrin-producing in pancreas rare gastrin. of and/or by oversecretion lead the ■A tumors

to stomach gastrin levels in ■↑ gastric (may acid recurrent/intractable results gastric high of and duodenum the by the the leading more in distally). production mucosa, of occur ulcers

20% of MEN (pancreas, In parathyroid gastrinomas tumors). associated cases, are and with pituitary, 1

with pain and burning Patients abdominal present loss, weakness, may nausea, GI gnawing, well Hx/PE: as with as weight unresponsive, bleeding. fatigue, vomiting, diarrhea, recurrent

stimulation Dx: ↑ levels as serum characteristic, ↑ are following is gastrin a fasting secretin test. gastrin Octreotide the can localize scan tumor.

Tx:

↓ Requires acid production. but symptoms. a often ineffective, PPI moderateto controls high-dose typically blockers are H2

of the should be light where malignant resection the possible. potential of In tumor, attempted surgical

associated cases. roughly syndrome of 1 Zollinger-Ellison 20% with in MEN is syndrome

or stool. as ↑ Defined the of with day of feces of > production along frequency g 200 ↓ consistency per secretion, osmolarity, Broadly, four ↑ 2.6-2). also are (see motility, the ↑ luminal ↑ mechanisms etiologic inﬂammation and Table

Acute diarrhea:

symptoms; onset usually with weeks < and infectious self-limited. 2 Acute of

toxins CMV). Yersinia), Microsporidium, Entamoeba bacteria difficile), (e.g., coli, preformed (e.g., E. bacteria E. Isospora, bacteria Vibrio and histolytica), include opportunistic Causes (e.g., noninvasive Shigella, aureus, C. organisms Salmonella, Giardia, (e.g., with cereus), Bacillus enteroinvasive coli, Cryptosporidium, parasites invasive Campylobacter, cholerae, (e.g., enterotoxigenic S.

diarrhea One the infection rotavirus (most of of common causes common most is pediatric during winter).

diarrhea: Chronic

symptoms. with Insidious 4 weeks of onset >

or malabsorption/osmotic carcinoid, VIPomas), pancreatic mucosal motility IBS). overgrowth, lactose (IBD), (e.g., secretion diarrhea abnormalities, disease altered be (e.g., intolerance), ammatory inf bowel due (e.g., intestinal bacterial ↑ Can to insufficiency, stool fasting of osmotic diarrhea suggest osmotic resolution ↑ and with gap diarrhea. a Figure diagnostic algorithm. See for 2.6-2

usually not days. fever, patient does Acute the lasting a > or diarrhea, bloody laboratory investigation high diarrhea unless require diarrhea 4–5 has

C. fecal Send bacterial difficile for and stool culture, O&P. leukocytes, toxin,

with in Consider bloody patients sigmoidoscopy diarrhea.

diarrhea: Acute

solutions. is rehydration bacterial infection with loperamide, treat salicylate) antidiarrheals suspected, When and (e.g., bismuth oral not

Acute infectious is self-limited. diarrhea and generally

and that Salmonella, E. include bloody Campylobacter. diarrhea cause Organisms coli, Shigella,

of eggs raw Diarrhea or after dairy: ingestion think

Salmonella.

AB T LE 2.6-2. Infectious of Causes Diarrhea

etiology Campylobacter common The most of diarrhea. infectious Ingestion contaminated water. or food of children Affects young and young adults. days. Generally 7–10 lasts Fecal WBCs. RBCs and Frequently diarrhea. bloody and out IBD. appendicitis Rule Erythromycin. with difficile clindamycin). treatment antibiotics cephalosporins, Recent (penicillins, Clostridium hospitalized Affects patients. adult for Watch megacolon. toxic toxicity. Fever, systemic pain, abdominal possible and RBCs Fecal WBCs. commonly causes bowel. small the colitis, involve Most but can difficile toxin C. stool. Identify the in pseudomembranes. shows Sigmoidoscopy inciting antibiotic. Cessation of the metronidazole cannot patient tolerate or the metronidazole vancomycin; PO. IV PO if food Ingestion histolytica countries. in developing history of of contaminated Entamoeba or travel water; last Incubation period three months. to can up pain, abdominal fever. Severe RBCs Fecal and WBCs. Chronic amebic mimics IBD. colitis fatal to lead perforation. can Steroids with Treat metronidazole. meat). coli of Ingestion (raw E. O157:H7 contaminated food elderly. children Affects and the 5–10 days. lasts Generally fever, vomiting. Severe low-grade pain, abdominal RBCs and Fecal WBCs. bleed out It important rule GI colitis. is ischemic to and HUS is a possible complication. antidiarrheal HUS or antibiotic risk. ↑ Avoid which therapy, contaminated poultry of eggs. Ingestion or young Affects elderly patients. children and Generally lasts 2–5 days. myalgia, pain. Prodromal fever, abdominal headache, Fecal WBCs. concern, as become Sepsis bacteremic. of a 5–10% patients is Sickle susceptible osteomyelitis. cell disease to to invasive leading are patients at-risk sickle Treat cell (e.g., patients) patients bacteremia oral with TMP-SMX. quinolone or or transmitted route. contagious; the fecal-oral Extremely between by people children institutionalized young Affects patients. and WBCs. and RBCs Fecal to severe lead May dehydration. also very young. in febrile cause seizures Can the TMP-SMX person-to-person Treat spread. ↓ to with Shigella Salmonella

1. Exclude: of diarrhea 2. Causes acute

3.

4.

5.

6.

Fecal enema barium leukocytesand biopsy sigmoidoscopy with Flexible series, blood Upper GI occult

Inflammatory osmolality, from electrolytes, Increased quantitative FACTS Normal HIGH-YIELD SJ Cancer disease permission, McPhee osmotic al. fat h, gap osmotic Stool with et (Reproduced, gap bowel weight/24 & 48th Current Diagnosis Medical ed. Treatment, York: McGraw- New

Hill, Fig. 2009: 15-2.)

antimotility the antibiotics agents systemic been infection after stool have and chills, studies has (e.g., malaise), fever, avoid If evidence consider sent. of patient

with the or cause underlying octreotide, Chronic symptoms Identify treat loperamide, diarrhea: opioids, cholestyramine. and

ﬂ cannot electrolytes, children treat give uids—hospitalize, cause. Pediatric PO ﬂuids, or who and the IV medication For take replete diarrhea: underlying

disease, as tropical ■Inability insuff result (e.g., mucosal bacterial def as nutrients Whipple’s such condition ileal abnormalities absorb disease, celiac overgrowth, sprue), to bowel of salt bile (e.g., disease), underlying ciency. and short a an syndrome, pancreatic ciency commonly involved. is The bowel most small

ushing, cardiac tumors. the carcinoid diarrhea, and valvular ﬂ are Cutaneous common most wheezing, of manifestations lesions

Half with have all patients IBS disturbances. comorbid psychiatric of

micronutrients ↓ and carbohydrates, in of absorption result (folate/B12/iron). May protein, fat,

with atus, weight with bulky Hx/PE: Presents stools frequent, abdominal pain, associated loose, foul-smelling, stools pale, def bloating, and and/or watery ciencies, nutritional loss, fatigue. f

dependent. Tx: Etiology gluten-free diet patients sprue. for with Institute celiac a patients medications. anti-inﬂ immunosuppressants, affected Severely TPN, receive may and ammatory

into glucose galactose. lactose brush-border of and a hydrolyzes from the disaccharide Results lactase, enzyme defciency that a

common Native among Asian, of deficiency and African, populations is American Lactase descent. or an the intestinal 2° to episode may transiently acute proximal It affecting also occur small mucosa. gastroenteritis of other disorders

atulence, and with watery milk diarrhea f Presents cramping, ingestion. bloating, abdominal Hx/PE: following

reveals (indicates of ingestion colonic Hydrogen of breath following hydrogen lactose lactose Dx: breath bacteria). ↑ load a test metabolism by is diagnosis. suggestive in symptom of resolution diet An that lactose-free the highly results empiric

products; dairy Tx: Avoidance enzyme lactase of replacement.

and of substance tumors enterochromaffin most systemic appendix such most to undergo serotonin P. and metastasis liver circulation. cells) and produce vasoactive carcinoid secreted arise substances the not Prior (hormone-producing ileum by metastasis, to commonly liver Due hormones metabolism from as first-pass reach and that the do

common Cutaneous the are wheezing, Hx/PE: fushing, most lesions cardiac manifestations. abdominal and right-sided valvular diarrhea, cramps, excitement. or exertion, usually Symptoms follow eating,

urine Dx: the serotonin metabolite of are 5-HIAA High diagnostic. levels Octreotide scan localize the can tumor.

Treatment octreotide tumor of symptoms) mass. debulking includes (for and Tx:

An that as abdominal idiopathic in by stress with bowel is bowel disorder by is pain ↑ functional changes by that characterized as well movements. relieved that habits any third It and age. syndrome the in most is patients the common since at is chronic, may present decades, second but anxiety, (e.g., IBS care disorders who of patients Half psychiatric depression, seek medical comorbid all fibromyalgia). have

stools, pain, present pain of abdominal and/or with change and a bowel (diarrhea ■Patients relief distention, with movement. a abdominal bowel habits mucous constipation), in

vomiting, weight uncommon. also loss, and significant are rarely awakens constitutional patients sleep; from IBS symptoms

usually tenderness. except abdominal for Exam unremarkable is mild

diagnosis exclusion based of on A history. clinical

rule electrolytes, to TSH, causes GI contrast Tests out include studies. CBC, films, abdominal barium other stool cultures, and

Manometry assess function. sphincter can

reassurance Psychological: physicians. from their Patients need be are that head.” “all told their in their symptoms not should They

Fiber help. may (psyllium) supplements Dietary:

antidiarrheals Treat (loperamide), and such Pharmacologic: antispasmodics with as dicyclomine). TCAs, (anticholinergics

Defined blocked contents passage through bowel. as small of bowel the and ﬂuid to build to obstruction, and up imbalances abdominal Fluid leading and discomfort. electrolyte can significant proximal gas the necrosis ischemia can complete The and the of obstruction partial, or or may occur. be bowel gallstone surgery (10–20%), or may from arise of volvulus. (60% due abdominal intussusception, hernias SBO a (10–20%), adhesions neoplasms stricture ileus, from prior IBD, to cases),

abdominal pattern with at Patients experience a crescendo-decrescendo recurrent cramping 5to typically intervals. 10-minute pain

but if is proximal distal. emesis if nonfeculent the feculent Vomiting is typically pain; obstruction early bilious it follows is the and

is complete obstruction, stool passed stool, no whereas ﬂatus or there passage continued of in In obstruction, no but ﬂatus (obstipation). is partial

Abdominal hernias. tenderness, scars, surgical reveals exam distention, often prior or

are peristaltic rushes. tinkles by and sounds characterized Bowel high-pitched

may Peristalsis later in progression. disease disappear tachycardia and peritonitis, suggest tenderness, Fever, emergency. rebound surgical a hypotension,

is leukocytosis demonstrate ischemia there may necrosis or bowel. CBC if of

and often reﬂ due ect dehydration metabolic alkalosis to vomiting. Labs for and bowel acidosis worrisome, Lactic as emergent surgical need particularly suggests is intervention. the it necrotic

often 2.6-3), air-f uid stepladder levels gas demonstrate films a a loops, dilated Abdominal the and pattern (see colon. in of of small-bowel paucity Figure cecum is suggestive the gallstone of of The radiopaque material ileus. at presence

diagnosis exclusion. of a IBS is

The SBO of hernias. leading children cause in is of leading adults SBO cause is adhesions. The in

a the complete rise sun or let on SBO. Never set

motility. Anticholinergics, slow opioids, GI and hypokalemia

IGU 2.6-3. R E F of Acute mechanical small the (upright film). intestine obstruction

marked Note gas. of and distention colonic levels, bowel loops, air-ﬂuid of the absence Kasper permission, with DL from al. duced, (Repro et ed. Medicine, Internal Harrison’s of 16th Principles McGraw-Hill, 1804.) 2005: New York:

Foley to obstruction, IV and may and care For status, hydration, supportive suction, status. be NG abnormalities, of uid NPO catheterization correction include sufficient monitor ﬂ electrolyte partial should

in required 3 vascular compromise or resolution. cases bowel), days lasting symptoms (necrotic is complete of Surgery > SBO, without

necrotic and performed evaluation bowel, may of for Exploratory of hernias. laparotomy adhesions, with IBD, lysis be resection and stricture,

a is between mortality associated risk a nonstrangulated treatment. on for up and with rate a SBO mortality the diagnosis strangulated is There 2% 25% to depending SBO; time

or be laparoscopy hours reevaluate surgical ischemia is 18–36 viability after concern. to performed if bowel A initial a may treatment laparotomy second-look

structural Loss obstruction. peristalsis of without severe electrolyte medications opioids). factors GI or and medical anticholinergics, Risk surgery/GI motility hypokalemia slow illness, (e.g., immobility, other imbalances, include that hypothyroidism, procedures, DM, recent

moderate or discomfort; an constant, include vomiting fatulence of and nausea symptoms with absence bowel and Presenting abdominal eating); (especially movements. diffuse,

bowel reveal absent diffuse Exam and ↓ tenderness signs, abdominal may no or sounds. distention, peritoneal and

exam elderly to A fecal rectal impaction is rule out required patients. in

Diffusely distended on on air-ﬂuid and with supine AXR levels small of loops large are view. seen upright bowel

Gastrografin ileus, rule out neo-In can obstruction; rule CT for can A partial diagnosing look study plasms. out large small and the AXR. on bowel air throughout

the ■↓ bowel or other use reduce and any of drugs motility. discontinue narcotics that

oral feeds. or ↓ discontinue Temporarily

Initiate necessary. suction/parenteral feeds NG as

electrolytes as needed. Replete

ischemic leading insufficient tissue ↓ to and perfusion to mesenteric injury. supply intestinal blood ejection vasospasm); arterial ↓ states). SMA) acute include output, (due to (due or fibrillation fraction); (due involving Causes arteriolar (low hypercoagulable thrombosis from arterial or the occlusion embolism to disease atherosclerosis) and thrombosis cardiac venous atrial (usually to nonocclusive

out with present sudden onset severe of abdominal the proportion pain of to exam. Patients

episodes (“intestinal may be history pain after similar present. eating of angina”) of prior abdominal A

symptoms diarrhea, include Other bloody stools. vomiting, and nausea, may

may unremarkable; is findings often signs exam include later Early peritoneal (suggest bowel infarction). abdominal

↑ ↑ amylase, lactate, tests CK. leukocytosis, show and ↑ acidosis may with ↑ LDH, Lab metabolic

edema the CT AXR air intestinalis). (pneumatosis may (“thumbprinting”) within reveal wall bowel and bowel and wall

gold disease. occlusive Mesenteric arterial for the standard is angiography

of and antibiotics, of hemodynamics, optimization Volume vasoconstrictors. broad-spectrum avoidance resuscitation,

arterial or embolism. for thrombosis venous Anticoagulation or

ischemia > The 50%. rate for mesenteric mortality acute is

in of > cause lower is common the GI Diverticulosis age. most years patients bleeding 40 acute of

perforation. with distinguished be colon disease cancer Diverticular must from

in Avoid risk. because stages ﬂ diverticulitis barium and of sigmoidoscopy perforation the of exible enemas initial

or peritonitis laparotomy for arterial deterioration Early evidence of or if disease is acute clinical present. occlusive

and endovascular thrombosis. arterial for stenting Angioplasty +/– thrombectomy acute

embolism. acute Embolectomy for arterial

Resection infarcted bowel. of

death. shock, organ failure, Sepsis/septic multisystem

chapter. See Medicine Emergency the

sigmoid mucosa herniate diverticula) (false commonly that and pressure; in muscle colon. of layers intraluminal Outpouchings through areas in found most the of the submucosa colonic high Diverticulosis bleeding > is age. in years acute the patients common of of GI most 40 cause lower > and age), (e.g., of advanced Ehlers-Danlos tissue age factors low-fber diet, high-fat a 80 those connective in years Risk syndrome). and occur include disorders (65% and, impaction. a potentially, 2° diverticulum due inﬂammation perforation of to Diverticulitis to fecalith is

is asymptomatic. often Diverticulosis

lightheadedness, Bleeding painless generally hematochezia (fatigue, presenting sudden, and symptoms on as anemia is exertion). with dyspnea of

with fever, presents nausea, pain, Diverticulitis vomiting, abdominal constipation. and LLQ serious and peritonitis a shock. complication is to that leads Perforation

show may CBC leukocytosis.

rule or Diagnosis or (to ileus, is air, barium AXR free out on obstruction), enema. colonoscopy, based must early to those risk perforation. diverticulitis in due with avoided the Sigmoidoscopy/colonoscopy of be

those improvement, patients abscess reveal who severe In with lack air. free show may abdominal or in or of CT disease

or Uncomplicated diverticulosis: supplements. be on fiber followed can and ber a diet Patients high-f placed

transfuse as Bleeding stops hydrate needed. usually Diverticular spontaneously; and bleeding: does or If embolization is not with bleeding surgery indicated. angiography stop,

(NPO), placement, cephalosporin) NG Diverticulitis: Treat if a with broad-spectrum the secondor patient is tube and ﬂuoroquinolone or bowel stable. a antibiotics (metronidazole rest and third-generation ﬂexible is and barium Avoid sigmoidoscopy enema suspected. if diverticulitis

immediate colostomy. Hartmann’s with ■For surgical diseased of bowel a resection via perforation, a procedure perform temporary

2.6-3 that from LBO. Table SBO distinguish features describes of LBO. radiographic Figure classic 2.6-4 demonstrates findings the

cause in The of the cancer. second leading after lung mortality States cancer United an ↑ 70– a age, 80 incidence with at There peak incidence years. is with cancer colon association has between observed also been an There

LE 2.6-3. T AB Large Small Bowel Obstruction Characteristics of and

severe History emesis. pain; acute abdominal Moderate copious to SBO. with distal pain Cramping hypotension signs dehydration, of seen. Fever, be and may (less SBO and commonly than cramping pain Constipation/obstipation, SBO), more feculent). nausea/ (less intense than deep abdominal vomiting but SBO), abdominal visible tenderness, distention PE peristaltic (distal waves, hypovolemia. fever, Abdominal rectal exam. surgical a Look for scars/hernias; perform High-pitched bowel “tinkly” bowel absence sounds. of later, sounds; fever shock peritoneal or or for ischemia/necrosis. of examine irritation suggest Signif mass; and tympany, cant tenderness; distention, perforation/peritonitis signs or sounds. “tinkly” bowel absence bowel High-pitched later, of sounds; ileus, Crohn’s stricture, foreign gallstone hematoma. disease, Adhesions Etiologies (postsurgery), body, CF, intussusception, volvulus, neoplasm, hernias, Colon fecal benign cancer, impaction, volvulus, diverticulitis, tumors. Assume cancer otherwise. colon until proven ileus, paralytic LBO, gastroenteritis. Differential Ogilvie’s ileus, appendicitis, syndrome IBD, SBO, paralytic (pseudo-obstruction). complete), or acid, is (see CT studies scan. (determine CBC, if 2.6-3); partial Figure lactic contrast AXR it electrolytes, if (if AXR is perforation scan; 2.6-4), acid, stable. CBC, CT Figure sigmoidoscopy/colonoscopy contrast enema (see lactic electrolytes, suspected); water

Hospitalize. with be Partial decompression and can status. conservatively treated SBO NPO NG

status, Patients IV decompression, managed complete aggressively surgical and NPO fuids, with NG electrolyte with replacement, be correction. should SBO

Hospitalize. with required. be tube; Gastrografn Obstruction relieved or a rectal a colonoscopy, usually can is surgery however, enema, partial with diverting Ischemic usually colostomy. colon requires colectomy a

cause Treat the neoplasm). (e.g., underlying

TABLE 2.6-4.

FIGURE 2.6-4. obstruction. bowel Large

dilated shows Barium sign, the bowel obstruction. loop with in toward juxtaposed site the of adjacent pointing study the walls “bird-beak” permission, with Way (Reproduced, from LW. & Diagnosis Current 10th ed. Surgical Treatment, 1994: CT: Stamford, 676.) & Lange, Appleton and bovis bacteremia. Streptococcus factors 2.6-4. are screening and Risk protocols in Table summarized

absence period and a the present after of colon with ■In silent growth. screening, symptoms prolonged of cancer typically only rectal

Age.

cancer hereditary disease, adenomatous Gardner’s (HNPCC). polyposis nonpolyposis colorectal Hereditary syndromes—familial age (100% 40), by risk

Family history.

Crohn’s colitis does higher a than disease. risk IBD—ulcerative carries

pedunculated more polyps—villous tubular progress sessile than Adenomatous than and polyps polyps often more polyps. cm 2 risk. > an Lesions ↑ carry

Past cancer. of colorectal history

diet. ber High-fat, low-f

50 ≥ patients performed age. should yearly for A of years DRE be of with lesions Up all DRE. to 10% are palpable

performed be years for ≥ guaiac year 50 Stool should age. of every patients to are colorectal 50% due Up to cancer. guaiac of tests

those years. in every 5 every of FOBT years 50 ≥ yearly OR Colonoscopy age sigmoidoscopy 10 with years

10 family years years age cancer frst-degree member. colorectal youngest or Colonoscopy age 10 years prior every ≥ of with have relative adenomatous polyps, to at performed diagnosis should of or in a patients 40 be who the the

often pain. Although or present anemia asymptomatic, may patients abdominal with vague unexplained location: features depend Other on

lesions: ulcerating blood bulky, Right-sided that loss. Often from masses anemia to lead occult chronic may weakness, vague abdominal complain loss, diarrhea, weight or Patients of pain. anorexia, rare. is Obstruction

masses Figure lesions: obstructing 2.6-5). (see “apple-core” Typically Left-sided abdominal Patients complain constipation, in blood-streaked change habits caliber, of pain, bowel obstipation), (e.g., a and/or stools. stool ↓ colicky common. is Obstruction

bright pain. with blood Rectal with present red rectal per Usually often rectum, and/or lesions: tenesmus coexist ruled rectal bleeding. so hemorrhoids, must out rectal patients Can be all in cancer with with

anemia) shows blood. microcytic and Order (often a stool CBC occult

rectal to sigmoidoscopy suspicious all lesions. Perform bleeding evaluate left-sided and

right-sided synchronous lesions with colonoscopy. out Rule enema. is If air-contrast rule incomplete, out lesions colonoscopy with additional barium an

cancer the of in Determine degree rectal with endorectal ultrasound. invasion

abdominal/pelvic CXR, Order workup. LFTs, for metastatic CT an and a lymph but go lymphatic or may liver, Metastases (to to may occur spread viscera, nodes). from hematogenous the lungs, brain), spread and to extension also arise pelvic (40–50% direct local bone, spread to

an cancer proven otherwise. is Iron elderly deficiency until anemia in male colorectal

FIGURE 2.6-5. Colon carcinoma.

on enema x-ray. “apple-core” The in the descending filling defect an carcinoma barium colon as appears encircling from LW. permission, with Way (Reproduced, Treatment, & Diagnosis Surgical Current ed. 10th CT: Lange, 1994: 658.) Stamford, & Appleton node on distant and the depth tumor of presence the wall bowel involvement metastases. and into ■Staging the is of based lymph penetration

known complication is a repair AAA to mesenteric artery. sacrifice of colitis the due of inferior Ischemic

hemoglobin hematocrit by should and One units. of by unit 3–4 1 PRBCs ↑ unit

the of treatment resection cancer of Surgical choice. the is 1° performed for lymph dissection should purposes. node Regional staging be

to on rectal the verge canal the anal between of anal the the depends technique resection anal proximity junction lesion the and lesions, the (the For skin).

resection: distal be the resected permanent colostomy cm is are preserved, 10 and For when a rectum placed. the anal cannot the and < Abdominoperineal from verge, anus sphincter lesions

rectum. 10 1° is anterior from and lesions anastomosis > resection: the anal cm colon a proximal created between Low verge, the For

For the rectum. the well-differentiated excision: low-grade, tumors Wide in local small, of lower third

colon in of with Adjuvant cases nodes. Used chemotherapy: lymph cancer rectal be cancers. Can considered for

for levels metastasis). Follow with nonspecific, LFTs, (diagnostically colonoscopy, CEA recurrence), and (for abdominal CXR, serial but useful monitoring CT

the colon. lack blood arterial of to supply Due to mucosal to involvement full-thickness superficial from necrosis. Severity ranges

affected exure. at area” splenic left commonly site colon, The “watershed the is particularly ﬂ the most the age. Incidence with ↑

bloody crampy with abdominal with Presents diarrhea. associated lower pain Hx/PE: and suggest Fever infarction. signs peritoneal

Dx:

CBC may leukocytosis. reveal

or colonoscopy colonic to assess sigmoidoscopy Flexible mucosa.

Tx:

IV with and ﬂuids, therapy Supportive antibiotics. broad-spectrum rest, bowel

or colitis, indicated is obstruction with resection fulminant 2° ischemic infarction, stricture. to Surgery for

from GI tract the and/or hematochezia, as melena. Bleeding present may hematemesis, jejunum). boundary to (the duodenum the anatomic tract and bleeding ligament bleeding proximal defined Treitz of as from GI is between Upper the lesions of presents 2.6-5 and the bleeding. Table GI upper features lower

Comprises ulcerative disease (see Figure colitis 2.6-6). and Crohn’s the during in to Caucasians the or Most Ashkenazi frequently most 50s. early appearing Jews, common in and 30s teens IBD. summarizes of the Table 2.6-6 features

2.6-5. T AB LE Bleeding Features GI and Upper Lower of

HIGH-YIELD > emesis), hematochezia, hypotension). lightheadedness, status tachycardia, melena Hematemesis History/PE depleted (”coffee-ground” FACTS (e.g., volume Hematochezia either. melena, > but be can stable. tube lavage; Diagnosis NG endoscopy if and NG lavage. upper bleed with GI out Rule NG age patients of Anoscopy/sigmoidoscopy with for bleeding. years < small-volume 45 or Colonoscopy arteriography if unstable. if stable; exploratory laparotomy esophagitis/gastritis, tear, Mallory-Weiss esophageal PUD, Etiologies varices. AVM. ssures, IBD, neoplasm, hemorrhoids/f (60%), Diverticulosis the Protect (may intubation). airway management Initial need the and may in normal loss). blood patient early with (hematocrit Stabilize be fuids PRBCs acute IV to bleed. GI Similar upper for directed the at (e.g., therapy underlying PPIs for Long-term banding cause Endoscopy management and/or by high-dose octreotide followed PUD; varices). underlying on etiology. the Depends diverticular for angiodysplasia. vasopressin injection), surgery embolization, (e.g., intra-arterial Endoscopic disease therapy or epinephrine or or infusion

E 2.6-6. F IGU R disease. bowel Inﬂammatory

disease. Crohn’s (A) deep and the reveals Barium fissures, edema ulcers, bowel. enema transverse of x-ray colitis. (B) Ulcerative demonstrates x-ray loss the pipe” (“lead Barium enema appearance), ulcers. the of edges shortening bowel of haustra serrations and fine small colon, of from et al. J with from Stobo (Reproduced, permission, and Medicine, ed. The Practice of Principles 23rd Stamford, & 1996: Appleton Lange, 135.) CT:

LE AB 2.6-6. T Disease Colitis of and Crohn’s Ulcerative Features

always is involved. of Site involvement The rectum May continuous extend proximally a fashion. in limited the and to submucosa. Infammation and mucosa ulceration are lesions”). tract, the of region, discontinuous the pattern a ileocecal May particularly in any portion (“skip GI involve spared. is The rectum often Transmural ammation is seen. inﬂ urgency. diarrhea, tenesmus, Bloody lower cramps, abdominal History/PE tenderness, may blood tachycardia, reveal and extraintestinal hypotension, frank orthostatic Exam manifestations. abdominal rectal on exam, abdominal weight mass, pain, watery diarrhea. loss, low-grade Abdominal fever, tenderness manifestations. may abdominal reveal extraintestinal Exam or fever, and fissures, mass, perianal fistulas, nodosum, and Aphthous stomatitis, cholangitis, primary episcleritis/uveitis, Extraintestinal arthritis, manifestations gangrenosum. erythema sclerosing pyoderma to fstulas same skin, well The loops. and as as ulcerative colitis, bowel the nephrolithiasis, gallstones, bladder, between as or colitis. Diagnosis stool for O&P, ulcerative workup The AXR, same assay CBC, as cultures, lab stool GI Upper

difficile. C.

Colonoscopy show involvement, edema, and continuous pseudopolyps. diffuse friability, rectal and can

diagnosis with can Defnitive made be biopsy.

5-ASA or disease. mesalamine), immunomodulating and oral; corticosteroids agents sulfasalazine, (e.g., agents topical (e.g., refractory for azathioprine)

or also toxic risk. Total proctocolectomy ↓ it longstanding curative for cancer or is colitis megacolon; fulminant

risk with yearly disease). cancer colorectal with years (monitor of of biopsies fecal screening in longstanding Markedly frequent and cases occult after multiple colonoscopy blood ↑ eight

series small follow-through. with bowel

also and aphthoid, during laparotomy. lesions.” Colonoscopy stellate fat” show may be “Creeping ulcers, may “skip or linear, strictures, “cobblestoning,” present

made diagnosis be with can biopsy. Defnitive

immunomodulating no is 5-ASA agents (e.g., seen. improvement if and corticosteroids azathioprine, agents; infiximab) indicated are

GI may stricture, suspected or the Surgical resection abscess; tract. be fstula, in may perforation, necessary recur for anywhere

of ulcerative greater colitis, malignancy Incidence in 2° but the population. is than than lower general

small wall. protrusions the Abnormal (usually through a in weakness abdominal contents inguinal the defect of region intestine) or abdominal the into basis their to as or the relationship of inguinal on indirect the Defined direct canal.

■ into and the the inguinal (in and of rings abdominal eventually through then Indirect: internal males). contents Herniation external scrotum

most genders. both The common hernia in

Due congenital vaginalis. to processus patent a

to the Protrudes lateral inferior vessels. epigastric

of contents Herniation abdominal Hesselbach’s of ﬂ Direct: oor triangle. the through

Protrudes the epigastric vessels. to medial

do Hernial the directly sac wall within herniate the ring; oblique muscle. abdominal not and contents inguinal of are the aponeurosis external internal contained they the traverse through

breakdown from with Most ↑ in often defect to that mechanical fascia age. due the acquired an transversalis

is are or of strangulation, unless contraindications risk and of Because laparoscopic) incarceration specific the present. (open indicated management surgical

of a fascia. in correcting hernia involves the inguinal the transversalis defect direct Repair

cord the internal are hernias to spermatic to reducing isolating only repaired size ring sac pass the Indirect the hernial by and allow and of through. in inguinal inguinal males ligating structures the

area inferior an ligament, abdominis. artery, the triangle by is bounded the rectus the and inguinal epigastric Hesselbach’s

cystic from transient blockage stones. duct impacted from Colic results Fertile, 4 risk common disorder factors any patient. Forty—the and Although can in occur and F’s—Female, is Fat, the include a Other F.” stones bowel TPN. sickle chronic weight in include history, a and (pigment small loss, cell family rapid be thought resection, disease), can factors of hemolysis “5th risk as Flatulence use, OCP

present right the the subscapular (usually Patients pain RUQ) postprandial epigastrium. or that with radiates the abdominal in to area

ﬂ abrupt; often by associated gradual atulence. vomiting, followed is nausea is food relief; Pain is intolerance, and and with fatty dyspepsia, and

patients. up may asymptomatic of in 80% to be Gallstones and may Exam palpable reveal tenderness gallbladder. a RUQ

x-rays are of radiopaque. 10–15% only rarely stones are diagnostic; Plain

sensitive). RUQ ultrasound of (85–90% modality choice the imaging is

forms of lab biliary other those findings with contrasts disease. Table of 2.6-7

be can Cholecystectomy curative and symptomatic for is electively gallstones. performed It laparoscopically. generally performed is require any not do Asymptomatic intervention. gallstones

endoscopic duct (ERCP) cholangiopancreatography require may bile common preoperative Patients stones. for retrograde

fatty dietary with foods). triggers (avoid modif nonsurgical candidates cation Treat as such

(brown). hemolysis Pigmented (black) or gallstones infection from result

radiopaque. are not gallstones cholesterol Most are of precipitations and

LE TAB 2.6-7. Disease of Biliary Diagnosis Differential

duct, border liver. and the the The the duct, through cystic artery triangle usually Calot, the cystic anatomic of the comprising hepatic common passes inferior of

DM), problems acute resolves. delay In inﬂ until with cholecystectomy medical significant (including ammation patients

cholangitis, gallstone colic, gallstone acute biliary pancreatitis. ascending choledocholithiasis, Recurrent cholecystitis, ileus,

that of inﬂammation, an the gallbladder distention, the cholecystitis). (acute of blockage to stone, gangrenous cystic obstructive by gangrene usually and Prolonged leads possibly superinfection, duct, impacted critically on or the of cholelithiasis Acalculous TPN, in absence ICU debilitated, and burn the who occurs are in cholecystitis victims. ill those trauma who or in patients chronically are

vomiting, and Patients nausea, RUQ present with fever. pain, are and longer more Symptoms typically of of duration than colic. those severe biliary

RUQ exam. mild may rebound sign), guarding deep RUQ of tenderness, and arrest the present possibly low-grade fever, inspiratory during icterus, on or tenderness (Murphy’s palpation be

Table (see shows 2.6-7). leukocytosis Fever present, CBC is often and

a Murphy’s in (see an ﬂ bile pericholecystic Ultrasound the gallbladder, 2.6-7). sign uid, thickened Figure wall, may demonstrate and gas sludge, stones, gallbladder ultrasonic

(see Obtain scan cholecystitis. ultrasound when nonvisualization equivocal of a is 2.6-8); suggests scan Figure on acute the HIDA HIDA gallbladder

IV patients, broad-spectrum f and administer u-ids, Hospitalize electrolytes. replete antibiotics and IV

cholecystectomy is If diagnosed after early soon onset, indicated.

with those delayed or weeks. medical 4–6 significant be surgery can patients For for problems, stable

F IGU R E 2.6-7. Acute cholecystitis, ultrasound.

sludge-filled, stone the with a shadow hyperechoic thick-walled acoustic and Note (arrow). gallbladder (arrow) This sludge pericholecystic but no and exhibits gallstones. patient (B) ﬂuid (Reproduced, permission, from with Grendell

J.

Treatment & Diagnosis 1st ed. in Gastroenterology, Current Lange, 212.) Appleton & Stamford, 1996: CT:

empyema, to formation. gas-forming emphysematous abscess Gangrene, organisms), sepsis, perforation, by (due fistulization, ileus, gallstone infection gallbladder

■Gallstones the common in duct. bile of the Symptoms vary obstruction, the degree and extent infection. to of of the bacterial according duration the obstruction,

E R IGU F 2.6-8. scan. Acute cholecystitis, HIDA

taken hepatocytes and is is into bile and common up the by dye IV excreted conjugated duct. acute activity to the is cholecystitis. not gallbladder duct obstruction cystic suggesting bowel, common duct, small although and in liver, The is due visualized, present from permission, (Reproduced, Grendell with J. 1st ed. Treatment Current & Diagnosis in Gastroenterology, Lange, CT: Appleton 217.) & Stamford, 1996:

when occurs stones also in pancreatitis ampulla obstruct pancreatic the Gallstone the duct.

jaundice, Charcot’s fever/chills. of pain, RUQ triad and consists altered consists fever/chills, pentad status. of jaundice, pain, mental Reynolds’ shock, and RUQ

colic, Hx/PE: it Although sometimes often pancreatitis. and presents fever, jaundice, asymptomatic, biliary with

is be (see values Table ↑ The bilirubin, which 2.6-7). the total Dx: abnormal alkaline phosphatase hallmark and lab may only

generally followed ERCP of Management Tx: by consists semielective cholecystectomy. sphincterotomy with duct Common may bile necessary. be exploration

bacterial infection occurs gallstones the biliary acute (progressive (choledocholithiasis) with associated of sclerosing of An to from cholangitis usually inﬂammation commonly primary or 2° tree biliary the ulcerative that tree colitis). obstruction, Other stricture and bile (biliary pancreatic). include duct etiologies or malignancy Gram-enterics pathogens. (e.g., commonly E. Pseudomonas) identified are Enterobacter, coli,

of triad—RUQ in and 50–70% Charcot’s and fever/chills—is jaundice, classic pain, seen cases.

shock and be mental suppurative septic altered present status—may Reynolds’ acute and pentad—Charcot’s suggests plus sepsis. cholangitis triad in

alkaline Table (see ↑ bilirubin, ↑ and phosphatase 2.6-7). leukocytosis, Look for

sepsis. rule Obtain blood cultures to out adjunct, clinical. be often diagnosis but useful CT or a Ultrasound is may also Magnetic (MRCP) may test that cholangiopancreatography resonance is useful. be noninvasive a

(biliary ERCP both and diagnostic drainage). is therapeutic

broad-spectrum hydration, treatment. support, BP often antibiotic IV and ICU admission monitoring, Patients require for

or cholangitis emergent open decompression. duct percutaneous require transhepatic drainage, via suppurative bile ERCP/sphincterotomy, with acute Patients decompression

from fistula. stone obstruction into (> a through 2.5-cm) A mechanical bowel passage the large a cholecystoduodenal of resulting the valve. at the ileum often (TI)/ileocecal is terminal Obstruction

an biliary of as no SBO. patients present have and symptoms history Many Hx/PE: previous classic elderly is presentation SBO in a woman. an of that subacute The

GI an Dx: can seen Pneumobilia series addition tree) a the confirm, obstruction. showing in to (gas imaging biliary with upper on in bowel follow-through small TI

extraction manipulation stone (enterolithotomy) Tx: the with into colon. or Laparotomy

ammation, idiopathic and extraand fibrosis, ■An by disorder characterized ducts. strictures bile intrahepatic inﬂ of (most colitis). often IBD usually in presents The with disease men young ulcerative

fatigue. jaundice, and pruritus, with progressive Presents Hx/PE:

with Dx: ↑ ■ ↑ is associated include findings phosphatase Laboratory and significantly alkaline bilirubin.

ulcerative colitis.

bile with between duct multiple show dilatations strictures MRCP/ERCP strictures.

skinning”). biopsy periductal sclerosis (“onion reveals Liver

of strictures; ursodeoxycholic High-dose liver duct stenting bile acid; short-term endoscopic and Tx: transplantation. dilation ↑ cholangiocarcinoma. at risk Patients for are

Liver results: be into can based on divided patterns diseases LFT distinct

and ALT. injury: Hepatocellular AST ↑

bilirubin. and Cholestasis: alkaline phosphatase ↑

normal ↑ Isolated alkaline phosphatase. aminotransferases bilirubin; and hyperbilirubinemia:

arises that circulating seen in is of in above, outlined when blood. sign be mg/dL) (> which is clinical can any excess a the bilirubin patterns 2.5 the Jaundice, Figures clinical approaches 2.6-10 and toward 2.6-9 isolated the hyperbilirubinemia. cholestasis summarize and section is that in Hepatocellular the described injury follows.

to the liver of necrosis. injury liver cell Inﬂammation and leading acute (e.g., causes HBV, alcohol, disease acetaminophen, of and drug-induced (e.g., HCV, INH, hepatitis include The viruses HDV, methyldopa). HAV, HEV) The

Ductal dilation?

2.6-9. FIGURE cholestasis. Approach to

HCV Chronic. is hepatitis. infection chronic Eighty of will develop HCV with percent patients

> alcoholic An toASTed. AST/ALT suggests ratio hepatitis—you’re 2

hepatitis, include deficiency). viruses of ischemic HCV, and etiologies hepatitis, HDV), (e.g., disease, hepatitis, hereditary chronic causes hemochromatosis, hepatitis Wilson’s α1-antitrypsin alcoholic autoimmune HBV, (e.g.,

fecal-oral route. HEV the by are and transmitted HAV

risk by bodily ﬂuids, of although very HCV are is sexually HCV low. acquiring and transmitted the HBV

viral jaundice followed nausea, symptoms of (e.g., fever, habits) bowel nonspecific by Acute often starts tenderness. a prodrome hepatitis symptoms, vomiting, in with changes and joint RUQ fatigue, URI pain, malaise,

scleral possible Exam lymphadenopathy. reveals jaundice, splenomegaly, and icterus, hepatomegaly, tender often

liver chronic indicative of gives fatigue, hepatosplenomegaly). disease to (jaundice, hepatitis Chronic symptoms usually rise develop those hepatitis. 80% of of least with HCV with HBV those At and infected chronic will 10%

in phosphatase ↑ bilirubin/alkaline and ↑ form. acute Dramatically AST are ALT present the and

a phosphatase/bilirubin months chronic for in > ↑ hepatitis, ALT ↑ are hypoalbuminemia. with concurrent In 6 AST and and alkaline produced be all clotting will VIII except PT the as by cases, severe In factors prolonged, liver. factor are

diagnosis serology in viral Table hepatitis cases. timing of description severe of and biopsy made chronic and 2.6-8 hepatitis Figure by markers) liver 2.6-11 is or a (see serologic by The and for

anti–smooth to and antimitochondrial hepatitis. antibody, muscle point antibody ANA, autoimmune other (hemochromatosis) can disease) (Wilson’s Iron ceruloplasmin identify causes. saturation and

etiology specific; symptoms over time. of for monitor Treatment is resolution

alcoholic hepatitis. severe for Steroids

(azathioprine) autoimmune hepatitis. and agents other with Immunosuppression steroids for

AB LE T 2.6-8. Key Serologic Hepatitis Markers

of HBV; state. surface on Antigen the HBsAg continued found carrier presence indicates HBsAg; HBV. HBsAb Antibody immunity to provides to HBcAg with Antigen associated core HBV. of period. window during HBcAb Antibody to HBcAg; the an indicator HBcAb disease. is recent IgM of A different determinant HBV core. second, antigenic in the HBeAg important of An transmissibility indicator (BEware!). A. hepatitis antibody test Antibody best indicates antigen; HAVAb low IgM detect HBeAb to IgM to e active HAV; the transmissibility. to

HCV HBV lamivudine or for infection. chronic (3TC), peginterferon for infection; and adefovir IFN-α, chronic ribavirin

is for patients with the failure. choice end-stage transplantation liver treatment Liver of

management fulminant hepatic failure. ICU emergent and transplant for

Important diagnostic Incubation tests Prodrome,

chronic hepatocellular of carcinoma. hepatitis The failure, sequelae include cirrhosis, liver and

of detection Level

2.6-1 E 1. R IGU F markers. with hepatitis course B serologic Time of

and to liver cirrhosis. diseases other hepatitis, lead chronic Alcoholism, chronic

Gut, three in butt, seen commonly anastomoses caput—the cirrhosis. and

Cirrhosis, hepatocellular failure, (3–5%). liver carcinoma

from as injury. Defined f regeneration and hepatocellular brosis nodular resulting hypercoagulability). chronic primary of right-sided 2° vein include cholangitis), primary Budd-Chiari syndrome Etiologies sclerosing constrictive thrombosis cirrhosis, disease (hepatic causes biliary heart biliary pericarditis, and failure, (e.g., to tract hepatitis,

and jaundice, mental ascites, status), varices, altered coagulopathy, gastroesophageal hepatic Presents peritonitis, renal encephalopathy asterixis, with bacterial (e.g., dysfunction. spontaneous disease. seen in advanced weight also are loss Weakness, and anorexia,

liver. reveal may or firm palpable, enlarged, Exam an (see Figures 2.6-12 signs of failure 2.6-13). may present of Stigmata portal and hypertension and be liver

↓ show Lab and albumin, ↑ studies bilirubin. PT/PTT, ↑ or seen. also hypersplenism) may to be Anemia thrombocytopenia (2°

Abdominal assess presence size, the of the ascites, hepatic Doppler of veins. splenic and ultrasound can patency with liver and serum-ascites = ascites measurement albumin albumin of (SAAG through albumin); see The – be gradient can 2.6-9. established of the etiology Table ascites serum

Obtain studies. serologies and hepatitis autoimmune hepatitis

such and causes, disease, Wilson’s respectively. and Serum may α1-antitrypsin ferritin, identify ceruloplasmin, deficiency, α1antitrypsin additional hemochromatosis, help as

nodular regeneration. and showing bridging biopsy fibrosis Liver

hypertension of portal Effects

Effects liver failure of cell

sexual Loss of hair

2. R IGU F E 2.6-1 cirrhosis/portal Presentation of hypertension.

with from P, CE. (Adapted, Taylor permission, Chandrasoma 3rd ed. Concise Pathology, 654.) Appleton Lange, & CT: Stamford, 1998:

v. vv. Superior mesenteric Gastroesophageal vv. Superior-middle/inferior rectal vv. Gastrorenal-splenorenal v. v v. 3 paravertebral IVC L. 4 v. v. 2 5 1 Paraumbilical Retro-peritoneal gastric venousPortal venousPortal Splenic v. Systemic

E 3. IGU 2.6-1 R F Portosystemic anastomoses.

1. Left → varices. esophageal gastric–azygos 2. hemorrhoids. → rectal Superior–middle/inferior

3. Paraumbilical–inferior epigastric (navel). → medusae caput 4. Gastrorenal-splenorenal.

5. paravertebral. Retroperitoneal

ameliorating at complications the hypertension. Aimed cirrhosis/portal of

Ascites:

and and diuretics (furosemide restriction Sodium spironolactone). Noncirrhotic of causes

ob- cultures. count cell differential, and to perform causes; paracentesis SAAG, and neoplastic with tain Rule out infectious

liver underlying disease. treat possible, If splenic right failure, heart

and thrombosis, bacterial peritonitis: vein Spontaneous

fever, mental and status. abdominal with pain, Presents altered

schistosomiasis.

peritoneal possibility is there infection. ﬂuid of if a Check 250 > The PMNs/mL WBCs. ﬂ 500 or is > are if there uid

identified. a with IV Klebsiella) organisms cover cephalosporin) gram-(Enterococcus) Treat is antibiotics to third-generation both gram-(E. causative until (e.g., coli, organism and

2.6-9. T AB LE Gradient Albumin Serum-Ascites

< > SAAG 1.1 SAAG 1.1

leakage: (e.g., Ascites to due ■Tuberculosis ■Malignancy protein cancer) ■Nephrotic syndrome ovarian is

portal hypertension: related Ascites to is

portal vein Splenic or schistosomiasis thrombosis, Presinusoidal:

Cirrhosis, metastases Sinusoidal: massive hepatic

pericarditis, Budd-Chiari Postsinusoidal: syndrome failure, heart constrictive Right

diagnosed 500 or ascitic 250 uid. bacterial ﬂ by in peritonitis PMNs/mL > the > Spontaneous is WBCs

and Primary middle-aged women. in cirrhosis that autoimmune biliary disease jaundice with is pruritus an presents

bleeding, include liver and GI failure, Complications of carcinoma metastasis. hepatocellular

dialysis. difficult and requires of often diagnosis A to treat syndrome: Hepatorenal exclusion;

encephalopathy: Hepatic

clearance ↓ of to Due ammonia.

abnormalities, electrolyte precipitated GI dehydration, bleeding. by infection, Often and

rifaximin. with lactulose, protein Treat and dietary restriction,

varices: Esophageal

GI shunt). (β-blockers, (portocaval bleeding; or Monitor (band surgically ligation), for octreotide), endoscopically treat medically

with Consider patients for disease. advanced liver transplantation

autoimmune disorder bile intrahepatic ducts. by of characterized An destruction with The conditions. commonly disease autoimmune most other presents middle-aged in women

E, pruritus, jaundice, and Hx/PE: with D, K). fat-soluble (A, the Presents malabsorption progressive vitamins of

bilirubin, ↑ phosphatase, antimitochondrial include alkaline antibody, and Laboratory ↑ cholesterol. findings ↑ Dx:

cholestyramine progression acid (slows liver Ursodeoxycholic pruritus; of for transplantation. Tx: disease);

despite States. worldwide of cancers most the its common relatively incidence the in One low United risk 1° United factors hepatocellular for cirrhosis the development and carcinoma (HCV). are chronic States hepatitis of the in (in food atoxins infection major also are countries, In various factors. risk HBV developing sources) af and

and of abdominal disease and liver as distention, easy coagulopathy. with bruisability, RUQ such commonly chronic jaundice, present tenderness, signs Patients Cachexia present. and may be weakness

Exam liver. of the reveal tender may enlargement

or ultrasound significantly mass and LFTs (AFP) as suggested well elevated levels. of on presence CT abnormal a as α-fetoprotein by Often the by

diagnosis. biopsy definitive for Liver

aggressive are be detected small transplantation successful. For that tumor orthotopic may early, tumors resection or liver

although therapy). radiation large prior they not surgery generally and used tumors to are effective, to be shrink may Chemotherapy (neoadjuvant

tumor with recurrence AFP Monitor serial levels. vaccinate and against to individuals. hepatic hepatitis high-risk exposure carcinogens Prevent in

testes, iron the of with in heart, hyperabsorption kidneys. pancreas, adrenals, parenchymal and Caused hemosiderin accumulation liver, pituitary, by recognized occurs is in It northern of fifth autosomal-recessive is European an disease descent males before usually and the rarely decade. that occur ↑ in well is hemochromatosis in (alcohol overload receiving common as absorption). iron patients transfusion therapy may with α-thalassemia) and chronic 2° (e.g., for as alcoholics iron

hypogonadism, cirrhosis. failure, or arthropathy heart abdominal pain of the MCP of with present symptoms joints, Patients DM, may or

dysfunction, reveal hepatomegaly, (CHF), atrophy. skin dysfunction may and testicular cardiac pigmentation, pancreatic Exam bronze

with ■↑ saturation transferrin. serum serum and percent iron, of ferritin iron, ↓

test. transferrin 45% transferrin level) iron is (serum saturation by divided most Fasting sensitive diagnostic > the

be AST and phosphatase alkaline can and mildly Glucose present. elevated intolerance

gene a hepatic hepatic screen. Perform MRI, determine (to mutation biopsy index), or HFE iron liver

phlebotomy; 2–4 levels iron maintenance phlebotomy Weekly ↓, perform serum every months. when

for used can therapy. be Deferoxamine maintenance

to hypopituitarism. impotence, carcinoma, cardiomegaly defects, arthropathy, CHF conduction and/or DM, Cirrhosis, hepatocellular leading

due deficient of deposition ■↓ to a the protein. copper excessive brain liver and ceruloplasmin and in copper-transporting on to defect autosomalrecessive chromosome 13. an Linked by < Usually 30 of age; occurs patients years age symptomatic are of in 50% patients 15.

abnormalities. with depression) (psychosis, mania, (loss 2° coordination, as (jaundice neurologic present Patients and to anxiety, hemolytic liver psychiatric dysphagia) abnormalities Hx: hepatitis/cirrhosis), as anemia, well tremor, of

rings asterixis, Descemet’s the jaundice, reveal in (green-to-brown as rigidity. cornea as in hepatomegaly, PE: May well and copper deposits Kayser-Fleischer movements, membrane) of choreiform

Dx: urinary ↓ ceruloplasmin, serum ↑ copper. ↑ copper hepatic excretion,

copper chelator Dietary ↑ (a (↑ copper urinary copper pyridoxine), that penicillamine shellfish, restriction possibly fecal oral and excretion; Tx: (avoid legumes), excretion). liver, zinc administer with

movements Wilson’s Cirrhosis, ↓, Dementia ↑, disease— ABCD Choreiform ganglia (hepatocellular), Basal Copper Asterixis Carcinoma Ceruloplasmin deterioration

of and important outlines features the 2.6-10 Table pancreatitis. acute chronic 2.6-11 pancreatitis. acute Ranson’s lists predicting mortality with Table for criteria associated

AB 2.6-1 LE T 0. Features and of Pancreatitis Chronic Acute

and pain Treatment and endocrine have exocrine chronic dysfunction. Complications Can Prognosis pancreatic malnutrition/weight loss, pancreatic pain, Chronic cancer.

pancreatic gallstone tissue, alcoholism. pancreatic peripancreatic often Pathophysiology of disease or to and 2° into enzymes Leakage Irreversible destruction pancreatic to parenchymal dysfunction. leading Time onset severe Abrupt pain. of course recurrent severe Persistent, episodes pain. of hypercalcemia, bites. scorpion post-ERCP, effects viral Gallstones, hypertriglyceridemia, infections, drug Risk factors trauma, diuretics), alcoholism, (thiazide side hypercholesterolemia, hyperparathyroidism, (90%), gallstones, Alcoholism brosis. cystic f May idiopathic. also be the to (radiating back); Severe vomiting, epigastric nausea, pain shock. weakness, fever, History/PE Turner’s exam. sign) may periumbilical (Grey and Flank evident be discoloration discoloration on (Cullen’s sign) steatorrhea, pain; f DM. anorexia, epigastric constipation, Recurrent of nausea, loss, atulence, weight episodes persistent elastase, stool the Removal Diagnosis calcium amylase, agent lipase, ↓ normal ↑ if ↑ offending if of severe; “sentinel lipase, ↑ or and possible. amylase ↓ f rest, time.” bowel and O2, present. IV IV nutritional respiratory surgical of Standard pancreatitis antibiotics, debridement analgesia, support, supportive uids/electrolyte is “tincture if replacement, NG support, suction, necrotizing measures:

sign” or AXR. “colon loop” cutoff on

or necrosis, stranding, pancreas ultrasound with may enlarged an Abdominal or hemorrhage, abscess, show CT pseudocyst.

15% requiring Roughly are 85–90% admission. self-limited; severe, mild are 10– ICU and Mortality in cases. 50% approach severe may

failure, effusion, formation, hypocalcemia, pancreatitis, chronic fistula Pancreatic renal pleural sepsis. pseudocyst, Table criteria to with 2° be Mortality predicted (see acute 2.6-11). pancreatitis Ranson’s can

calcifications, CT pancreatic (“chain ileus lakes”). mild glycosuria, of and on and AXR

surgery medium-chain exogenous causative diet, nerve Analgesia, structural fatty-acid lipase/trypsin agents of celiac causes. intractable or for avoidance and (EtOH), pain block,

2.6-11. TABLE Criteria 40% risk 3–4 7 5–6 signs. with of and The signs, Pancreatitisa for a ≥ Ranson’s mortality Acute with with 100% signs, is 20%

the 75% are adenocarcinomas of pancreas. head the in Roughly Risk first-degree pancreatitis, cancer, pancreatic diet. include high-fat a factors smoking, relative a with chronic and Incidence men. after common rises 45; more in age slightly

loss obstructive the jaundice, and back, as abdominal appetite, indigestion. weight well of fatigue, with weakness, loss, toward radiating vomiting, as pain nausea, with Presents

the thus Often late disease and asymptomatic, in presents course.

thrombophlebitis a (Trousseau’s (Courvoisier’s Exam sign). migratory reveal may palpable, nontender or sign) gallbladder

involvement (hepatic). SMA, ducts, bile portal the Use and extent vascular vein), (particularly pancreatic to and mass, pancreatic of SMV, and CT the detect metastases a dilated

ERCP or use is not a ultrasound visualization. for mass endoscopic visualized, better If

measure sensitivity specificity. elevated, lacks this often and is CA-19-9 but

patients Most with metastatic disease, palliative. and is present treatment

(pancreaticoduodenectomy). or have the of no head using of Whipple procedure vessel be may metastasis resected and major involvement 10–20% tumors Some evidence pancreatic

prognosis improve 5-FU poor gemcitabine with Chemotherapy is short-term five-year but and (5–10% survival). may survival, long-term

classic cancer pancreatic painless, obstructive of jaundice. progressive presentation is The

Neoplasms Transplant with 211 212 210 213 Medicine Diseases Eosinophilia Neutropenia Associated

whereas disorders as dysfunction petechiae, usually coagulation other manifest Bleeding as due of such factors disorders platelet symptoms, hemarthroses. cause to

vessels, and platelets, monocytes, of requires factors. the interaction coagulation Hemostasis blood shown This clotting Figure as activates the 2.7-1. cascade, in

fibrinogen is intrinsic antidote. protamine PTT, levels; antithrombin Heparin: and affects and sulfate the activates the ↑ pathway, III ↓

small pathway, Warfarin: teratogenic, it since allows ↑ size affects PT, and vitamin the to is the cross K inhibits and its placenta. extrinsic Vitamin is K the antidote. 2.0–3.0 with Goal patients in of (2.5–3.5 mechanical valves). INR

is factor dosing monitored; have Inhibits Xa does to Enoxaparin twice daily. heparin [LMWH]): and once be (low-molecular-weight or not

factors transient proper of conversion inhibits and vitamin necessary S period K–dependent anticoagulation. paradoxical before and Heparin-to-warfarin warfarin proteins C hypercoagulability (II, leading X), before IX, a because VII, is to other

vascular Intrinsic exposure (initiated by by following pathway—measured trauma) of PTT collagen

factor B is by characterized IX Hemophilia deficiency. factor VIII by characterized 2 deficiency. A Hemophilia is is inactivated 3 antithrombin III. by Thrombin inactivation heparin. of of in The presence the increases rate

Vitamin X). * IX, factors (II, VII, clotting K–dependent Their by synthesis inhibited is warfarin.

2.7-1. FIGURE cascade. Coagulation

leads to bleeding of diathesis. a A that defciency clotting a factor (see basis of lacking is 2.7-1). Subtypes are factor the which distinguished on Table to usually through clotting may factor. development antibody The the of hereditary an but be condition is acquired a patients following lymphoproliferative may This with or a transfusion. postpartum, or disease, occur in blood autoimmune may have history. and nearly a Patients are family always male

joints left if and arthropathy that, into joint and to tissues hemorrhage lead can Presents spontaneous the with untreated, destruction.

renal be and bleeding, retroperitoneal bleeding Spontaneous intracerebral and hemorrhages, may seen. also GI

are have or may asymptomatic. Mild otherwise trauma after surgery but hemorrhage cases major

Evaluate factor def clotting ciency: for suspected

congenital isolated but factor seen elevations deficiency. VII are in PT: Usually normal,

severe prolonged, (the the more more the aPTT: hemophilia). Prolonged

fbrinogen, Thrombin bleeding time: normal. Usually time,

this mixing a is a study: if with likely. deficiency patient’s the plasma; Mix factor corrects the plasma Conduct normal aPTT, not clotting have a the patient may factor the does correct, aPTT inhibitor. If

should Specific VII, XI, IX, factor performed then be assays: and factors assays for factor VIII, Obtain XII. is according to level follows: as characterized factor Hemophilia

> normal. of Mild: 5%

1–3% of Moderate: normal.

1% ≤ normal. of Severe:

at of factors episodes least immediate clotting ■Treat transfusion to bleeding with 40% cryoprecipitate) normal of (or concentration. ad- BID VIII half-life maintain Factor hours, has a to should of 12 patients so dosed be

2.7-1. TABLE of Hemophilia Types

classic the hemarthroses the minimal of (Recessive) hemophilia presents Russian following boy or The (X-linked) Imperial from with is who family case no trauma.

consists factors of vWF, Cryoprecipitate fibrinogen, VIII XIII, fibronectin. and and

(factor Hemophilia X-linked (9%) IX inheritance. defciency) B XI Ashkenazi common defciency) Jews. (< in Hemophilia (factor 1%) Most C clotting the A X-linked ciency. VIII severe defciency) congenital Hemophilia most inheritance; (factor def (90%) common a milder, heterozygous likely Factor form. defciency in (< VII Presents 1%)

the DDAVP helps release body extra factor VIII.

ASA Willebrand’s in the risk of bleeding von disease. ↑ with patients

ability vWF Ristocetin to of in cofactor agglutinate the measures platelets of in the ristocetin. assay vitro presence

an tachycardia, obvious of hypercapnia, another without in pulmonary gradient Suspect rapid embolism with onset alveolar-arterial patient hypoxia, a ↑ oxygen explanation. and

levels. equate hours, needed. is of so transfusion IX daily 24 Factor a half-life has

extending of weeks treatment length varies The orthopedic the surgery. after up to with lesion, several

effect prevent desmopressin treated restricted f the with may should hyponatremia. if so, be Mild of hemophiliacs to side be they (DDAVP); uid

necessary to transfuse may the loss. of degree be blood RBCs, depending It on

precludes patients treated treatment of VIII, IgG which with factor. replacement who are antibodies neutralizing develop for A percent hemophilia further to Fifteen factor

defective with von factor in carried or is vWF. deficient of levels An patients autosomal-dominant condition factor have by which which (vWF) VIII, Willebrand’s low factor are dysfunction to platelet due Symptoms deficient and to

VIII. The milder than is disease hemophilia. of is vWD most the inherited affected). is population the disorder common (1% bleeding

bruising, mucosal and (e.g., epistaxis, Presents bleeding. easy bleeding), with menorrhagia, bleeding postincisional oral to severe produce petechiae. is Platelet dysfunction enough not Symptoms with worsen use. ASA

of family Look bleeding history for a disorders.

a factor and be normal, seen but as of are a VIII PT aPTT Platelet result prolonged deficiency. may count

capacity of to ristocetin plasma assay the platelets. can vWF measure cofactor A agglutinate of patient

be treated OCPs. episodes with with can menorrhagia controlled be Bleeding DDAVP; can

and function. inhibitors ASA Avoid of other platelet

all-inclusive is risk patient’s called Also that ↑ disease. thrombophilias states, an thromboembolic states hypercoagulable or term conditions describing of developing a prothrombotic may physiologic genetic, 2.7-2). are be acquired, or multiple (see and Table Causes usually causes underlying disease to 2° are condition, Acquired process, or an clinical lifestyle. resistant V, polymorphism disease, factor activated in protein to factor which the rendering by causes hereditary called is V collectively thrombotic C, Inherited are of Leiden (a it APC) most common. inactivity or

DVT, pulmonary Presents and embolism, including thrombosis, ■ stroke. thrombotic complications, with recurrent MI, arterial may Women miscarriages. have recurrent

LE 2.7 -2. T AB may recognizable usually or factors patients 2.7-2. one of in have causative of predisposing ■Although States factors, the no they have Hypercoagulable Table Causes more outlined also family history. a have They may

they circumstances, rarely symptomatic, are diagnosed occurs. be this patients ideal before should Under but

coagulation be abnormal values hereditary Prior to workup causes out. acquired of causes, should for ruled is two while are abnormality values untreated, a two the that and obtained hereditary requires family abnormal of patient in asymptomatic Confrmation similar members. obtained with values other

for prothrombin homocysteine III antigen/antiphospholipid resistance, Workup G20210A deficiency, APC protein lupus and mutation. includes deficiencies, and S syndrome, antithrombin elevation, C hypercoagulability

type of as of thrombosis. well the area the address event Treatment should thrombotic as

for 3–6 6–12 second, for heparin lifelong and Treat followed for months and with first anticoagulation events. oral months by embolism subsequent the anticoagulation or (unfractionated LMWH) warfarin pulmonary the of DVT event,

Heparin-to-warfarin conversion “Coagulation necessary Cascade” is (see the above). discussion

to of disease liver coagulopathy. common as patients, second acquired among a A hospitalized disorder cause only thrombosis blood f of end-organ and is It by vessels, small in damage. to caused leading brin deposition Depletion diathesis. bleeding and to a clotting platelets of leads factors severe almost any illness. with associated May be

commonly infections pan- include with leukemia, obstetric septicemia, neoplasms, complications, ■Disorders acute DIC with promyelocytic associated

is thrombosis hemorrhage. and by DIC characterized both

Petechiae deficiency. Platelet suggest

Cavities joints or Bleeding factor into body deficiency. Clotting suggests

HUS, causes of DIC. anemia TTP, three are The and microangiopathic hemolytic

aortic disorders ARDS. acidosis, vascular and tissue and (e.g., drug massive hemolysis, aneurysm), intravascular trauma, creatitis, injury reactions,

the disease according or chronic: whether ■Presentation varies acute to is

and ecchymoses out with petechiae. into Acute: organs, venipuncture with bleeding sites generalized of Presents Patients have acral are who in shock cyanosis. may

and renal mucosal thrombophlebitis, bleeding, neurologic transient dysfunction, with and bruising Presents Chronic: syndromes.

Table outlined in as Diagnosed 2.7-3.

is DIC disease, confused depressed. with unlike may factor disease, be liver severe but VIII liver

results spontaneous illness the of reversal. Treatment often in underlying and transfusion RBC require Patients management. shock often a Platelets be event of < transfused count hemorrhage in should 20,000. with platelet the

to (HUS) hemolytic-uremic be chapter); the includes end-organ (see off of of and that HELLP small dysfunction. vessels, ischemia to and to due syndrome leading spectrum syndrome microthrombi block blood diseases Obstetrics that a platelet Part thought anemia). hemolytic leading (microangiopathic with to fragmented microthrombi, are RBCs hemolysis contact the by initial unknown formation drug toxins), idiopathic. or (bacterial microthrombus but may infectious related, autoimmune, The cause is be of

by ve characterized stroke), function, microangiopathic renal fever. clinical seizure, impaired and count, neurologic (delirium, A platelet signs/symptoms: changes syndrome low hemolytic anemia, f

Diagnosis clinical. is largely

low rare It is all is to with presence signs on schistocytes creatinine for smear present, peripheral (broken and suggestive. platelets be the highly RBCs) rising of but also often Nucleated smear. are the RBCs seen in peripheral

indirect along haptoglobin. with low LDH, anemia Hemolytic elevated bilirubin, and include AST labs factors are Coagulation normal.

2.7-3. TABLE DIC Laboratory in Values

DIC. syndrome, Overlapping HELLP are conditions HUS, and

hemolytic Characterized and failure, platelets. anemia, low HUS: by renal of elevations are typical of HUS Severe than TTP. in creatinine more

conjunction the occurring chapter). women, pregnant often with HELLP preeclampsia Affects in syndrome: (see Obstetrics

from and aPTT. DIC: PT Distinguished TTP prolonged by

(the of severe ↓ corticosteroids plasmapheresis plasma with with along and to of replacement microthrombi the mainstay Treat formation cases). mixed is results. Rarely, splenectomy performed with are transfusions Platelet contraindicated.

of cause relatively common A thrombocytopenia. platelets. antibodies IgG formed are against patient’s the marrow. marrow ↑ platelets in ↑, with of the megakaryocytes production Bone is The women of disorder common age. most immunologic in childbearing or May chronic. acute be

no well Patients symptoms. present systemic feel with often and have petechiae, melena. bruising, hematemesis, hematuria, may minor They bleeding, or easy mucocutaneous. is Bleeding is there splenomegaly. Usually no

ITP conditions, associated leukemia, including with and HCV. of SLE, range is lymphoma, HIV, a

The is as follows: presentation clinical

following Abrupt hemorrhagic of viral complications illness. Acute: onset a males affects years Commonly 2–6 females with age, equally. affected children and of

unrelated to infection. onset that Insidious Chronic: is are women to be men. age; affects likely of affected adults three more years times than Most 20–40 often

a diagnosis of antibodies the for one. platelet-associated poor exclusion, is as test A

thrombocytopenia RBC of other can causes history a the peripheral basis of a Once physical, have blood on showing been normal a the made morphology. be ruled and CBC, smear out, diagnosis and the which Most as show do would abnormality. require patients not megakaryocytes biopsy, bone only marrow ↑

spontaneously is patients Most rarely with remit, this in the chronic acute but ITP ITP. childhood case

symptomatic reserved Treatment bleeding. with patients for is counts platelet asymptomatic. with Those are 20,000 generally >

will also of are of no Platelet to lead platelets. as transfusions benefit, IgG patients’ destruction levels

therapies (IVIG), splenectomy. main corticosteroids, are The globulin high-dose gamma and Most but if patients corticosteroids, to respond

are Anti-D immunoglobulin (Rh) rituximab emerging therapies for ITP. and

tapered should will splenectomy act and (Rh) “decoys” as recognize considered. be that 3–6 cannot months, be IVIG immunoglobulin WBCs Anti-D them after they so

binds so patient’s that anti-D destroyed instead An to immunoglobulin, they is are emerging RBCs (Rh) platelets. therapy the of which in Patients a drop hematocrit. have will their should treatment. not splenectomized patients receive Rhand this

may pregnant severe in thrombocytopenia occur patients, In fetus. the

IgG instead of on platelets.

Figure lineages. categories various illustrates blood cell the and 2.7-2

of disorder hemoglobin. and is Anemia a hematocrit low according (MCV, There RDW, and are classified shape) which several (see 2.7-3). reticulocyte morphology red count are subtypes, color, cell to Figure MCV. with hemoglobin/hematocrit, starts the diagnosed Once anemia by has low approach been the a between is 80 fL < fL is 100 100 fL normocytic; microcytic MCV macrocytic. and anemia; fL indicates An and > 80

exceeds loss iron which intake. in condition A setting or blood (e.g., ↑ intake May pregnancy) needs 2° GI is when menstruation usually when of occur to the growth the are insuff chronic by needs dietary loss, in or or bleeding. patient’s cient for Toddlers, commonly girls, are adolescent women of childbearing affected. most and age

2.7 IGU -2. E R F differentiation. Blood cell

reticulocyte CBC, count

Retic 2.5 Retic 2.5 > <

and rule patient evaluated elderly be could Iron out an due cancer malignancy. needs colorectal deficiency to to in be to anemia

to can infection. anemia be a due deficiency Iron hookworm

FIGURE 2.7-3. Anemia algorithm.

and weakness, Symptoms fatigue, nails, brittle pica. include the develops asymptomatic. If anemia patients are slowly, generally

cheilitis, koilonychia angular findings glossitis, Physical include and nails”). (“spoon

stores looking gold but the is evidence is biopsy performed. standard marrow of seldom iron for Bone

often which body impaired. confused iron is in by use chronic disease, anemia Iron deficiency of is the with two 2.7-4). conditions the (see help Table can differentiate Labs

Peripheral and a shows low count. RBCs smear hypochromic reticulocyte blood microcytic with

confirms stores diagnosis. reﬂects of low body serum the and ferritin iron Low an iron However, thus and may acute-phase deficiency. obscure is evidence reactant ferritin of also

with 4–6 iron Treat replacement for months. pain. nausea, diarrhea, iron lead Oral to sulfate constipation, abdominal and may iron interfere Antacids may absorption. with

iron but of IV side a associated is dextran anaphylaxis. be effects, including If with serious administered can risk 10% necessary, a Hence, this only done usually hematologist. is by

LE 2.7 -4. AB T Anemia Defciency Iron vs. of Anemia Chronic Disease

DNA by Most are that replication. anemias normal with and synthesis interfere macrocytic caused processes

due deficiency can to infection be B12 by tapeworm, a

Diphyllobothrium latum.

nitrofurantoin. in stress sulfonamides, metabolic deficiency dapsone, oxidative infection, fava of beans, and Causes include acidosis, G6PD antimalarials,

maturation. interfere to DNA and cell synthesis, delay (cobalamin) Vitamin in ciency leading folate blood a with def B12 of anemia factor intrinsic from usually needed which absorption). due deficiency parietal to is produce (destruction the Cobalamin cobalamin pernicious malabsorption, for cells, or from insufficient deficiency Folate folate, use of alcoholism, certain results drugs. malabsorption, dietary interfere Drugs DNA including megaloblastic to with chemotherapeutic anemia. lead many synthesis, may agents, that

Presents loss fatigue, of of appetite, with tingling/numbness the diarrhea, and hands pallor, headaches, and feet.

present develop system, combined neuropsychiatric the nervous may of as so patients lacking a and/or disorder deficiency the sensory, with dysfunction, known autonomic, Cobalamin demyelinating may affects degeneration vitamin and subacute that cord. of motor, symptoms

Peripheral MCV. RBCs smear shows elevated with an can granulocytes (> be also 5) Hypersegmented seen.

neutrophils marrow granulocytes. mature hypersegmented sample and giant reveals Bone

The performed. and measuring (ingestion factor) of for intrinsic but Schilling of without cobalamin test rarely is added both is cobalamin with radiolabeled classic absorption

of are deficiencies with poorly and used thus homocysteine diagnostic adjunctive Serum levels (MMA) levels: acid are vitamin tests, methylmalonic and including

and homocysteine. MMA ciency: Elevated B12 def

ciency: MMA; Normal homocysteine. Folate def elevated

correct and cause. the Address cause the of the underlying anemia,

marrow is Occurs unable destruction of production compensate circulating for ↑ cells. bone blood to when the following: include Etiologies

to recessive stress. G6PD sensitivity def X-linked that oxidative RBC ciency: ↑ disease An

disorder is which complement blood cell activation ↑. hemoglobinuria: Paroxysmal sensitivity A in nocturnal to

An RBC of abnormality the Hereditary spherocytosis: membrane.

EBV to infection, infection, medications. or disease, CLL, destruction: Occurs mycoplasmal Autoimmune rheumatoid RBC 2º

section). Sickle A (see cell recessive β-globin disease: following mutation the

hemolytic TTP, HUS, anemia: Microangiopathic DIC.

Associated heart valves. hemolysis: Mechanical with mechanical

hypersplenism. Malaria, Other:

and fatigue, Presents tachypnea. with pallor, tachycardia,

are typically Patients and and elevated LDH. low indirect jaundiced, with haptoglobin bilirubin and dark excretion fecal urobilinogen. with ↑ is Urine is and there urinary of hemoglobinuria, is elevated. Reticulocyte count

the and history by presentation. Diagnosed clinical a bilirubin, consistent of ↓ elevated haptoglobin High with LDH, anemia. are levels indirect diagnosis hemolytic and obtain Also reticulocyte a count. hemolysis. to detect is A used autoimmune test Coombs’

corticosteroids immunologic typically hemolysis and iron urinary includes to Treatment to the with cause but causes losses. address varies of replace supplementation be to anemia. severe may be transfusion necessary treat helpful, may and Splenectomy

caused blood of destruction marrow cells. bone due failure of cell rare by condition to production A anemia; may hereditary, or result drugs, etiology autoimmune (e.g., B19); from may (e.g., have Fanconi’s cleaning HIV, exposure to may parvovirus in be It as solvents) an a or radiation. toxins viral or

are weakness, platelets—e.g., with Patients tendency WBCs, pallor, and pancytopenic, a resulting to and bruising, of a bleeding. from infection, symptoms lack RBCs, petechiae, typically

be The depending be and of variable blood disease or of sudden may onset severity, patient’s counts. sustained may on the

hypocellularity presentation fat. marrow and Diagnosed by a bone clinical biopsy by revealing by and occupied verifed space CBC;

anemia, elevated an both diseases megaloblastic differential feature MCV. as includes The

African-American in an of G6PD male is classic took The who case Vietnam quinine. soldier deficiency

RBCs Indirect Coombs’ patient’s to the tests detect in antibodies serum. sensitized erythrocytes. detect Coombs’ Direct tests

café aplasia. with au and spots, by hypoplasia/ may Patients lait on exam Fanconi’s be physical identified radial/thumb anemia stature, short

β-globin represents defect qualitative the chain. in SCD a

Salmonella. get classically Patients with SCD osteomyelitis with of of also the are avascular at risk ↑ They necrosis hip.

autoimmune to transfusion and prevent immunosuppression replace antithymocyte and cell A cells; stem of absent marrow. transplantation Blood globulin destruction cyclosporin to with and cause mortality Infections major be should a aggressively. of treated are

replaced by autosomal-recessive mutation glu hemoglobin (the β adult commonly An chain of has disorder a caused by val). most are to cells Signs tendency and of cell sickled survival vasoocclusion. to and due a symptoms lead ↓ red to

in two first dactylitis life; of childhood. may Asymptomatic year first or with during the present output growth. in and jaundice, (murmur hemolysis results anemia, ↑ cardiomegaly), cholelithiasis, and delayed cardiac Later,

syndrome splenic which especially and/or pulmonary damage, (pneumonia to ischemic pneumococcal chest acute to leads Vaso-occlusion organ and sepsis, infarction). infarction, predisposes crises of painful unknown Patients also experience etiology. triggers vaso-occlusive Common infection. for a and (VOC) temperatures, dehydration, cold crisis include

their spleens, with which parvovirus is B19. include who patients infection which occurs aplastic 2° crisis, usually in Other sequestration, complications splenic not and to infarcted have potential

cell with smear screen sickle is on based cells. sickle blood a The target and cells gold quantitative standard The is hemoglobin electrophoresis.

stimulates is hemoglobin so Treat fetal the which pregnancy). in hydroxyurea, of is contraindicated production teratogenic, it with (hydroxyurea

carries overload, If iron of hydroxyurea can prove which the therapy, does effective, risk be transfusion chronic tried. not

Treat cholelithiasis with cholecystectomy.

suspected the must IV and VOCs trigger). therapy, be rehydration, O2 pain (if ﬂuid be with adequate is treated management, antibiotics to infection

and hydration from incentive < prevent and variant sickle aggressive progressing syndrome, the to chest VOCs acute initiate 40%. To spirometry, keep setting. can be done transfusions necessary, an This simple exchange with or, ICU if transfusion in

or production absent ↓ normal Hereditary of involving of globin hemoglobin. chains disorders mutation a α-hemoglobin; of a or β-hemoglobin. α-thalassemia from is genes of four more for or for β-thalassemia the both by results two one caused genes the one mutation of of

African, Eastern, is Thalassemia descent. among common Middle and people Asian of most and presentation the vary 2.7-5). prognosis with of Table number Disease genes missing (see

in and evaluation (but by that α-thalassemia) Diagnosed studies. hemoglobin this DNA is note electrophoresis normal

patients require be H those and (deferoxamine) β-thalassemia given disease major do are transfusion iron but should treatment, Most and chelators commonly to prevent not overload. hemoglobin with dependent

or 1° elevation Erythrocytosis (due 2° hemoconcentration). of abnormal hematocrit) and may plasma to ↑ (an to either ↓ RBC be volume production) (due

2.7 T AB LE -5. in life β chronic severe 0/2 Patients β-thalassemia anemia Differential the survive. Thalassemias microcytic transfusions of need of transplant develop marrow Diagnosis or and to frst major year smear. β-thalassemia 1/2 minor but cells their peripheral asymptomatic, hypochromic on are and microcytic are β Patients Hydrops 0/4 utero. die α in Patients fetalis severe have 1/4 microcytic α H chronic Patients disease anemia hemolysis, Hemoglobin splenomegaly, and jaundice, hypochromic, with cholelithiasis. compensate, of one-third reticulocyte to The expanded to elevates patients count have and erythropoiesis. skeletal changes due α-thalassemia α asymptomatic. low MCV 2/4 trait have Patients are usually but Silent disease. carrier have symptoms of or signs Patients 3/4 α no

cell vera characterized True mass. is high by a polycythemia red

diphenhydramine with sometimes acetaminophen and Premedication prevent used reactions. to is transfusion

necrosis acute in Hemoglobinuria may reaction renal transfusion subsequent hemolytic failure. lead tubular and to

and ﬂow ↓ blood work. cardiac and hematocrit, ↑ by ↑ Characterized oxygenation, tissue

with bleeding/bruising, a consists neurologic of present “hyperviscosity after CHF. and which Patients hepatomegaly, vision, bath), pruritus abnormalities, blurred splenomegaly, warm plethora, (especially easy syndrome,”

which (PCV), stem tumors), neoplasia environment), is smoking, poor 1° pluripotent erythrocytosis or or (erythropoietin-producing a a is with cell. associated of hypoxia proliferation lung high intrauterine marrow in vera (from clonal polycythemia altitudes, there disease,

diuresis, gastroenteritis, excessive severe is and with burns. associated erythrocytosis 2°

demonstrate to clinically cell or assess Erythrocytosis imaging hypoxia diagnosed with neoplasia. ABGs counts, by and to is used

and Patients have PCV platelets. WBCs, with excess RBCs, be are other of in levels of may distinguishing from useful in Levels PCV, erythropoietin low, which polycythemia. causes

also should underlying cause. address relieves but symptoms erythrocytosis, Phlebotomy of the treatment

PCV interferon. cytoreductive can hydroxyurea treated or drugs as be with such is be used. should Because prothrombotic, ASA PCV also years. is survival With 7–10 treatment,

adverse but a Blood in reactions. is transfusion safe result variety of may generally allergic all 3–4% reactions reactions of and minor the are occurring common, each transfusions. febrile Nonhemolytic in most are as Etiologies follows:

blood, antibodies. febrile Involve Nonhemolytic formation cytokine and storage WBC the of during reactions:

donor Minor proteins. against reactions: allergic IgA) (usually formation Involve antibody of plasma-containing transfusion product. occur following Usually

against erythrocytes. Entail donor transfusion Hemolytic of reactions: development antibodies the Usually antibody or ABO result from against incompatibility antigens. from minor

malaise. with reactions: Nonhemolytic chills, and Present rigors, febrile fever, following onset hours transfusion. is Symptom 1–6

by allergic Minor reactions: Characterized urticaria.

ushing, site, IV at back Hemolytic hypotension. with reactions: tachypnea, tachycardia, burning Present fever, ﬂ pain, transfusion the apprehension, chills, nausea, and of of transfusion only amount a the small Symptoms begin following blood.

clinical impression. Diagnosed by

the with Stop acetaminophen. transfusion reactions: fever Nonhemolytic and control febrile infection. out Rule

Administer reactions: Minor antihistamines. allergic the of setting a +/– In epinephrine and the stop reaction, severe transfusion steroids. give

immediately. Hemolytic reactions: transfusion Stop transfusion the ﬂ blood IV uids; pressors be normal donor may to blood ↑ Replace (diuretics with administer urine vigorous output ow). maintain and good used and ﬂ renal saline;

disorders intermittent include group are of The porphyrias acute porphyria that porphyria. a tarda, inherited porphyria, erythropoietic cutanea and acute dominant are porphyria) and recessive erythropoietic porphyria). (e.g., Some intermittent (e.g., others autosomal autosomal porphyrias of accumulation to porphyrins. that involve production an lead All abnormalities of heme

Signs symptoms and type the with of vary porphyria. however, that general, a visceral combination and complaints, neuropsychiatric form seizures. by a porphyrias take pain complaints the typically abdominal photodermatitis, characterized are of of In colicky and

aref and nonspecifc blisters, a exam exam. tachycardia, skin erythema and abdominal Physical reveals exia,

anemia. erythropoietic form Patients the with with hemolytic present are synthesis exposures; associated triggers attacks ↑ as or Acute heme chemical OCPs. well-known with barbiturates, of stimulants and fasting are alcohol, such red or after Urine attack. appear brown acute may an have Patients history. a family may

by showing elevated urine, physical of blood, a the history and along combination and stool labs Diagnosed with porphyrins. Enzyme may helpful. be assays also

treatment attacks; Avoidance acute of triggers acute of during episodes. symptomatic

may during heme severe to given can ↓ feedback administered attacks, glucose synthesis be to heme (provides be the IV pathway). for and hematin synthetic doses High of mild attacks

is myoglobin, cytochrome and production Heme molecules. necessary for hemoglobin, the of

is urine. sign The of porphyria telltale pink

then pain of brown an case college who and porphyria student a urine of abdominal a consumes acute day. has classic at The and involves the episode alcohol next barbiturates and party,

their cell of level type by the hematopoietic involved of cells, of Malignant categorized differentiation. and proliferations acute myelogenous. lymphocytic be or Leukemias or may chronic,

compression, leukostasis. cava four vena emergencies: oncologic and spinal cord syndrome, The superior hypercalcemia,

hematopoietic clonal of and cells. myelogenous disorders leukemias Acute stem lymphocytic are early ability of (blasts), normal bone growth rapid of produce immature which the They cells. characterized overwhelms blood by marrow to cells are

well myelogenous as (AML) as adults. leukemia (ALL) Acute lymphocytic acute and affect children leukemia malignancy. childhood common the most ALL is

symptoms signs fatigue) with are (pallor, (petechiae, purpura, patients and progression anemia bleeding). and onset thrombocytopenia and rapid; of present Disease (common ALL). pain Medullary expansion and periosteal involvement to may in lead bone

may ↓ gums swollen/bleeding exam, platelets. hepatosplenomegaly from have leukemic infiltration and and On patients infiltrate skin CNS. and Leukemic cells also the

bone examination aspiration, blasts patient’s blood obtained Based present. are of if peripheral by and marrow, circulating the or on biopsy 20–30%) a is (> with process. consistent leukemic blast that with Marrow is cells infiltrated leukemic the they myeloblasts; In AML, cells are lymphoblasts. in are ALL be (see distinguished morphology, of immunophenotyping may cells and cytogenetics, Table by These examination 2.7-6). cytochemistry,

dysfunctional, count the The elevated, usually may be neutropenic WBC patients frequent infection. is cells and of a history but are with leukostasis edema, If the there injury, occluding a CNS is and the microcirculation, ischemic is (blasts pulmonary very (> to DIC). of leading WBC symptoms, 100,000), risk high

of acute leukemia AML: (ALL: system analysis. classified The the according to L1–L3; is FAB M0–M7) and karyotype further type with cytogenetics. Prognosis varies leukemic

AB T -6. LE 2.7 Lymphoblasts vs. Myeloblasts

rods Size of 50% Amount RBC) Present in Nucleoli More Myeloperoxidase ne Uncommon, times Larger cytoplasm Inconspicuous (2–4 RBC) times Absent Conspicuous f Smaller Less Granules coarse of Common, Auer cases (1.5–3.0

colony-stimulating AML also chemotherapeutic ALL treated agents, are although antibiotics, with transfusions, and used. are factors primarily and transplantation. marrow or genetics do Patients unfavorable for candidates achieve may with who those not bone be remission

lysis are on WBC their may blast high, allopurinol if (tumor be should be Prior prevent counts they renal from lysis syndrome). to and therapy, insufficiency hyperuricemia to resulting started patients hydrated, well and

leukapheresis may ↓ hydroxyurea be WBC count. Leukostasis to syndrome +/– with treated rapidly

as Indicators of poor are a follows: prognosis

year years; with B-cell 50,000; and cancer); 1 10 < WBC ALL: presence (associated Age > the (associated of in > Philadelphia t(9,22) an diagnosis; at chromosome morphology or count L3 to Burkitt’s involvement with lymphoma). CNS ↑ the

a Age elevated 8 megakaryocytic FLT3 LDH, chromosomes t(6,9), more phenotype, mutations trisomy AML: 5 (acute karyotype, or M7 variant). MDR1+ mutation, > gene 7, years, and in FAB or 60 complex CD34+ or

(ATRA) leukemia acid responsive (APL)—has therapy. promyelocytic good it AML to type (FAB) a because M3—acute prognosis is all-trans-retinoic that retinoic of form the The contains mutation receptor. causes acid AML this conventional less toxic than ATRA is chemotherapy.

blood, marrow, lymph functionally in peripheral proliferation nodes, A spleen, and of that bone clonal malignant, the accumulate liver. incompetent lymphocytes common most leukemia. of type The B all A well-differentiated T-cell involve lymphocytes. CLL cases of form rare almost but exists, contribution, lymphoid patients although times first-degree some more three are likely a unknown, etiology CLL than with malignancy. develop to is as others The relatives of there genetic is ratio the 2:1. adults (median affects is 65); Primarily older age male-to-female

infection. but and malaise, fatigue, many Often with patients asymptomatic, present are Common splenomegaly. physical and findings lymphadenopathy

on f of be leukemic Diagnosed clinical may the the confirmed only the CD21. characteristic T by antigens CD20 B-cell cells with ow presence by and cells—on demonstrating picture; CD5—normally cytometry found

on an smear. and shows with cells peripheral abundance lymphocytosis count of (lymphocyte CBC ruptured small, smudge > 5000) normal-appearing lymphocytes marrow with cells. anemia, common leukemic infiltration thrombocytopenia and to Granulocytopenia, owing are cells function hypogammaglobulinemia. by leads Abnormal the leukemic to

rarely but for provide Bone is or marrow and required to may biopsy assess prognostic diagnosis information may therapy. help staging response

is (APL) the M3 for AML A characteristic type sign

Auer rod.

achieve complete with Eighty-five ALL chemotherapy. remission children with of percent

by be anemia. CLL autoimmune complicated may hemolytic

lymphoma. CLL small The is of lymphocytic equivalent lymphoid

2.7-7). expected The with correlates Table stage clinical survival (see

is palliative. Treatment peripheral lymphocytosis treatment The not dictate degree of when with correlate should does be does prognosis, it initiated. nor anemia, recurrent withheld patients severe infection, splenomegaly, symptomatic—e.g., when until is or often present are with lymphadenopathy thrombocytopenia. Treatment they and

for especially radiation localized chemotherapy, although Treatment of alkylating consists agents, primarily with useful may be lymphadenopathy.

achieved long is adequate Although curable, be intervals disease-free not of symptoms. with may treatment CLL

and well. and excess leukocytosis myeloid basophils granulocytes and as leading with erythrocytes clonal cells, Involves expansion of progenitor ↑ sometimes to platelets be BCR-ABL To present. must CML, be truly translocation the this Philadelphia is t(9,22). > the patients, 90% by of chromosome In reﬂected patients. CML affects middle-aged primarily

while routine are asymptomatic. diagnosed blood patients many testing, With are and of symptoms signs those typical However, anemia.

splenomegaly have early and satiety. with LUQ frequently Patients pain as well. Hepatomegaly be may present symptoms chills loss, weight Constitutional seen. anorexia, also fever, may of be and

CML Patients phases: three through disease go with

lasts Chronic: typically 3.5–5.0 Without treatment, years. symptoms as above. Signs and are described rare. bleeding Infection and are complications

toward ↑ blood an transition in marrow peripheral Accelerated: with bone A blast and counts. crisis, an suspected abrupt and thrombocytopenia Should differential < shows 100,000. basophils when be the in ↑

Resembles months. 3–6 leukemia; is Blast: acute survival

analysis including cytogenetic the chromosome. picture, Philadelphia reveals labs; the by usually clinical ■Diagnosed

LE 2.7 -7. TAB Staging CLL (Rai Clinical Staging) of

and WBC—often reaching CBwC very at sometimes > diagnosis, > high 100,000 a 500,000. shows shows Differential all maturation. stages of granulocytes in elevated to so will Rarely, count syndrome. a hyperviscosity as WBC cause the be

is low; uric Leukocyte LDH, levels and phosphatase B12 are elevated. acid, alkaline

and the phase change, disease targeted is with rapid of undergoing introduction since particularly Varies therapies:

Imatinib. Chronic: transplantation stem cell treated is available. be can matched patients Younger allogeneic if sibling donor with a suitable

or stem acute dasatinib clinical Therapy Blast: hematopoietic plus as transplant leukemia trial. cell for or

A malignant cause. B well-differentiated with unclear an disorder lymphocytes of disease for that of affects cases rare males. most 2% HCL leukemia commonly older is and adult accounts a

Typically bone with marrow infiltration, splenomegaly. pancytopenia, presents and

mycobacteria loss. and Patients such early fatigue, and weight petechiae pain, atypical of as bruising, complain (especially satiety, Mycobacterium abdominal weakness, avium– intracellulare), with infection are CLL to except those of lymphadenopathy. patients rarely have that Symptoms similar

through confirmed spleen. labs; of in blood, and exam, or by marrow, identification Diagnosed the physical cells the hairy the history,

microscopy, ﬂ the to hairy on ﬂuorescent-labeled helpful (TRAP) and f cells ow cell-specific are with uorescence antibodies cytometry of in electron (quantification antigens) distinguishing monoclonal of cells, cells. phosphatase staining acid bound pathognomonic Tartrate-resistant hairy

abundant with time, mononuclear the name a projections. demonstrates the leukopenia cells of smear 85% cells, cytoplasmic roughly hairy CBC peripheral pale (making and usually cytoplasm leukemia shows or a misnomer);

pancytopenia Ten have remainder never the percent course and a require but of patients therapy, develop benign progressive and splenomegaly. treatment median years. survival is The five without

cytopenic. symptomatic extremely Treatment are begins patients when or remission. induce effectively of currently initial Nucleoside treatment choice, and analogs the are Other blood IFN-α. options may which counts, splenectomy, improve include and treatment

BCR-ABL inhibitor a Imatinib kinase. is (Gleevec) of tyrosine selective the

tumor syndrome, leads rapid high-grade complicated which and to death be The treatment of in intracellular contents may NHL and cell hypocalcemia. hyperkalemia, by hyperuricemia, hyperphosphatemia, lysis releases

transformations lymphoid of lymphoid in residing lymph Malignant the primarily tissues, especially cells nodes. Classically into Hodgkin’s and varieties. non-Hodgkin’s organized

(e.g., cells, natural HCV). (NK) viruses stimulated genes exogenous or tumor of of cells clonal EBV, inactivation by by genes; and/or introduction cells, the oncogenic t(14,18); progressive a of B chromosomal represents suppressor commonly by NHL by the killer expansion translocations, HTLV-1, most T is There pylori MALT gastric lymphoma. a strong and H. association between infection Most of (almost NHLs 85%) are B-cell origin. lymphoma. five NHL and Hodgkin’s is neoplasm times the hematopoietic than most common common more is

patient median be to higher-grade tend is but aggressive, > in more age NHL found The may years, also disease. 50 who have children, varies grade presentation with Table 2.7-8). (see disease Patient

the well. is may node be an first disease present diagnosis; site, extranodal biopsied lymph biopsy Excisional diagnosis at should for as for which necessary

signs CNS patients or or in 1° done symptoms, HIV, be A neurologic exam lymphoma. CSF should with the disease nodes whether is on classif the cation) number Arbor diaphragm. the and (Ann staging based of on Disease crosses

than rather on histopathologic based stage. is classification on ■Treatment treated patients Symptomatic are radiation chemotherapy and with

2.7 T -8. LE AB Non-Hodgkin’s of Presentation Lymphoma

peripheral Painless adenopathy. from Cytopenia bone marrow involvement. Fatigue weakness. and hepatomegaly. Peripheral adenopathy, splenomegaly, Adenopathy. CNS). (GI, skin, thyroid, GU, disease Extranodal weight loss). > 38.5°C, (temperature night symptoms sweats, B mass mass formation SVC lymphoma). lymphoma; bowel in in syndrome abdominal and with obstruction lymphoblastic Mass Burkitt’s mediastinal (e.g., hepatomegaly. Bulky splenomegaly, adenopathy, testicular, Masses mediastinal). (abdominal, Skin f ndings. [vincristine], Intermediate to Adriamycin, prednisone). Low Oncovin high [Cytoxan], cyclophosphamide and (CHOP:

be thumb aggressively low-grade, treated symptomatic to ■The with NHL a a be for rule aggressive patients, treated NHL curative high-grade, to approach palliative and with for is approach. indolent in of

with an unclear predominantly etiology. A malignancy B-cell association is EBV. possible There with a in nodular has elderly the and decade third the 60 lymphocyte-depleted the type) sclerosing first age bimodal age type). in at around the HD distribution, (primarily then peaking (mainly a male predominance has childhood. It in a

as usually more a widely disseminated diaphragm, it found suggesting although it present disease. as mass; presents with HD may also mediastinal cervical involvement the adenopathy, above commonly infradiaphragmatic is

systemic hepatosplenomegaly. B Patients and have pruritus, also symptoms, pain for afebrile 1–2 nodal weeks fever are that and are fevers sites Pel-Ebstein HD. high (1–2 specific of with weeks) alternating alcohol-induced signs at rare

morphology. biopsy nondiagnostic, with is which appearance) abnormal usually “owl’s-eye” and usually is examined node biopsy, diagnosis lymph made an cells B and cells (giant huge, create excisional Fine-needle nuclei so nucleoli, nodal for (RS) Reed-Sternberg which eosinophilic is the abnormal classic by bilobar for

include cellularity, in of types, frequency, Histologic lymphocyte lymphocyte sclerosing, order predominant, and nodular descending depleted. mixed the crosses the number staging not laparotomy recommended. is presence symptoms, diaphragm; of and on based is disease the B nodes, the whether of Staging

chemotherapy Treatment and/or involving dependent, is radiation. stage node next lymph is toward region. involved the contiguous area the Radiation directed plus bleomycin, used MOPP and vinblastine, prednisone). Chemotherapy (mechlorethamine, and ABVD regimens dacarbazine) (Adriamycin, [vincristine], procarbazine, include Oncovin

for are (nodal very the 90% IV. stage disease diaphragm), side I stage disease III, II 65% and Five-year survival of 84% and good limited and are for to rates for stage one

and cancer. NHL, cancer, as AML, thyroid breast lead to can Chemotherapy such 2° neoplasms and radiation

chains). (kappa/lambda fragments malignant Clonal with of of varying proliferation light production cells stages immunoglobulin or plasma immunoglobulins of differentiation, monoclonal excessive at commonly believed It is

myeloma. and of multiple pain must The raise anemia suspicion always bone combination of

pain at concern malignancy. for rest Bone raise should

vomiting, confusion, and in symptoms polyuria, constipation, Hypercalcemia lethargy. of nausea, manifests

myeloma which multiple . osteoblastic Because is be osteoclastic bone detects may activity, process, an scan, a

of incidence in to peak the the be a a elderly, decade. seventh with disease other chemicals. possibly, radiation; and of pesticides, and, Risk disease significance for (MGUS); petroleum, factors monoclonal gammopathy development include undetermined

abnormalities. with lesions, hypercalcemia, bone of plasmacytosis the anemia, renal bone present and marrow, lytic Patients the prone They and have and/or serum proteins urine. in (M) are to infection elevated monoclonal

in proven M diagnostic of of plasma serum and/or protein plasma The evidence histologically > triad criteria lesions. lytic bone in classic or the urine, and marrow cell infiltration, bone cells are 10%

presence The multiple common. is is M alone proteins of insuffcient MGUS for the relatively of diagnosis myeloma; macroglobulinemia, lymphoma, Other may amyloidosis. M including lymphoproliferative CLL, result and diseases in Waldenström’s proteins, also

be marrow urine bone skeletal protein evaluated and with Patients electrophoresis, and a CBC. should a serum biopsy, survey,

with Treat chemotherapy.

alkylating prednisone treatment other involves combination agent) and (an agents. a initial melphalan Common and oral of stem mechanism, to Myeloma doses an to by transplantation used support intensive gene of may resistant to tend chemotherapy. autologous and cell be more become MDR drugs cells

that cells disorder to A B leads clonal malignant of gammopathy. a monoclonal in coagulation result (leading amyloidosis. abnormalities, to syndrome, hyperviscosity cryoglobulinemia, hemolytic anemia), of levels Elevated agglutinin IgM cold and autoimmune disease neoplastic by Tissue plasma is and infiltrated IgM cells. of indolent chronic, disease the A elderly.

weight Raynaud’s lethargy Presents and of along phenomenon symptoms loss nonspecific from cryoglobulinemia. with with peripheral neuropathy changes problems Patients complain sensorimotor status vision. of blurry neurologic to from ranging and mental seen. Organomegaly organ GI affecting and kidneys, tract, dysfunction are lungs the and skin, also

precursor is multiple MGUS with to As myeloma, a disease.

show ESR, and phosphatase. Labs elevated LDH, alkaline uric acid,

required Bone and establish to diagnosis. aspirate biopsy marrow are the Marrow nucleus). bodies plasma classically shows (PASIgM with the deposits cells, around Dutcher abnormal also and electrophoresis immunofixation and Serum are urine used. protein

with lymphoma underlying treated Excess chemotherapy. is immunoglobulin removed is plasmapheresis; with

term generic of fibrils. deposition A extracellular protein referring to fibrils with amyloidosis, kinds (see Table of etiologies 2.7-9). involving many There types are varying deposited of different different a of Classically the disease elderly.

distribution, amyloid of on depends clinical of amount The the deposition. presentation type protein, the tissue precursor and and important clinically the common liver. in (AL) deposition and 1° sites amyloidosis, 2° the two the (AA), forms kidneys, amyloid most of of systemic heart, are major In

brain the in clinically disease). limited organ important disorders, amyloid Alzheimer’s In (e.g., deposition to one some is

under tissue the red by clinical picture; apple-green staining Congo light. by Diagnosed birefringence biopsy confirmed with polarized showing

should 1° protein experimental 2° is condition burden; chemotherapy with to in the underlying be amyloidosis reduce addressed. amyloidosis, treated is dialysis-related amyloid, may and transplantation kidney also transplantation amyloid. heritable Transplantation liver may used; cure cure

TABLE 2.7-9. Types of Amyloidosis

cell A with dyscrasia, deposition of monoclonal AL fragments. plasma light-chain Associated macroglobulinemia. and multiple Waldenstr’s with myeloma of Deposition acute-phase the AA serum amyloid A. reactant (e.g., and diseases chronic infammatory with infections, arthritis), rheumatoid neoplasms. Associated dialysis. Dialysis-related in β2 which Deposition of long-term microglobulin, on accumulates patients products Deposition Heritable (e.g., of gene prealbumin). abnormal aka transthyretin, A heterogeneous of group disorders. normal otherwise Senile-systemic of Deposition transthyretin.

ANC % 1500, neutrophil (ANC) where bands An (0.01). count) (WBC + segmented < neutrophils) = absolute count (% marginated ↓ pools, may be sequestration utilization. tissue or combination or due of to to and destruction ↑ Neutropenia a production, intrinsic Table (see 2.7-10). or may be It acquired

varies are at infection, with neutrophil ↑ which risk Patients count. of inversely

Acute and E. with aureus, neutropenia: Associated sepsis. coli, Proteus, Pseudomonas, S. Klebsiella

than and rather with autoimmune sinusitis, recurrent gingivitis, stomatitis, Chronic Presents neutropenia: sepsis. perirectal infections and disease, by (e.g., sarcoidosis). neutropenias Felty’s syndrome, accompanied splenomegaly Some Gaucher’s are chronic

cornerstones the physical and The history exam are diagnosis. of

be CBC follow neutropenia. ANC used with to may present, bone biopsy or is aspirate and anemia If thrombocytopenia marrow be should performed.

collagen Serum may immunologic disease levels, be vascular merited. workup a ANA and evaluation, for

0. 2.7 LE AB T -1 vs. Intrinsic Neutropenia Acquired

suppression. chemotherapy, induced antibiotics, (e.g., NSAIDs), by usually Drug Acquired HEMATOLOGY/ONCOLOGY ethanol, marrow ltrating disorders. Marrow-inf Postinfectious. infection. HIV of descent; (seen leukopenia African variation). to Benign and Yemenite West Indians, familial genetic in due Jews, people antineutrophil childhood; due to Chronic in of thought be infancy to production (occurs and neutropenia IgG). idiopathic Autoimmune neutropenia to or rheumatoid (isolated arthritis 2° SLE). or thiamine def Nutritional def or ciency). ciency (B12/folate orotic Metabolic disease disease). aciduria, MMA, Gaucher’s hypothyroidism, hyperglycinuria, (ketoacidosis, marrow). (X-linked, hypocellular integument and Intrinsic with congenita abnormalities Dyskeratosis agranulocytosis). Kostmann’s infantile (aka syndrome syndrome ciency). (neutropenia, Shwachman-Diamond-Oski dysplasia, pancreatic metaphyseal insuff and giant syndrome neurologic cells). Chédiak-Higashi albinism, granules impairment, (oculocutaneous and in Fanconi’s anemia.

an is their inﬂammatory important; be neutrophils. most lack not to of patients to owing able ■Infection management mount may infection response to

in should with context the treated Fever broad-spectrum antibiotics. of immediately neutropenia be should fungemia. be by fungal treated Suspected infections as appropriately well.

shorten Hematopoietic as G-CSF cell duration neutropenia. be such can factors of used stem to the In IVIG marrow and instances, transplantation be bone may some allogeneic used.

= (WBC) eosinophil Absolute count (0.01). eosinophils) (% levels 350. do exceed Normal not can Eosinophilia tissues. eosinophils IL-5, eosinophilopoietic of into or one GM-CSF) of three the by or and chemokines be (IL-3, of and blood peripheral overproduction triggered that more by migration the cytokines stimulate occurs usually a 2° 2.7-11). disorder, cause it Table to Eosinophilia another but (see may be 1°

A and of travel, medication, relating to a symptoms history should history diet lymphoma/leukemia. atopic, with elicited along be

findings vary. exam Physical murmurs). Patients present CHF, fever, mural syndrome prominent from (emboli ECGs, and hypereosinophilic thrombi, with anemia, (HES) may abnormal cardiac with findings nervous eosinophilic liver, and the affected include to spleen, system infiltration). organs skin, lung, (due Other

for differential should is a obtained, CSF eosinophilia, and be ■In addition CBC a which should and history physical, analyzed be and to suggestive

LE 2.7 AB -1 T 1. Unknown Hypereosinophilic of Etiologies Eosinophilia 1° etiology. syndrome: rare. Autosomal-dominant inheritance; eosinophilia: Hereditary Results from Eosinophilia-myalgia syndrome: abnormal metabolism. tryptophan 2°

The elevated states the United in most IgE: serum common with Allergic cause

States. cause diseases: The common Parasitic worldwide. most Other:

Coccidioidomycosis. Churg-Strauss (e.g., Vasculitis syndrome). also solid disorders; malignant hematologic tumors. Benign or Collagen (e.g., diseases vascular PAN). dermatomyositis, (e.g., phenytoin). ASA, Drug induced sulfonamides, iodides,

a infection or a with coccidioidomycosis helminth. or reaction drug a of a may Hematuria be schistosomiasis. eosinophilia of with sign

in defect be brain pelvis, the demonstrate narrowing potential abdomen, down a lungs, ■Imaging may that of the and helpful focal may causes.

of tailored Medication cause the to should eosinophilia. be the treated HES is and agents with cytotoxic the eosinophilia. corticosteroid to ↓

treat Tissue transplantation increasingly variety of a diseases. used is to transplantation include the of Types following:

him/herself. Transplantation patient the Autologous: to from

a Transplantation Allogeneic: to different patient. a genetically donor from

donor between from Syngeneic: genetically to a patient). a identical twins (i.e., identical Transplantation

and recipient. made to With allogeneic the are HLA match efforts and ABO donation, donor rejected. Even immunosuppression, be however, antigenic with transplants matching and may of rejection: hyperacute, (see chronic acute, There and are types three Table 2.7-12).

to bone disease which marrow specific transplantation host tissues. T complication allogeneic in cells is a attack Graft-versus-host (GVHD) donated may < (occurring or acute > It (occurring post-transplant) be days afterward). chronic 100 100 days

disease, thought are which problems. dysfunction, Minor antigens to or for GI liver typically with be changes, skin lung GVHD, obstructive histocompatibility presents responsible cholestatic

with are treated corticosteroids. Patients high-dose

2. 2.7 -1 LE AB T Transplant of Types Rejection

Within minutes. Timing transplant after months. days to three Five years. Months to Pathomechanism Preformed antibodies. T-cell mediated. causing reaction f Chronic brosis. immune ischemia. Tissue tissue Vascular fndings thrombi; or destruction phosphatase, such alkaline as Laboratory evidence ↑ of creatinine. BUN, GGT, LDH, tissue of organ loss Gradual function. ABO Prevention compatibility. Check agents. Cytotoxic Treatment N/A N/A sampling (MMF). (OKT3), tacrolimus, or with corticosteroids, with antibodies mycophenolate antilymphocyte tissue; treat transplanted Confrm of mofetil to treatable out rule reaction. treatment; acute No biopsy

used drugs: ganciclovir, The commonly and include can (tacrolimus), typical FK506 ketoconazole. prednisone, regimen transplant MMF, after these TMP-SMX,

those variant which autologous an transplant lower patients GVHD of are marrow relapse rates than transplant. is A treated allogeneic in the significantly who with with effect, an have treated bone graft-versus-leukemia leukemia difference reaction leukemic is a be against cells cells. of thought to This to T due donated

Table associated are that commonly neoplasms. 2.7-13 outlines with conditions

T -1 AB 2.7 3. LE Neoplasms Disorders Associated with

syndrome (“We go Down ALL ALL will Down together”). and Squamous carcinomas of Xeroderma cell cell basal skin. the pigmentosum gastritis, Chronic adenocarcinoma. remnants postsurgical anemia, pernicious Gastric atrophic gastric mental retardation) Tuberous cardiac rhabdomyoma. seizures, and (facial Astrocytoma sclerosis angiofbroma, keratosis of carcinoma skin. Squamous Actinic the cell adenocarcinoma. Barrett’s ux) ref GI (chronic Esophageal esophagus due iron of to (atrophic webs, the all esophagus. syndrome anemia; Squamous glossitis, Plummer-Vinson esophageal cell def ciency) carcinoma Cirrhosis (alcoholic, or HBV carcinoma. HCV) Hepatocellular adenocarcinoma. Ulcerative Colonic colitis Paget’s brosarcoma. and 2° f bone disease of osteosarcoma sarcoma. NHLs malignant Aggressive and AIDS Kaposi’s gravis) malignant thymomas. (e.g., myasthenia and Benign diseases Autoimmune lung, Acanthosis malignancy and (stomach, uterus). (hyperpigmentation epidermal Visceral thickening) nigricans breast, nevus Malignant melanoma. Dysplastic states lymphomas. Immunodefciency Malignant

249 of 248 EXTERNA ORBITAL CONJUNCTIVITIS 248 Eyes CELLULITIS the and 248 OTITIS Ears Infections INFECTIOUS

Table pneumonia outlined Some of common 2.8-1. are in causes

May classically atypically. or present

or pleuritic chest yellow-green (purulent night pain. fever, sputum symptoms: Sudden cough productive dyspnea, onset, Classic hemoptysis), sweats,

headaches, dry Gradual Atypical onset, throat. myalgias, sore cough, symptoms:

to egophony, bronchial exam and sounds, percussion, dullness breath may tactile rales, ↓ show fremitus. wheezing, or Lung

as signs may those exam. or well as or physical status with on minimal Elderly diabetes, have COPD, immunocompromised atypical patients

culture, CXR, physical Figures Workup and ABG. culture blood exam, and aspirate, Gram includes stain sputum CBC, (see nasopharyngeal and 2.8-1 2.8-2),

the pathogens following: include Tests specifc for

direct antibody serogroup only sputum test Legionella staining Urine 1), culture. (DFA), Legionella: fuorescent antigen with (detects

testing, Chlamydia PCR. Serologic pneumoniae: culture,

TABLE 2.8-1. Common of Causes Pneumonia

mycobacteria Burkholderia, Streptococcus (with S. S. Staphylococcus, bronchogenic Pneumocystis H. (GNRs), groups: Pseudomonas) Klebsiella, pneumoniae H. Wegener’s carcinoma, HIV), Aspergillus, Group Mycoplasma Legionella, jiroveci Pseudomonas, B (hospital pneumoniae (e.g., uenzae Mycoplasma, viruses, aureus, burnetii, Nocardia, Gramrods Mycoplasma (CF) pneumoniae unusual Coxiella catarrhalis, Viruses fbrosis pneumoniae, users S. Postviral gramrods, (RSV) Anaerobes Immunocompromised Staphylococcus Mycoplasma Anaerobes pneumoniae anaerobes Obstruction, Cystic coli Moraxella drug pneumoniae Aspiration inﬂuenzae Chlamydia H. (GBS), Gram-rods Atypical fungi, inﬂ Chlamydia pneumoniae H. immunodefciency, Viruses Nosocomial S. streptococci pneumoniae organisms S. inﬂ inﬂ lymphoma, Staphylococcus, granulomatosis, acquired) C. uenzae, E. Staphylococcus, S. Recurrent COPD Special Alcoholics/IV uenzae Viruses Anaerobes mycobacteria Neonate

An adequate 25 few 25 cells/hpf). (> stain sputum cells/hpf) epithelial has (< and many cells sample Gram PMNs

2.8-1. FIGURE S. aureus.

who of while isolated sputum of a These pneumonia were the patient clusters developed from gramcocci hospitalized.

Usually clinical. Mycoplasma: agglutinins Serum antigen and used. serum also Mycoplasma cold may be

culture. test, Streptococcus Urine pneumococcal pneumoniae: antigen

inf for culture. RSV), Nasopharyngeal uenza, pathogens rapid Viral: tests (e.g., DFA, aspirate, viral

FIGURE 2.8-2. S. pneumoniae.

pneumonia. sample Sputum with a from patient characteristic gramdiplococci. Note the lancet-shaped

the initial Table treatment for pneumonia. summarizes 2.8-2 recommended

treatment oral with uncomplicated Outpatient cases. antibiotics only in is recommended

with unstable 65 or antibiotics In-hospital (alcoholism, age patients respiratory and and/or years altered COPD, recommended with of > involvement. diabetes, is treatment status, vitals of mental for in malnutrition), comorbidity IV those immunosuppression, multilobar failure, signs

obstructive with staphylococcal, coverage. pseudomonal, anaerobic diseases or bronchiectasis), (e.g., consider adding or patients CF For

due tuberculosis. Mycobacterium Infection to asymptomatic. usually that latent infection (LTBI) Initial TB infection to is leads due latent reactivation of Most (i.e., disease) rather symptomatic of cases to are infection active cases

TABLE 2.8-2. Treatment Pneumonia of

the presentation. PORT patients criteria The index) comorbidity, with on and (i.e., pneumonia risk-stratifies age, pneumonia of severity basis criteria to apply AIDS not patients. do PORT The Note:

pneumoniae, ≤ pneumoniae, S. viral. healthy patients uenzae, age, of H. C. inﬂ pneumonia, pneumoniae, Mycoplasma otherwise years community-acquired 65 Outpatient uoroquinolone. (azithromycin), Macrolide f or doxycycline, renal comorbidity failure, pneumoniae, aureus, inﬂ heart age failure, S. of coli, or diabetes, Enterobacter, EtOH Legionella, viruses. S. Klebsiella), H. 65 years aerobic (E. abuse) uenzae, > GNRs (COPD, Patients with disease, liver or uoroquinolone. Macrolide f macrolide. to cephalosporin a the second-generation Consider adding β-lactam or inﬂ H. Chlamydia. GNRs, requiring aerobic pneumoniae, pneumonia Legionella, uenzae, anaerobes, hospitalization Community-acquired S. fuoroquinolone. cephalosporin, Extended-spectrum β-lactam/β-lactamase inhibitor, or if suspected. atypical are macrolide a Add organisms H. aerobic pneumonia ICU Legionella, inﬂ requiring S. uenzae, care GNRs, Pseudomonas. pneumoniae, Mycoplasma, Community-acquired anaerobes, + or Fluoroquinolone cephalosporin or inhibitor macrolide. β-lactam/β-lactamase extended-spectrum hours hospitalized > a days Acinetobacter), aureus, care or Institution-/hospital-acquired f facility long-term 48 in S. Pseudomonas > GNRs Legionella, pneumonia—patients 14 and ora. mixed (including carbapenem. β-lactam Extended-spectrum with antipseudomonal or activity cephalosporin or until Consider f organisms for lab a coverage best adding or agent. sensitivities resistant the identify an single (Pseudomonas) of aminoglycoside uoroquinolone on are therapy Patients initial ill (MRSA). 24–48 antibiotic or who S. Methicillin-resistant aureus hours worsening over critically gram-coverage. Add vancomycin linezolid; broader or

symptoms. presents TB with always 3 extended an (> weeks) almost of duration

to 1° exposure. than but or TB TB most considered should be well. is as common, disseminated extrapulmonary Pulmonary

system, can bone, almost organ GI the lungs, TB infect tract. including and CNS, GU any tract,

(HIV), diabetes, lung age. (i.e., advancing factors for disease alcoholism, reactivation) Risk preexisting immunosuppression include and active disease, immigration/travel prison), homelessness with contacts. and profession, an health (e.g., TB in and working nations, factors include from TB for allied Risk interacting living crowded known developing conditions exposure

and 3-week) night cough, an tachycardia, loss, exam, Presents dyspnea, duration. weight fatigue, hypoxia, symptom with sweats, (> prolonged lung hemoptysis, fever, abnormal lymphadenopathy, a cachexia, of unknown common is cause a TB origin of (FUO). fever atypical can signs extrapulmonary HIV patients rates and symptoms present higher of TB. with and have

can ■ obtain. blood/tissue is but Active for (or culture sputum of disease) gold disease: the Mycobacterial weeks take extrapulmonary to standard rapid can but yield stain Figure lacks sputum sensitivity. (see acid-fast A 2.8-3) preliminary results

and are sputum culture samples mycobacterial advised. A.M. stain a AFB Three for are or stain the is of suspicion, bronchoalveolar there bronchoscopy but degree of lavage proceed clinical biopsy. to with high a results If the of have sputum a rate patients a high HIV (i.e., stains

a AFB by smear accompanied culture).

most cavitary a upper hosts the The in among inf ltrate typical fnding common is CXR. lobe on or infltrates without cavitation. HIV lower patients with lobe show TB or may with 1° those ne Multiple f nodular

2.8-3. E R IGU F (“red by color identifed their red on acid-fast snappers”) TB organisms staining. are

Resource [ Library Digital with Education (Reproduced, permission, at Pathology the Birmingham.) of University http://peir.net] Instructional from Alabama, the typical densities miliary are which distributed or lymphatic represents TB, hematologic lungs throughout dissemination. of both

Diagnose previous Figure PPD with ■LTBI a 2.8-4). (see (i.e., test exposure): may (anergy). not with individuals a PPD LTBI mount Immunocompromised now are well. diagnose to as Interferon-gamma LTBI assays release available to disease. evaluated with CXR) should a active be out cases (e.g., LTBI rule of All

All departments. reported and health cases local to should state be instituted Respiratory suspected. be isolation if is should TB is Treatment as follows:

with (INH, rifampin, with observed × four by four-drug Active TB: months months, and a pyrazinamide, therapy regimen followed rifampin. multidrug Directly 2 INH ethambutol)

(pyridoxine) INH B6 Administer with to neuritis. peripheral prevent vitamin

conversion PPD × therapy INH with signs/symptoms active disease, of 9 TB: without Latent of months. For initiate regimens 6 or rifampin months include × × months. Alternative 4 INH

to adults), common more important are (90% but pyogenes). β-hemolytic Viral Streptococcus in causes pharyngitis is A streptococcal (group identify it as are Etiologies follows:

A Neisseria streptococci gonorrhoeae, diphtheriae, Group (GAS), Bacterial: M. Corynebacterium pneumoniae.

acute HSV, Viral: CMV, adenovirus, uenza HIV coronavirus, virus, Rhinovirus, EBV, coxsackievirus, infection. inf

erythema, fever). scarlatiniform petechiae, vomiting, soft scarlet palate rash pharyngeal Fever, headache, tonsillar exudate, of Typical pharyngitis: (indicates lymphadenopathy, sore cervical streptococcal throat,

symptoms. rhinorrhea, lesions, ulcerative anterior hoarseness, Coryza, GI pharyngitis: cough, streptococcal conjunctivitis, Atypical of stomatitis,

uids Rifampin orange. ﬂ turns body Ethambutol neuritis. can optic cause and causes INH neuritis hepatitis. peripheral

volar is forearm. PPD injected the on intradermally the surface of induration at The hours. measured 48–72 diameter is of as not patient typically recommended renders preclude a prophylaxis but unvaccinated individuals. should PPD vaccination for BCG induration mm: The TB close 5 is of ≥ that follows: interpreted contacts, CXR a as factors, evidence size risk indicates TB. HIV or test of nations, ≥ correctional IV residents drug Indigent/homeless, health residents of and and 10 illness, care developing workers. of mm: institutions, chronic use, health else, no 15 ≥ mm: factors. including Everyone known those risk with

with out old TB. anergy or rule from and age, thus does A implies controls reaction malnutrition immunosuppression, not

2.8-4. FIGURE PPD interpretation.

are fever, of four cervical for exudate, are lymphadenopathy, The tender Centor cough anterior and (three criteria streptococcal pharyngitis required). identifying tonsillar lack of

overdiagnosis identify rheumatic resistance. order pharyngitis to antibiotic It lead to to fever, treat important and streptococcal cost in prevent and overtreatment and ↑ but is may

febrile in Always patients. ICU sinusitis occult consider

detection, culture. throat GAS by evaluation, and Diagnosed antigen clinical rapid is of of the four 90%. With rapid testing antigen three of > sensitivity out the criteria, Centor

10 is empiric suspected, If therapy begin GAS × days. antibiotic with penicillin are azithromycin alternative amoxicillin, and Cephalosporins, options. can attained relief antipyretics, fuids, be rest, salt-water gargles. Symptom with and

fever Nonsuppurative: Acute the chapter), (see rheumatic glomerulonephritis. Cardiovascular poststreptococcal

peritonsillar and, Suppurative: Cervical mastoiditis, media, retropharyngeal rarely, otitis of syndrome) sinusitis, due oral the lymphadenitis, to abscess, jugular vein anaerobe. (Lemierre’s or Fusobacterium, an thrombophlebitis

affected and with may palate with away and unilateral abscess erythema, deviated Peritonsillar tonsillar the trismus the soft uvula present voice, (“lockjaw”), enlargement, odynophagia, from side. muffed a intraoral via ultrasound CT. and or abscess abscess the localize fuid Culture and drainage. antibiotics with Treat surgical

to the paranasal sinuses. Refers infammation of The most are sinuses commonly affected. maxillary or site, classifed chronicity. Can organism, be by following: the Subtypes include

S. (symptoms uenzae, commonly and Acute pneumoniae, catarrhalis. lasting associated H. inﬂ 1 Most sinusitis month): < M. with viruses, symptoms rare week. are are < and characterized 1 Bacterial causes lasting by

a months): Chronic Represents sinusitis persisting chronic process. infammatory 3 > (symptoms Often to sinus ongoing anaerobic and of due infections. low-grade drainage obstruction patients, be mucormycosis diabetic In considered. should

and congestion, nasal with Presents headache, discharge. pain/pressure, fever, facial area. tenderness, erythema, affected over may the swelling and Exam reveal

suggestive nasal leukocytosis, bacterial of acute sinusitis. fever, and High purulent are a discharge

diagnosis. A clinical and may generally not management sinusitis guide of the Culture radiography acute cases. are required for chronic but

Transillumination shows (low sensitivity). opacifcation the of sinuses

imaging but is 2.8-5) after sinus of choice symptoms for is necessary usually persist (see only Figure CT treatment. test the if for a soft in tissue mucus. MRI (as tumor) differentiating useful is from

FIGURE 2.8-5. Sinusitis.

right and opacifed coronal scan. air-flled this left Compare the sinus normal sinus maxillary on CT from permission, (Reproduced, with Lalwani AK. Diagnosis in Oto ed. laryngology: Head Treatment and & 2nd Surgery, Neck Current York: 2008: McGraw-Hill, Fig. New 14-2.) culture because gold by is ■Bacterial routinely not diagnosis discomfort. of tap sinus standard for is but the performed gaining guided are meatus from cultures the Endoscopically middle popularity.

self-limited Most relief). (decongestants, antihistamines, treated be are of cases can thus pain therapy with and sinusitis symptomatic acute viral and/or

TID PO < sinusitis 7 alternatively, days): Acute TMP-SMX, days or, azithromycin, Consider × × second-generation 10 amoxicillin/clavulanate (usually a 500 cephalosporin 10 bacterial or clarithromycin, days. mg fuoroquinolone,

corticosteroids, in the may with Adjuvant useful of be allergic/infammatory therapy antihistamines sinusitis and weeks): intranasal disease. combating the decongestants, component Chronic (4–12 course to a similar (3–6 given used although weeks) be Antibiotics those may are acute necessary. disease, for longer may be Surgical required. intervention also

endemic California). Valley, Joaquin southwestern United the fungal San infection pulmonary (e.g., States to A may as Can a or extrapulmonary fulike and sites, illness, CNS, an bone, as pneumonia and present acute including subacute or skin. involve 1–4 exposure. is The weeks incubation period after are at HIV-patients ↑ African-American, risk. Filipino, pregnant, and

Potential meningitis, frontal and osteomyelitis, thrombosis, include formation. bone cavernous complications of sinusitis abscess sinus

United respiratory African-American, in with States from coccidioidomycosis pregnant patient the southwestern or Filipino, Consider HIV-, infection. the

chest sweats. pain, dyspnea, cough, night arthralgias, and fever, anorexia, with headache, Patients present tissue bone Disseminated meningitis, lesions, soft with can infection and present abscesses.

lavage cultures bronchoalveolar with along fungal wound of or Obtain sputum, affected other tissue. exudate,

or other immitis stains special or sputum of Coccidioides spherules Identify H&E on tissue.

↑ disappear fxation months; two complement weeks at two (IgM) Precipitin after 1–3 (IgG) within ↑ and antibodies antibodies months. Titers 1:16 infection. disseminated indicate >

or or may mediastinal nodules, CXR hilar be fndings may pleural show adenopathy, or effusion. infltrates, cavity, normal

fne-needle Consider open biopsy biopsy, if is bronchoscopy, biopsy, lung pleural or indeterminate. serology

disseminated disease. however, 1° and severe pulmonary IV or infection necessary; Acute: B is rarely consider for amphotericin therapy protracted IV once therapy PO or mild patient fuconazole be infection used may the itraconazole continuation or stable. for is

nodules needed or cavities. pulmonary for Chronic: chronic treatment is No asymptomatic requires for plus months. symptomatic 8–12 cavitary azole long-term disease usually or surgery Progressive therapy

nuclei. orthomyxovirus A transmitted contagious highly droplet by are basis There B, and Subtypes on of infuenza: the infuenza (hemagglutinin glycoproteins (e.g., classifed and three of are H1N1) H5N1, A, neuraminidase). types A C. of follows: as terms Relevant are

gradual proteins through drift: Refers surface small, mutations. changes to Antigenic point in immune infected escape accounting for to with that infuenza are the allow These suffcient changes multiple virus recognition, times. be the small can to fact individuals

among to Refers Antigenic genetic change pandemics. leads major acute, reassortment) an to circulating infuenza the shift: humans; in (signifcant subtype A

season infuenza In the typical and March. States, the lasts begins until in November United of patients 50 of residents, problems failure, medical diabetes, years chronic health high-risk home months with disease, workers). children any with age, groups renal is (e.g., heart (e.g., to patients contacts years virus care 19 women, recommended for HIV), and pregnant > infuenza inactivated age of 6 of nursing Vaccination age,

typically coryza, weakness. fevers, of chills, and onset with myalgias, present Patients abrupt cough, Elderly atypical patients by may presentations only have characterized confusion.

a fnding. common is Leukopenia are from nasopharyngeal tests Rapid of available. infuenza viral swabs antigens or viral can diagnosis made be DFA defnitive tests culture. with More

care cough with analgesics and Symptomatic medicine. such of are of course the Antivirals 1–2 infection two or by effective most used when days oseltamivir onset may as shorten zanamivir days. within and

Severe pneumonia, COPD occur. of can and sinusitis, bronchitis, and viral asthma 2° exacerbation bacterial pneumonia, 1°

fatty uenza. ASA Reye’s been with inf or use syndrome, infections, liver children including in viral with associated has encephalopathy,

live pregnant healthy vaccine people immunocompromised. or 2–49 severely are not available nasally attenuated, age is delivered for who of inﬂ uenza A years

and recent procedures, neurosurgical sick factors immunodef ear sinusitis, for meningitis contacts. recent include infection, Risk ciencies, Causes 2.8-3. listed are in Table

seizures, fever, Brudzinski’s headache, Kernig’s signs altered nausea/vomiting, or ( of stiffness, Patients signs). with neck present irritation meningeal and status, photophobia, malaise, mental

blood Obtain cultures.

pressure differential, obtain focal protein, papilledema RBC cits). (in glucose, or and of LP and count WBC Gram count, plus culture; CSF opening def stain the absence neurologic for

cryptococcal (for antigen PCRs Viral HIV HSV); (e.g., patients).

out to MRI other diagnoses. CT rule or vary (see may reveal Table 2.8-4). fndings CBC CSF leukocytosis;

TAB LE 2.8-3. Meningitisa,b of Causes

GBS in S. HSV abscess), E. uenzae Enteroviruses HSV, N. Cryptococcus, JC meningitidis coli/GNRs TB, Listeria inﬂ HIV include pneumoniae Neisseria GNRs (brain Listeria type Enteroviruses Causes toxoplasmosis pneumoniae CMV, S. meningitidis N. virus VZV, a meningitidis b pneumoniae and S. H. (PML). meningitis H. of the ↓ uenzae with incidence inﬂ of The b Note: last greatly uenzae H. has the years. in the introduction inﬂ vaccine 10–15

TABLE 2.8-4. les Prof CSF

or ↔ 10–20 PMNs) (> ↔ or ↔ ↔ Clear ∼2/3 Aseptic cerebri serum ↑ ↔ meningitis Pseudotumor ↔ yellow ↑ syndrome Viral clear ↔ 1000 Most 3–12 ↔ or ↔ ↔ 10 meningitis ↔ Yellow/red ↑ or ↑ ↔ or ↑ ↑ ↔ ↔ ↔ MS Clear ↔ ↔ ↓ (monos/ ↔ ↔ or ↔ ↔ Guillain-Barré ↔ or ↑ ↑ ↔ ↑↑ of Bacterial meningitis (high ↔ ↑ ↔ Clear ↑ Normal ↑↑ ↔ ↑↑ ↔ protein) Clear ↑ < < or ↔ Cloudy or often or ↔ lymphs) Clear 15–45 ↑ ↑↑↑ ↑ ↔ ↑ ↑ ↑ 5 SAH

to is rapidly should administered be Antibiotics and performed. an 2.8-5) hours be may LP (see given Table up before empirically two

meningitis Some with care be close can viral follow-up. and supportive cases of treated

receive with of meningitis should meningococcal or ciprofoxacin, rifampin, patients Close ceftriaxone prophylaxis. contacts

2.8-5. T LE AB GBS, < coli/GNRs, 1 month E. Meningitis of Bacterial Treatment Empiric Listeria. + Ampicillin or cefotaxime gentamicin. months inﬂ meningococci, Pneumococci, 1–3 H. uenzae. ceftriaxone Vancomycin or + cefotaxime. IV Pneumococci, adulthood months meningococci. 3 – ceftriaxone IV Vancomycin or cefotaxime. + 60 > gram-bacilli, illness Listeria, Pneumococci, years/alcoholism/ chronic meningococci. or vancomycin cefotaxime Ampicillin ceftriaxone. + +

bacterial given minutes in before Dexamethasone 15–20 ■ antibiotics. especially be pneumoniae, may S. meningitis, benefcial if

Cerebral edema: CT/MRI. on Visible refex. of with Presents oculocephalic loss mannitol. Treat IV with

seen on be scan. May CT Subdural effusions: Occur uenzae of infants meningitis. with inﬂ H. in 50% No is treatment necessary.

clinical Presents picture improved fndings. as a worsening CSF Ventriculitis/hydrocephalus: with antibiotics. ventriculostomy possibly intraventricular Requires and

with and Seizures: Treat benzodiazepines phenytoin.

monitor concentration. fuids and Hyponatremia: sodium Administer

Subdural with seizures. empyema: Presents intractable Requires surgical evacuation.

loss, nerve coma, Other: sensorineural palsies, Cranial death. hearing

common HSV are encephalitis. causes of most and the arboviruses include etiologies VZV, cerebral virus, Nile enterovirus, Rarer and malaria. Borrelia, West Legionella, CMV, toxoplasmosis, Mycoplasma, Rickettsia, the most and the vulnerable. elderly Children are

with headache, seizures. consciousness, fever, altered and Presents DTRs) def present. defcits may cits, accentuated be Lethargy, coma, focal nerve and confusion, also neurologic (cranial

The SAH. toxic-metabolic includes or hematoma, subdural encephalopathy, differential brain malignancy, and abscess

shows moderately CSF protein. lymphocytic ↑ pleocytosis and of trauma suggest evidence without HSV RBCs encephalitis. and fungal, low is amebic in tuberculous, level glucose bacterial, The infections.

(Cryptococcus), wet CSF India stain (mycobacteria), Giemsa preparation (bacteria), amebae), Gram stain a (trypanosomes). (free-living ink acid-fast and Obtain stain HSV, for PCR VZV, EBV, CMV, enterovirus. and

the demonstrate lobe HSV). a may (in lesion MRI temporal contrast-enhancing in

encephalitis IV immediate HSV requires acyclovir. ganciclovir CMV +/– foscarnet. is IV encephalitis treated with Give Rocky disease, for suspected fever, Lyme or spotted doxycycline Mountain ehrlichiosis.

appearance infection usually due fbrous suppurative parenchyma, “ringenhancing” brain with to the a of A capsule. focal, streptococci, (80–90% cases common are organisms staphylococci, most are of often organisms implicated polymicrobial). and The infective are anaerobes; multiple Nonbacterial

be patients tested medications other frequently close of may rifampin choice for of meningococcal prophylaxis used, is Although contacts the meningitis. with

indicates encephalitis. RBCs The without a trauma of history CSF in presence HSV of

morbidity. with associated high is HSV encephalitis sensitive specific. PCR highly is and mandatory. is of course acyclovir A IV full

deficit neurologic classic focal fever, a 50% The is of headache, present and in of brain triad cases of abscess. clinical

metastatic and diagnoses. the is absent, differential major fever When become brain 1° tumors

a not mass brain. do lesion general, In in with the patient a LP

AIDS-defining hosts, and be should settings. epidemiologic illnesses: zygomycosis relevant causes include should considered immunocompromised Candida; Some contemplated commonly Aspergillus, in be tested and neurocysticercosis in Toxoplasma, Modes transmission following: of include the

or cases; often media dental (33%), or Due sinusitis frequently (2%). Streptococcus due males; to affects mastoiditis paranasal Direct infection spread: (10% of young milleri), otitis to

neurosurgical Affects of Direct with patients a or head procedures. trauma inoculation: history

with an cases): Hematogenous the poorly that spread are MCA (25% encapsulated multiple at distribution and of shows junction. located gray-white abscesses Often

signs Headache, and increasing symptoms, def are a by cit. and focal of inattention, confusion, neurologic ICP drowsiness, followed early then seizures

is is most common Headache the refractory and to treatment. often symptom and constant, dull, leads def ICP ↑ and VI cits. to CN CN III

lesion a with ring-enhancing low-density will scan core. show CT a sensitivity has abscesses lesions. and fossa higher for early posterior MRI

necessary analysis precipitate syndrome. may is and a CSF herniation not

may CRP. show Lab ↑ and leukocytosis, values peripheral ESR, ↑

and and/or if therapeutic for antibiotics or broad-spectrum purposes. drainage necessary (aspiration excision) surgical Initiate IV diagnostic be treated Lesions can 2 cm often < medically.

for weeks a IV weeks metronidazole give vancomycin; 6–8 PO. third-generation +/– 2–3 cephalosporin Administer followed therapy + by CT/MRIs serial follow resolution. Obtain to

mannitol used used in cerebral be cases may ICP. with ↓ to severe may edema; taper ↓ to Dexamethasone be IV

or lymphoma, CNS PML toxoplasmosis,

pneumonia pneumonia or P. bacterial recurrent jiroveci

and T that destroys lymphocytes. retrovirus targets CD4+ A in replication rate of a characterized a viral progressive to count CD4+ (see decline progressively Infection that is by leads high Figure 2.8-6).

immunosuppression; determine degree the prophylaxis count: helps Indicates therapy CD4+ and guides prognosis. of and

antiretroviral and provides progression; disease for response May rate treatment gauges therapy. indications predict of load: to the Viral

■In (acute patients may present ulike infection/seroconversion, often acute fever, also asymptomatic, acute (e.g., or lymphadenop is initial syndrome), f with retroviral symptoms but the mononucleosis-like infection HIV

LATENT Anti-p24 antigen Virus, IMMUNODEFICIENCY Opportunistic ACUTE lymphocytes CD4 p24 infections symptoms antibodies Acute and antibodies Anti-gp120 malignancies

FIGURE 2.8-6. Time course infection. HIV of

(Adapted, with Microbiology Levinson & W, and from 6th ed. ogy: Review, Medical permission, Examination Board Jawetz Immunol E. 2000: McGraw-Hill, New 276.) York: athy, pharyngitis, weight loss, rash, maculopapular headache). diarrhea, nausea/vomiting,

recurrent ■HIV loss, infections, opportunistic present infections. sweats, or may night later weight as thrush, with are inversely Complications correlated count Figure CD4+ 2.8-7). (see

R 2.8-7. E IGU F opportunistic to CD4+ of count infections. Relationship development of

et from with (Reproduced, SJ permission, al. McPhee 48th & Current ed. Medical Treatment, Diagnosis McGraw-Hill, York: 2009: Fig. New 31-1.)

homozygous HIV resistance The mutation confer CCR5 to infection. may

should avoid HIVpatients are efavirenz. pregnant who at not she (AZT) zidovudine be antiretroviral If of therapy should with patient delivery, is the time on treated the intrapartum. Infants AZT weeks should after receive birth. six for

live only given MMR the should to HIV vaccine patients. is that be to contacts. not their give vaccine Do or HIV-patients oral polio

Complete Major Collapse Pathogens The Concerning T-Cell

to bloodstream antibodies up to six test months Detects sensitivity, exposure). appear (high after anti-HIV the take in specifcity): moderate (can ELISA

sensitivity, high rmatory. (low specif Conf blot city): Western

tests Rapid HIV available. now are

RNA for CXR, smear, VZV. hepatitis, Baseline Pap serologies cell (viral HIV load), PPD VDRL/RPR, should and CMV, and CD4+ evaluation include toxoplasmosis, testing, count, skin PCR

PCR retroviral should acute (viral HIV) (acute include HIV RNA may ELISA syndrome load); . be Evaluation for

antiretroviral with the regardless and CD4+ (e.g., 350; a (3) conditions nephropathy). CD4+ < or HIV-related (1) those patients; load; for HIV-associated with following: illness) viral Initiate count specifc count (2) pregnant (4) of patients therapy symptomatic patients AIDS-defning with asymptomatic (i.e., those

of or one of nucleoside/nucleotide one inhibitor. initial two consist either combination RTI inhibitors non-nucleoside generally protease The (NNRTI) regimen reverse plus should (RTIs) transcriptase some most medications (usually order treatment is in response principle and to of select resistance. three) emergence achieve at multiple limit important the The to durable least

drug-drug interactions, of conditions choice on tolerance, refux). and The regimen comorbid adherence, (e.g., drug patient hyperlipidemia, depends Monotherapy/dual used. therapy should not be

reconstitution. copies), 50 than rapidly which is occurs usually of immune therapy (< The goal more suppression viral be carefully monitored. load viral count and CD4+ should thus

obtained resistance c suspected, provide resistance testing genotype to can should HIV when such initiation mutation specif identify as therapy the An is of before information be and antiretrovirals. and

opportunistic infections. Table against outlines prophylactic 2.8-6 measures

microscopic illustrates of opportunistic Figure some the appearance common organisms. 2.8-8

immunosuppressed HIV, xerostomia, and treatment). immunosuppressive leukemias, factors cancer, diabetes, inhaler lymphomas, include use, antibiotic (e.g., denture states corticosteroid use, Risk use,

rubbed white that erythematous with possible an soft with Presents plaques be base off, mucosal burning. can and Hx/PE: oral differential tongue; off). of hairy leukoplakia includes the borders (lateral The rubbed easily not esophagitis. of Odynophagia characteristic is candidal

clinical. Usually Dx: yeast shows KOH Gram budding and/or stain pseudohyphae. or

suspension nystatin Tx: therapy with thrush azole as fuconazole). Treat or (e.g., local a clotrimazole tablets, or PO such candidal with therapy. Treat azole esophagitis PO

T 2.8-6. LE AB Prophylaxis for Opportunistic HIV-Related Infections

pneumonia 200/mm3, HIV-related prior jiroveci weeks, unexplained infection, candidiasis. P. or < CD4+ oral P. 2 jiroveci fever × Single-strength pyrimethamine. +/– or dapsone TMP-SMX months. Discontinue ≥ CD4+ prophylaxis for 3 > 200 is when (MAC) Mycobacterium CD4+ avium 50–100/mm3. < complex daily clarithromycin. Weekly or azithromycin 100/mm3 months. CD4+ Discontinue prophylaxis > > 6 is for when serologies. 100/mm3 < Toxoplasma + gondii IgG CD4+ Double-strength TMP-SMX. 5 or — section). TB (see mm tuberculosis M. risk” “high PPD > pyridoxine) Sensitive: × +/– pyrazinamide months × or months. INH rifampin 9 (+ 2 regimens. INH-containing with Include pyridoxine recurrences. Candida Multiple Fluconazole. Esophagitis: and Nystatin Oral: swish swallow. — recurrences. HSV Multiple Acyclovir, or valacyclovir. famciclovir, — All patients. Pneumovax. Give CD4+ years or < is fve every when 200. All patients. annually. Infuenza vaccine pneumoniae Inf uenza — S.

unequal with Pseudohyphae 5–10 fruiting 37°C nonseptate branching halo yeasts + budding septate bodies45° tubes (empty-looking) at hyphae, Rare hyphae Narrow-based capsular branching wide broad Germ Irregular yeasts wide-angle angle μm budding

E 2.8-8. F R IGU opportunistic organisms. Common

The specific. highly test meningitis CSF for and is cryptococcal sensitive antigen

pigeon AIDS Risk factors droppings. and exposure include to

absent Presents and Hx/PE: impaired meningismus. headache, with mentation, fever, includes and other TB lymphoma, meningitis, AIDS dementia encephalitis, PML, The differential toxoplasmosis, fungal complex, disease. HSV

and Dx: count protein; fungal opening culture. CSF pressure); cryptococcal ↑ (↓ ink India stain, monocytic test, LP CSF with leukocyte predominance, ↑↑ antigen glucose; ↑

mg then 2 give × ucytosine + weeks; 8 400 amphotericin f uconazole weeks. Tx: B f × ■IV months. 200 is maintenance administered therapy or mg 200 be with Lifelong > 6 > QD, CD4+ until for fuconazole should

LPs VP ■↑ may pressure for serial opening management. shunt or require

spelunking, bird to Risk river the exposure factors bat valleys. Mississippi and include excrement, or in and especially Ohio AIDS,

exposure or f ulike a asymptomatic is causes often 1° illness.

Presentation disease to range fulminant may extrapulmonary symptoms with manifestations. from no or pulmonary

infection (most often loss, Fever, disseminated and indicate within hepatosplenomegaly, days). nonproductive 14 weight pancytopenia lymphadenopathy, cough,

coccidioidomycosis, bacterial pneumonias, and The TB, differential lymphoma. atypical sarcoidosis, includes blastomycosis, pneumoconiosis,

hilar densities, or is focal lymphadenopathy infltrate, diffuse (chronic infection shows cavity, nodular CXR cavitary). usually

antigen response the to and most monitoring test for the The urine test diagnosis, sensitive is polysaccharide making initial therapy, diagnosing and serum relapse. diagnostic Culture also sputum, is CSF). bone (blood, marrow,

The form on or lymph stain is yeast with lavage. bronchoalveolar node, biopsy liver) silver (bone seen marrow,

and disease host: the on of the Depends severity

pulmonary or host. Treat the supportively disease immunocompromised stable in Mild nodules:

cavitary Give year. lesions: > for itraconazole 1 Chronic

liposomal 3–10 disease or disseminated itraconazole amphotericin disease: or 12 weeks acute by B followed × B longer. pulmonary Amphotericin Severe days × or therapy Maintenance with itraconazole. daily

Formerly pneumonia, carinii Pneumocystis or PCP. known as AIDS. Risk factors immunity cellular and impaired include

weight cough, fatigue, and exertion, oxygenation. fever, with on tachypnea, impaired nonproductive Presents loss, dyspnea

disease or as organ as other also local disease present in systems. Can disseminated

The and differential includes coccidioidomycosis. histoplasmosis, TB,

or stain silver of by induced with specimen immunofuorescence. and bronchoscopy Diagnosed sputum cytology PaO2. check Obtain an to ABG

infltrates diffuse, interstitial CXR ground-glass bilateral any may a but presentation possible. show is with appearance,

TMP-SMX 21 high-dose Treat × days. with and regimen for primaquine allergy. sulfa constitute Clindamycin with an patients alternative

35). mm < to 70 oxygen an used or taper gradient be severe moderate arterial-alveolar A (PaO2 patients in prednisone > hypoxemia with should

CMV reactivation immunocompromised infections 1° in occurs Most patients. serious only asymptomatic; are generally percent in of Seventy United States the adults been have infected. nursery day breast in in Transmission via and sexual via or facilities, milk, care droplets through respiratory occurs contact, blood transfusions. bone for positivity post 100 include factors the reactivation a transplant viral > 10,000. tissue status a days CD4+ f marrow or with load < HIV and rst Risk 100 or

of mononucleosis). infectious may Systemic mononucleosis EBV resemble discussion the infection (see

are Specifc as manifestations follows:

detachment with retinitis: < retinopathy), pie” foaters (“pizza and and presents high (CD4+ changes 50). visual rate Has of a CMV feld retinal

diarrhea. and hepatobiliary GI involvement: bloody GI including nonspecifc multiple with symptoms, present Can been development in AIDS the implicated and CMV, have cryptosporidia of microsporidia, cholangiopathy.

cough, sparse pneumonitis: mortality associated high with fever, CMV sputum and rate. a production; Presents with in with than with more in Much common those and hematologic patients malignancies transplant AIDS. patients

(CD4+ 50; cations). transverse subacute include encephalitis CNS polyradiculopathy, myelitis, calcif Can and < periventricular involvement:

and Suspect who jiroveci dyspnea. any P. in patient HIV cough presents pneumonia nonproductive with

ganciclovir. Treat infection CMV with

serum culture, tissue Virus isolation, examination, PCR.

with ganciclovir Treat foscarnet. or Treat is if underlying immunocompromised. patient disease the

groups. several infection demographic organisms Ubiquitous in and pulmonary causing disseminated COPD, TB, a pulmonary pulmonary 1° such Windermere form form in with as patients CF. (Lady 2° occurs affects healthy The preexisting disease nonsmokers apparently syndrome); or in AIDS infection with 50. patients a < Disseminated CD4+ occurs behavioral There change is evidence no exposure. affects that

Disseminated who with or chemoprophylaxis patients are and not loss for associated on M. in is avium MAC. in weight weakness, infection AIDS fever, HAART

occasionally Hepatosplenomegaly lymphadenopathy and seen. are

possible is of the in into setting the Adrenal adrenals. infltration insuffciency

( mycobacterial in blood Obtain cultures weeks). 2–3

and show Labs anemia, alkaline serum LDH. phosphatase ↑ and hypoalbuminemia,

marrow, macrophages or bacilli. of liver with foamy intestine, reveals acid-fast bone Biopsy patients. granulomas may absent be Typical in immunocompromised

rifabutin and and with +/– Treat ethambutol HAART. clarithromycin for 6 100 > is 12 CD4+ months for Continue months. until > > and

a those or CD4+ for Weekly azithromycin infection. ning opportunistic AIDS-def with < 50

meat Risk include or raw litter. factors changing cat and ingesting undercooked in exposure is France. highest Worldwide,

asymptomatic. 1° infection usually is

occurs in may eye specif (brain, Reactivated > skin, and and heart, liver). in present toxoplasmosis and patients c tract, GI immunosuppressed organs lung,

patients. is AIDS in common ■Encephalitis seropositive with focal and lesions def neurologic seizures, mental cits. altered Classically, status, present CNS headache, fever,

histology, (indicates in mice, Serology, the exposure reactivation); tissue examination for culture. organism or PCR tissue risk isolation of and for

the ring-enhancing ganglia; involvement, In mass show (can scan or lesions) isodense MRI setting basal obtain for a an CNS (predilection multiple hypodense, more sensitive). CT of or

sulfadiazine radio-graphically. leukovorin high-dose resolved with PO maintenance the + + low-dose × 4–8 disease pyrimethamine and sulfadiazine weeks; and with clinically and until pyrimethamine Induction leukovorin has

< for a prophylaxis in pyrimethamine with DS) toxoplasmosis + used (Bactrim 100 dapsone can CD4+ or a TMP-SMX be IgG. patients and

ring-enhancing patients in differential The of are CNS toxoplasmosis diagnoses two AIDS lesions lymphoma. likely and most

United STD bacterial most in The common States. the Chlamydia the Caused anus, which genital can by infect and trachomatis, urethra, eye. tract, sexual douching. and multiple intercourse, include frequent factors partners, new or unprotected Risk gonorrhea mimics infection nongonococcal or urethritis coexists as with is N. (known gonorrhoeae when Often absent). emerging Chlamydia cause LGV venereum, lymphogranuloma of proctocolitis. an of cause serovars

PID. is may Infection often present with mucopurulent urethritis, or but cervicitis, asymptomatic

reveal penile Exam testicular in tenderness tenderness men. may or women discharge and cervical/adnexal in

includes orchitis, endometriosis, and gonorrhea, The PID, differential UTI. vaginitis,

in presents or transient as shallow Lymphogranuloma ulcer. form painless, papule venereum 1° a its 2° it pruritus as strictures, f an and stula, discharge, presents its form elephantiasis). (anal as swelling syndrome” the rectal painful it of nodes, in can form, inguinal and rectovaginal its “anogenital In 3° present with

is usually clinical. Diagnosis

gold Culture is standard. the

detection, Urine are take (PCR 48–72 (for a or chain means gonorrhea/chlamydia) rapid probes and reaction) immunofuorescence tests DNA of while hours. ligase

show (intracellular). bacteria but urethral or no of stain may Gram genital PMNs discharge

common in infection is of cause urethritis nongonococcal men. a Chlamydia

urethritis/ venereum. Chlamydia lymphogranuloma arthritis, cause species nongonococcal neonatal PID, pneumonia, conjunctivitis, and

gonorrhea for prevalence of of coinfection. the and chlamydia in light Treat high

is the resemble those Syphilis diseases. other “great dermatologic findings because imitator” of many its

azithromycin × g 1 100 PO or day. × 1 BID days mg 7 Doxycycline PO pregnant in erythromycin Use patients. gonorrhoeae. Treat to sexual threshold low a maintain partners, treat N. and for LGV prolonged days. serovars therapy for require 21

and syndrome Reiter’s Fitz-Hugh–Curtis conjunctivitis, (perihepatic and pelvic inf ammation Chronic f syndrome infection brosis). pain, arthritis), (urethritis,

men). can epididymitis women) (in from and result (in Ectopic PID pregnancy/infertility

diplococcus reproductive the female any gramintracellular tract. infect site that almost A in can tends limited Infection be to in urethra. the to men

Presents greenish-yellow pain, Bartholin’s or glands. swollen a discharge, adnexal with pelvic and purulent dysuria, urethral the and a erythema Men discharge, experience of urethral meatus.

endometriosis, differential UTI, and salpingitis, pharyngitis, The tubo-ovarian abscess. vaginitis, includes PID, chlamydia,

pharynx, Gram stain for anus). gold urethra, any culture site standard (i.e., the is and cervix, or acid sent Nucleic cation tests penile/vaginal on amplif urine. can tissue be or from

septic and/or may rash, Disseminated disease monoarticular with tenosynovitis. arthritis, present

PO IM 1 × Ceftriaxone dose. or cefepime 1 (doxycycline macrolide or × days for Also chlamydia × dose). coinfection treat presumptive 7 effective prophylaxis. are Condoms Treat possible. sexual the partners or partner if resistance. emerging of because be Fluoroquinolones not used should

24 requires for Disseminated hours. least at ceftriaxone disease IV

Persistent infection 2.8-9). (see pain; infertility; with abscess infection rupture; disseminated tubo-ovarian Figure with gonococcal

pallidum, by a Treponema Caused spirochete. course AIDS disease progression. of the accelerate can

with see infection): a (10–90 (chancre; ulcer Presents 2.8-10). days painless after Figure ■1°

F 2.8-9. IGU E R gonococcal infection. Disseminated

erythematous on painful pustules Hemorrhagic, bases. (Reproduced, from permission, with

et al. Wolff K Synopsis of Dermatology, 5th Fitzpatrick’s Color Atlas & Clinical ed. New York:

Fig. McGraw-Hill, 2005: 27-17.) after on malaise, 2° with asymptomatic chancre): with diffuse, fever, (nonpruritic) and (4–8 palms. maculopapular weeks and symmetric, rash a low-grade headache, the generalized soles lymphadenopathy Presents mucous Highly infective condylomata include (see Figure eruptions patches or 2.8-11). lata 2° Meningitis, also hepatitis, nephropathy, involvement be and eye seen. may

infection): of year from syphilis 1° f of symptoms; latent of or to rst 2° (period end Early serology. No resolution

(period beyond rst the asymptomatic or Late infection No latent symptoms; of year): serology. f progress One-third to 3° syphilis.

2.8-10. FIGURE syphilis. 1°

ulcerated papule raised, and is a clean an indurated chancre scant with smooth, discharge. borders; The base; from Bondi (Reproduced, with EE. permission, Dermatology: Therapy, 1st and Diagnosis ed. Stamford, Appleton 1991: & CT: Lange, 394.)

2.8-11. FIGURE Condylomata lata.

Typical lesions the lata. heaped-up condylomata verrucous of appearance of K al. (Reproduced, from with permission, Wolff et & Atlas Synopsis Fitzpatrick’s Color ed. 5th Clinical Dermatology, of McGraw-Hill, 2005: York: New Fig. 27-27.) initial after appearing ■ gummas. destructive, manifestations 1–20 years with granulomatous 3° Presents infection): (late Robertson includes Neurosyphilis tabes accommodation to degeneration), (constricts light). Argyll but with not column dorsalis (posterior and meningitis, pupil reactive aortic fndings aneurysms, dilated aortic aortitis, aortic and root regurgitation. root, Cardiovascular include

■See 2.8-7. Table hepatitis), with VDRL HIV, HSV, use, drug and (mononucleosis, Viruses arthritis, seen are SLE/Leprosy. false Rheumatic positives fever/Rheumatoid Drugs/IV

TABLE 2.8-7.

microscopy (only Dark-f motile Identifes 2° and spirochetes eld lesions). 1° 1° disease. 60–75% sensitivity is VDRL/RPR only and Rapid but cheap, in false Many positives. and Sensitive specifc. FTA-ABS as a diagnostic Used test. 2° use. Sensitivity similar to and but FTA-ABS TPPAa easier to specifcity the Becoming of choice. test 2°

agglutination pallidum test. = T. particle a TPPA

and neurologic out suspected ■Neurosyphilis patient with in AIDS a be ruled RPR. symptoms any and should

Benzathine 1°/2°: penicillin IM day. × 1 14 doxycycline with patients Tetracycline for may or allergies. days × used be penicillin

3 × infection: Treat benzathine with weekly once penicillin Latent weeks.

be Treat IV; penicillin with prior to Neurosyphilis: patients therapy. should desensitized penicillin-allergic

of description a with along of treatment. See for lesions their and genital transmitted outline diagnosis sexually an 2.8-8 common Table

reaction. ﬂ Remember illness an the acute can ulike Jarisch-Herxheimer that syphilis treatment in of known result as

in males, females 80% cases. cultures more Affect and coli obtained E. are of than frequently pathogens. mnemonic the other PP See for SEEKS recent anatomic vesicoureteral of mellitus the and ux), abnormalities or antibiotic (DM), ref urologic or other previous UTIs instrumentation, (e.g., include presence factors immunosuppression, catheters BPH, use, diabetes Risk pregnancy. pyelonephritis,

with dysuria, pain, hematuria. suprapubic Present possibly and urgency, frequency, with poor may Children feeding, bed-wetting, present and fevers, urine. recurrent foul-smelling urethritis differential vaginitis, urethral acute prostatitis. syndrome, and or STDs, includes The

Diagnosed clinical by symptoms. transplant scheduled treatment In urinary absence warranted with patients renal pregnant surgery, only and the is for anatomical tract GU for those with symptoms, of anomalies, tracts, instrumented GU those children, patients. women,

c. and nitrites bacteria), and hematuria to sensitive 95% dipstick/UA: esterase marker also (a Urine specif WBCs) ↑ with marker pH seen. infections), (seen cystitis) 75% are (Proteus of up commonly ↑ is urine leukocyte ↑ of (a

and are organism/hpf (1 106 = bacteriuria organisms/mL) WBCs/hpf) 5 Microscopic analysis: suggestive. Pyuria (>

CFU/mL. Urine 105 standard > culture: is The gold

basis or an uoroquinolone with or on days, 3 Uncomplicated × × PO 7 f UTI: a Treat days. TMP-SMX outpatient nitrofurantoin Note to resistance been fuoroquinolones and that has increasing. TMP-SMX

as catheters, UTI but the antibiotics same above, men, renal instrumentation): Complicated transplant, (urinary days. for Administer obstruction, 7–14

mirabilis saprophyticus Proteus E. bugs— UTI Enterobacter Serratia Pseudomonas SEEKS coli S. Common pneumoniae PP Klebsiella

LE 2.8-8. AB T Genital Lesions Transmitted Sexually

mg Treatmentd well is 2.8-12) such or ower (1 myalgias, dark-f ulcer Spirochetes or Single No eld or DFA ulcers pink BID) Number red, Cryotherapy; days serum Penicillin 1–3 viral bodies) Tzanck beefy-red characteristic deep, Malaise, (1 Previously culture; a shallow 1 Yes IM or postexposure) symptoms and burning Vesicle BID) g signs cream rmation a with raised; Clinical weekly) Granulomatous for pruritus becomes biopsy or as multinucleated Calymmatobacterium microscopy; demarcated, Pruritus Acyclovir granulation a mm identifed shows Diffcult red weekly) g serology mm Appearance made fever Diagnosis trichloroacetic Regional 5–10 Clinical cells; caulif Papule for test or mm red, Papule 1–3 smear white, Figure tissue Papule 3 as (100 Doxycycline Irregular, (chancroid; lymphadenopathy or (condylomata clinical weeks topical exam, pallidum a grounds Papule or No conf giant with of 5-FU seen Size cultures; granulomatis. and (Donovan 1 Lesion adenopathy azithromycin vulvar T. exam; Yes azithromycin round, lesions necrotic Concurrent (100 white known Raised edge valacyclovir No 1–5 10–20 border mm rolled warts) on infection with under (chancre) and to Inguinal acid, pustule Multiple Regular, Doxycycline 3 by raised cm biopsy Pain (3–7 acuminata; weeks mg 1° Irregular, × agents × podophyllin, diagnosis multiple antibody Multiple Regular, see ulcer lesions genital by 85% caused Some herpes b of HSV-2. are and 11 with c warts; types 31 16, with genital cervical 18, are serotypes and are associated associated HPV cancer. 6 partners. For sexual all, d treat

2.8-12. FIGURE Chancroid.

ulcers. Multiple, painful with from Wolff (Reproduced, K permission, al. et Fitzpatrick’s Color

5th & ed. of Clinical Synopsis Dermatology, Atlas 2005: Fig. McGraw-Hill, York: New 27-31.)

patients: or asymptomatic UTI or × bacteruria days. with Pregnant 3–7 Treat nitrofurantoin cephalosporin symptomatic uoroquinolones. f Avoid culture with a Confrm clearance post-treatment. repeat

treated with initially and should Patients urosepsis with IV hospitalized be antibiotics. GNRs coverage include broader enterococcus. to or Consider resistant

given women may uncomplicated with recurrent Prophylactic antibiotics be UTIs. to Check prostatitis men. in for

of cystitis. pyelonephritis pathogens 85% result of cases Nearly same from the cause community-acquired that factors. have and Cystitis similar pyelonephritis risk

cystitis symptoms similar urinary upper ■Signs are but of tract disease. and to those show evidence of

and fever/chills, pain, ank include Symptoms ■ nausea/vomiting. f Dysuria, are also and frequency, possible. urgency

those culture: are ■UA and to similar WBC Results casts. but with of cystitis, urosepsis. rule cultures Send to blood out

common pregnancy. Pyelonephritis the of complication is serious medical most of patients develop Twenty pyelonephritis. untreated percent to bacteriuria thirty will with

antibiotics. in and pyelonephritis admit When with patient doubt, a IV administer

mental altered be patient with elderly considered any status. in Urosepsis must

two SIRS = more the of or following: 1.

< Temperature: hypothermia or 38°C Either or fever). > (i.e., 36°C

2.

20 breaths < on ABG. 32 or > Tachypnea: minute PaCO2 mmHg per

3.

HR 90 > bpm. Tachycardia:

4.

< or 4000 cells/mm3. 12,000 Leukocytosis/leukopenia: > cells/mm3 WBC

CBC: Reveals leukocytosis.

necessary. not In imaging is Imaging: general, therapy. adequate CT who and with of test and choice in the responding used out patients are to renal often the noninvasively, but obstruction calculi to becoming not be rule is diagnosis can function can confrm Ultrasound may scarring. In demonstrate recurrent renal cases, IVP

For patients for 10–14 treated an be may on days. cases, basis mild outpatient therapy. Fluoroquinolones frst-line are and uids f ↑ Encourage closely. monitor PO

present have with and antibiotics patients suspected complications to severe Admit are who have symptoms, administer vomiting, nausea or pregnant, bacteremia. IV medical serious or systemic and depending cephalosporins, inhibitors, carbapenem on may be Fluoroquinolones, used thirdor disease β-lactam/β-lactamase severity. and fourth-generation

bloodstream. the of or syndrome systemic by a induced infammatory the with toxins in Defned microbial presence as response invasion documented infection, (SIRS) with to due refers perfusion. Severe end-organ sepsis dysfunction poor sepsis to shock Septic refers organ and dysfunction hypotension from with sepsis to vasodilation. following: include Examples the

staphylococci exotoxins. uid loss 2° streptococci) to caused and Gram-shock (e.g., f by

Klebsiella, E. Gram-shock (e.g., caused (lipopolysaccharide). Proteus, to vasodilation Pseudomonas) and endotoxins coli, 2° by

H. uenzae. coli, monocytogenes, Listeria E. GBS, inﬂ Neonates:

pneumococcus, H. inﬂ uenzae, meningococcus. Children:

site aerobic infection). grambacilli, Gramcocci, the of anaerobes on presumed (dependent Adults:

S. aureus, lines: IV users/indwelling coagulase-Staphylococcus species. drug

uenzae, inﬂ Asplenic Pneumococcus, organisms). meningococcus (encapsulated H. patients:

onset status, tachypnea. abrupt mental chills, Presents fever and with of and tachycardia, altered is sepsis in end-organ dysfunction. Severe seen occurs shock. septic of Hypotension cases in

shock with typically and a is warm Septic shock skin extremities. warm cool with presents cardiogenic skin contrasts typically which extremities. shock, and with This

tests DIC suggest ecchymoses, coagulation cases). of Petechiae, abnormal or (2–3%

A diagnosis. clinical

cases), (↑ show creatinine, leukocytosis ↑ perfusion INR). with of of thrombocytopenia tissue ↓ LFTs), studies leukopenia abnormal (↑ or bands, ↑ evidence Labs coagulation (50% and

urine). sputum, obtain It CSF, critical is to wound, sites (e.g., blood, cultures appropriate all of

infection. site Imaging the aid in of establishing (CXR, etiology CT) or may

ICU required. be may admission aggressively IV with the source on and likely Treat pressors, f empiric antibiotics infection). (based uids, of

lines). catheter factors remove (e.g., Foley or underlying infected Treat

BP 1° to perfusion goal organs. to maintain end is The and

caused P. genus vivax, P. malariae) Plasmodium infected disease transmitted protozoal strains of P. (P. and A the falciparum, four ovale, Anopheles female by the by an of and bite mosquito. 24 hours number causes within deaths, highest morbidity P. has the onset. of of and symptom largest falciparum occasionally the travelers of Europe, through in Recent infected have southern areas. and States of endemic from parts United and immigrants eastern occurred mainly the outbreaks the and in arrival to should Travelers and repellent chemoprophylaxis areas nets bed minimize take exposure. use mosquito to and endemic

(> hours. and periodic with a 41°C), exposure occurring area, in Patients diaphoresis fever of chills, of sequential over malaria-endemic a history have 4–6 attacks four often Splenomegaly or days symptoms. after more appears of onset depending asymptomatic every are 2–3 attacks, between which recur Plasmodium on strain. days, often Patients the

Severely patients prostration, bleeding. consciousness, may present agitation, ill impaired hyperpyrexia, with and hyperventilation, lymphadenopathy, diagnosis. photophobia different or presence neck stiffness, The suggests of or rash, a additional

fatal essential be correct is because treatment. diagnosis often falciparum to can standard chloroquine resistant is strain P. the Timely and of

should for the be parasitemia. lms Wright-stained to f and determine sent microscopic well Giemsa-or of thin thick degree the as strain blood expert as evaluation including and febrile intervals during Specimens at for be three obtained should between eight-hour days, periods.

normochromic, normocytic anemia usually reticulocytosis. demonstrates CBC with

methods, fuorescent including more and detection resources allow, sensitive rapid serologic available, are methods, If antibody PCR. antigen tests

locations traveled emigrated recently patient considered differential Malaria for any to or be from presents has in tropical and fever. should the with who

P. ovale, P. vivax, and

malariae symptoms infection. months after cause to all initial P. years can

hypoglycemia. finger mental patient malaria to rule with in a a changes status stick out and Obtain

the of can be treated choice Plasmodium orally, infection ■Uncomplicated by with determined malarial medication strain. the led but increasing has to antimalarial been Chloroquine has resistance the standard medication,

have young adult fever, lymphadenopathy and mononucleosis. A who infectious may presents with sore throat, the of triad

The proliferation, atypical due but B-cell to the lymphocytosis are lymphocytes. predominantly EBV cells T in infection is

quinine doxycycline, mefoquine, including of or atovaquone, clindamycin halofantrine. other with the use artesunate, and medications,

treatment dormant forms, resistant chloroquine. of liver with include ovale are vivax hypnozoite P. to P. strains The which and life cycles P. the P. unknown eradicate an cases primaquine is liver. the strain, in of hypnozoites ovale, in Thus, or added vivax, to

as to treated parenteral (IV antimalarial oral medications regimens tolerated. with can transition be with quinidine) Severe infections for need medications. the proguanil/atovaquone as multiple eliminate (Malarone) combinations such Newer care. treated can Symptoms be supportive with

change malaria: status, in coma. hemorrhages, Cerebral Headache, mental signs, retinal neurologic convulsions, delirium,

hemolytic P. anemia: Severe associated with falciparum infection. Usually

renal hemoglobinuria). necrosis failure: blackwater urine to due tubular (dark Associated and Acute with fever

edema: Noncardiogenic Often by pulmonary overly rapid precipitated re-hydration.

hypoglycemia, Other: infected grambacteremia, secretory hepatopathy, dysrhythmias, birth diarrhea, and include of cardiac low lactic acute children mothers. complications in DIC, rate acidosis, a Additional

Most occurs young EBV usually due infection. commonly adult to acute in patients; including most f Transmission occurs often through exchange of uids, saliva. body

pharyngitis. and fever Presents with invariably persist months. illness may 3–6 for Fatigue initial accompanies and bilateral (especially maculopapular a cervical), Exam low-grade petechiae, reveal palatal and posterior generalized rash, fever, may lymphadenopathy and generalized splenomegaly, upper exudate edema. enlargement, tonsillar eyelid

are who misdiagnosed as carriers present their in streptococcal mononucleosis may having be of pharyngitis symptom oropharynx). strep pharyngitis of as with with group Patients A (30% patients infectious 1° asymptomatic their

pharyngitis) with EBV a drug-related streptococcal can maculopapular during cause Treatment (for ampicillin infection acute pruritic, prolonged, of rash. patients β-lactams of to discontinuation not ampicillin. with does and This rash remit will future sensitivity portend

viral HHV-6, includes The also and causes lymphoma. other HIV, differential toxoplasmosis, of CMV, hepatitis,

weeks the the few frst heterophil antibody in Diagnosed after test (may begin). be by (Monospot) symptoms sheep that horse The test. and are proliferating cells the that the antibody agglutinates B Monospot for produce RBCs EBV-infected a basis characteristic the

nucleosis can suspected with EBV-specif antibodies patients c ordered test. and mono Monospot in a be to due are are Infectious mononucleosis most and infection. EBV-antibody CMV that syndromes often Monospot HIV should other viral Acute and considered. be etiologies

reveals relative with thrombocytopenia lymphocytes. 10% > with CBC atypical T mild differential often and lymphocytosis

total reveals and bilirubin. mildly transaminases, usually alkaline phosphatase, elevated CMP

Treatment effective supportive, therapy. antiviral mostly no is as there is to anemia. severe severe airway autoimmune are due or indicated thrombocytopenia, hemolytic enlargement, tonsillar compromise for Corticosteroids

(particularly CNS meningitis, CN meningoencephalitis, encephalitis, palsies peripheral and syndrome. aseptic present infection: optic cranial or neuritis, Guillain-Barré myelitis, Can nerve transverse as VII),

Occurs rupture: 0.5% < Splenic cases. in of shoulder compromise. referred hemodynamic common or pain, in pain, and with abdominal More presents males,

with obstruction: airway Upper Treat steroids.

Ten develop patients of percent superinfection: Bacterial pharyngitis streptococcal secondarily.

hepatic necrosis: males. death cause males; in common affected of in common More the Fulminant most

the rst Autoimmune in f Occurs hemolytic anemia: weeks. during patients two 2% of . Coombs lasts 1–2 Mild anemia months. severe. if with Treat corticosteroids

Other: infection ulcerations, vasculitis. complications myocarditis genital pericarditis pneumonia include acute pleural with can interstitial or with fulminant), EBV be changes, (which hepatitis associated and nephritis, Rare effusion, with electrocardiographic

have that pharyngitis treatment. About one-third requires patients infectious streptococcal with of coexisting mononucleosis

(FUO) Fever Origin of Unknown

of remains 38.3°C or hospitalization. of three duration following that undiagnosed temperature least at outpatient A weeks’ three days three > of visits

fever, with and headache, myalgia, malaise. Presents The differential the includes following:

infective endocarditis), discussion osteomyelitis, Infectious: TB, (e.g., of organisms; abscess, HACEK occult endocarditis see catheter the infections. HIV CMV, patients, lymphoma. MAC, In or consider histoplasmosis,

hepatic renal Lymphomas, leukemias, carcinomas. and cell Neoplastic:

tissue disease, connective polyarteritis Autoimmune: disease, Still’s SLE, (including sarcoidosis). cryoglobulinemia, nodosa, granulomatous disease

fever, familial hepatitis, emboli, Pulmonary alcoholic Miscellaneous: drug

fever. fever, Mediterranean factitious ■ Undiagnosed (10–15%).

majority 60%). cases for cancer and the FUO account of infections Overall, of (> diseases for Autoimmune account ~15%. diseases rheumatic the one-third account for elderly, of cases. In

FUO symptoms not do antibiotic patients without other empiric require therapy.

With fever and rash, think—

Lyme the North is in disease most America. disease common vector-borne

presence and take detailed multiple with fever CBC history stain PPD. differential, a travel); exposures culture, obtain culture, occupational, dietary, sputum the family, CXR, ESR, sexual, of UA blood social, [pets/animals], and cultures, and Labs: (including and Confrm a and Gram tests) serologies/antigen suspected. obtained infectious etiology an (ANA, Specifc viral autoimmune if is or can RF, tests cultures, viral be

of be CT in true done the chest and should workup Imaging: the abdomen of FUO. a early out Rule drug fever. yield. Invasive testing (marrow/liver low biopsy) is generally and Laparoscopy tests higher second-line (after yield colonoscopy are CT). as

Stop medications. unnecessary has etiology been severely antibiotics patients to Give until determined. ill the empiric response. there antibiotics Stop no if is

an a of < oral a cells/mm3). patient 38.3°C single neutrophil ≥ ≥ Defned 38.0°C 1 as absolute temperature (101°F) in a ≥ hour count (100.4°F) of or 500 neutropenic temperature (i.e., of for

in postchemotherapy). cancer days Hx/PE: nadir chemotherapy patients Common (neutropenic undergoing 7–10 absent. may be or minimal Infammation

Dx:

cultures, sputum, including wound. urine, appropriate blood, and Send testing fungi, mycobacteria. and viruses, for Consider

exam avoid the a of thorough but in thrombocytopenic. exam, risk Conduct patient a light the physical bleeding if rectal is

stool and serum a transaminases; and lesion, blood, creatinine, with BUN, differential, Obtain cultures. CBC urine, order

scan to for CT infection. or respiratory with CXR for symptoms; occult abscesses other patients evaluate

therapy Figure (see 2.8-13). antibiotic Empiric Tx: of factors Routine indicated. use is colony-stimulating not fevers therapy, antifungal antibiotic start 72 hours If persist treatment. after despite

spirochete the burgdorferi. A Borrelia disease caused tick-borne by white-footed deer on Usually and by the Ixodes summer mice. ticks months, carried during seen white-tailed and Northeast, c to coast. the northern Endemic Midwest, Pacif and

rash and/or onset malaise, of headache, Presents with fatigue, fever, Hx/PE: arthralgias. with myalgias, the after a Infection occurs 18 tick for hours. > usually feeds

a papule (early migrans is ■1° and localized days as expands erythematous site macule the tick-feeding slowly small over to that disease): at begins found or Erythema weeks. clearing or often with be (“bull’s raised, border eye”). may central The macular

PO needed days + Vancomycin after (outpatient) 3–5 (< Reassess Fever Neutropenia IV Risk chemo? 38.3°C) needed High-dose Vancomycin neutrophils/mm3) 500 (≥ Intermediate/High not malignancy? Hematologic Neutropenia 14 days? > Risk + penicillin, Solid as ± or Low + or tumors (adults only) chemotherapy? Combination ceftazidine, Therapy: cefepime, Ciprofloxacin outpatient or aminoglycoside conventional Aminoglycosides Vancomycin with amoxicillin/clavulanate cefepime, Monotherapy: antipseudomonal, Cefepime, carbapenem carbapenem + ceftazidime, treated ceftazidime, carbapenem Minimal comorbidity? < days? 7 Neutropenia

F 3. 2.8-1 E R IGU fever Empiric treatment neutropenic for a patient. algorithm

heart and (third-degree disseminated (e.g., neurologic (early 2° palsy), abnormalities polyarthropathies, disease): with block). and/or Presents Bell’s conduction migratory phenomena meningitis myocarditis,

and loss disease): (late change). (memory encephalitis 3° mood subacute Arthritis and

follows: migrans is Clinical diagnosis Dx: as of erythema

or Western rm indeterminate to ELISA a the blot Use conf ELISA. and Western blot: but A denotes specif ELISA for disease. c exposure not active is rates false without high Western blots positives. ELISA have sent of

obtain; Extremely done. to diffcult culture/PCR: not routinely Tissue

ceftriaxone. advanced disease disease Tx: CNS doxycycline (e.g., with more with early Treat disease) and arthritic or or with endemic bite therapy rash, a tick empiric characteristic acquired patients the an Consider in arthralgias, area. for bite Prevent avoidance. tick with

Rickettsia disease by the tick variabilis). and A (Dermacentor caused by American rickettsii dog carried endothelial the The invades vessel of vasculitis. causes small lining and capillaries organism

Presents and with fever, headache, malaise, Hx/PE: rash. initially The it characteristic Figure as 2.8-14). and (beginning wrists centrally on (see spreads rash macular is becomes petechial/purpuric but the ankles) in cases. or status severe mental develop DIC may Altered

immunof Dx: be with of diagnosis uorescence indirect Clinical confrmed biopsy. should rash

Tx: (for multidrug-resistant organisms). Doxycycline chloramphenicol or

wane. arthritis can Lyme minimally very can and and be inﬂ subtle ammatory wax and

Mountain on and spreads starts ankles fever the spotted then centrally. and Rocky wrists

2.8-14. FIGURE Mountain fever. Rocky spotted

a macular that evolve will petechial will These lesions into centrally. rash erythematous spread et Daniel published (Courtesy MD, in of al. Noltkamper, Knoop as KJ 2nd ed. Medicine, Atlas of Emergency 382.) York: McGraw-Hill, 2002: New

left untreated. The fatal can condition rapidly if be awaiting clinical high, treatment is suspicion while If testing. begin tick bites. avoiding Prevent by

Causes of eye: red

also room fungal, common A of often emergency is inf or or parasitic, can most setting, complaint ammation viral chemical. but bacterial be conjunctiva allergic, the the in as may well infectious that It is allergic to conjunctivitis, differentiate identify conditions from essential causes other as vision-threatening of potentially vision-threatening etiologies other to mimic conjunctivitis. or the etiologies conjunctivitis. for infectious common 2.8-9 Table See of

to paranasal endophthalmitis sinuses; to and due blindness. Commonly can lead of the infection (including inﬂ by (in streptococci, uenzae MRSA), children). staphylococci and caused Usually H. and patients, in Rhizopus and are In the differential. mucormycosis immunocompromised diabetic

ocular acuity. acute-onset EOM, Hx/PE: and ↓ pain, with proptosis, fever, Presents ↓ visual of for Look trauma history or ocular a sinusitis. Pala

2.8-9. T LE AB of Common Conjunctivitis Infectious Causes

purulent body Haemophilus, Foreign discharge. Staphylococci, Bacterial sensation, Moraxella Pseudomonas, streptococci, and culture stain if Gram severe. drops/ ointment. Antibiotic emergency! gonorrhoeae An N. lead can to Corneal involvement blindness. perforation and diplococci. shows Gram gram-intracellular stain ceftriaxone, PO IM oxacin. ciprofoxacin of or if Inpatient treatment complicated. epithelial and entropion. trachomatis childhood, trichiasis, A–C corneal Recurrent scarring, in C. keratitis cause leading preventable blindness of The worldwide. chlamydial Giemsa cultures. stain, weeks. 3–4 erythromycin × tetracycline, or Azithromycin, Adenovirus lymphadenopathy. ocular irritation, preauricular watery (most severe discharge, common) Viral Copious epidemics. Occurs in Contagious; self-limited. supervision with an of corticosteroids ophthalmologist. Topical

or mucosal tal sinusitis and/or Rhizopus. or nasal ethmoid coexisting maxillary with suggests mucormycosis ulceration

Dx: clinical. Mostly involvement). rule scan Blood and CT fuid tissue (to culture; and intracranial orbital out abscess

Admit. Tx: an Immediate antibiotics; ophthalmologic/ENT consult. IV request surgery. may formation Abscess necessitate B Diabetic if associated patients amphotericin (often surgical ment is and sinus with thrombosis) Rhizopus should or with treated debride be immunocompromised Mucor and diagnosed. cavernous

external etiologic Pseudomonas canal, pools) poorly ammation the (from inf also auditory of agents. “swimmer’s common most known An as Enterobacteriaceae chlorinated the ear.” are and grow presence of Both excess moisture. the in

Presents pain, possible with and pruritus, Hx/PE: discharge. purulent edematous (unlike reveals canal. the and Exam of erythematous an movement ear pain and with media) tragus/pinna otitis discussion the See for a otitis media. of chapter Pediatrics

Dx: A clinical diagnosis. Gram stain a if culture are helpful fungal etiology is and suspected. if is patient the CT appearing. scan toxic

is antibiotic often therapy. emergency an Neisseria inpatient ocular conjunctivitis requiring parenteral

at Diabetics malignant risk externa. are otitis for

eardrops. and Antibiotic ■ Tx: steroid systemic disease. in patients Use antibiotics severe with for Diabetics skull risk at otitis the osteomyelitis thus malignant IV are and and hospitalization and externa base require of antibiotics.

pain the of movement with tragus/pinna.

the bacterial other infectious causes. Infection 2° endocardium, of to or usually especially valve. the commonly heart valves, the Most mitral affects abuse; factors prosthetic and congenital, immunosuppression. disease; heart include Risk valves; heart rheumatic, IV valvular or drug are follows: Etiologies as

history IV acute and of of in bacterial causative aureus S. methicillin-sensitive agent 80% patients in endocarditis with drug (both The methicillin-resistant): cases > a abuse. of

common The streptococci: sub-acute Viridans for endocarditis. most bacterial pathogens left-sided

in endocarditis. The prosthetic infecting organism most valve Coagulase-Staphylococcus: common

S. bovis: is GI bovis endocarditis coexisting associated with Streptococcus malignancy.

for species: Account of Aspergillus most and cases Candida fungal endocarditis. organ catheters, transplantation, malignancy, and indwelling include drug Predisposing factors AIDS, long-term IV IV use. causes 2.8-10 the lists endocarditis. Table of

(fever/FUO, loss, are common Constitutional fatigue). symptoms weight

heart murmur. Exam a reveals involvement valve is users > IV commonly aortic non–IV valve valve (tricuspid The found right-sided in valve valve). affected more than > users; in is drug more aortic mitral the mitral drug

toe embolic f embolic from nodules the Roth’s 2.8-16), lesions peripheral see (subungual (small and nodes spots tender also splinter pads), phenomena see seen. (retinal hemorrhages), other Janeway focal Figure and stroke, are defcits Osler’s neurologic Figure nger (small, on 2.8-15), petechiae; hemorrhages hemorrhages;

2.8-10. TABLE Causes Endocarditis of

(native (IV S. Enterococcus prognosis). (GI (prosthetic S. Viridans aureus gonorrhoeae S. S. streptococci abuse) valve) N. epidermidis bovis insult) (poor Fungi Cancer valve) drug pneumoniae cause valves; infarcts. emboli can seed cerebral Mets Cardiobacterium Brucella valve) to (autoantibody Actinobacillus burnetii endocarditis uenzae Libman-Sacks Coxiella Kingella Bartonella Eikenella parainﬂ Haemophilus

FIGURE 2.8-15. Janeway lesions.

sole leads macules of Peripheral a to to embolization cluster Janeway the known as erythematous lesions. Army et published and Medical Dermatology, Hall KJ Medical Knoop USAF (Courtesy of Antonio, al. Center in San of Brooke TX, Wilford as Center, the Department 2nd Emergency Atlas of ed. Medicine, York: New 2002: 384.) McGraw-Hill,

Diagnosis by (see criteria clinical and the Table symptoms, 2.8-11). guided risk Duke is factors,

ESR and ↑ shift; with left leukocytosis CRP. CBC and

antibiotic ■Early vancomycin or treatment empiric nafcillin IV includes gentamicin. + or organism. depending ceftriaxone are choices suspected alternative Ampicillin/sulbactam the on Tailor is antibiotics once causative known. the agent sometimes is Acute valve necessary. replacement The

FIGURE 2.8-16. hemorrhages. Splinter

of Note sub-acute bacterial from the to plate, due the hemorrhages endocarditis. nail distal emboli along splinter aspect the MD, in et Pathology, Armed Bethesda, Forces as the Knoop Institute al. published KJ of (Courtesy of Medicine, Atlas ed. of 2nd Emergency 2002: 384.) McGraw-Hill, York: New

2.8-1 AB LE T 1. Criteria of Duke the Diagnosis for Endocarditis

for Endocarditis: surgery— indications

local abnormalities Suppurative complications with conduction

aneurysm Resection of mycotic

fungi) therapy antimicrobial Ineffective vs. (e.g.,

ulcer and an anthrax-associated with pruritic then black papule a The eschar. halo forms an edematous

persistent organism, of culture typical Coxiella with a separate two any least single for cultures At or a blood organism, burnetii. bacteremia echocardiography endocardial Evidence or (via transesophageal involvement of murmur). new

factors. risk Predisposing ≥ 38.3°C. Fever infarcts, septic emboli, Septic aneurysm, Vascular mycotic phenomena:

Janeway lesions. Glomerulonephritis, Immunologic nodes. Osler’s phenomena: Roth’s spots. does meet criteria. not Microbiological that evidence major

is for prosthetic valve endocarditis prognosis poor. for PUS mnemonic RIVER for surgery. indications the See

or high-risk valve). in work endocarditis previous disease antibiotic before valvular dental with with (e.g., prophylaxis a those patients prosthetic ■Give

gram-bacterium by Caused Bacillus the anthracis. spore-forming products. wool, individuals Its handle incidence veterinarians, rare, an infection bone meal animal hair, occupational is who natural hazard is for and farmers, or but hides, biological weapon. Also a inhalation GI can cause deadly), (most (most common), anthracis B. or anthrax. cutaneous

Presents skin after penetration of spores. days and exposure Cutaneous: 1–7 edematous that ulcer and regular, a lesion a raised with by enlarges pruritic begins and as form satellite round, The to an edge. surrounded papule halo an bulbus/lesion a also lymphadenopathy characteristic. is Regional a into evolves within days. lesion eschar The black 7–10

with fever, hypoxia, exposure), after due symptoms Presents mediastinitis. hypotension, Inhalational: days dyspnea, pneumonia or to classically hemorrhagic of (1–3

of after GI: bloody dysphagia, the present and diarrhea, poorly pain. Occurs nausea/vomiting, can meat; cooked, with abdominal ingestion contaminated

for test (widened mediastinum, the infltrates). CXR is disease sensitive most pleural effusions, inhalational and show stain chains Gram nonmotile of ulcer exudate Aerobic of culture bacilli. short also Antibody diagnosis. tests the confrming are in useful

inhalational neck. or Ciprof additional oxacin least the at face, frst-line disease disease or ■ one therapy two for doxycycline of or are for head, cutaneous or plus days 14 antibiotics penicillin; resistance Many for disease. inhalational β-lactamases amoxicillin as agents strains longer to are therefore, penicillin express that no recommended single confer and

for days. ■For treat disease, 7–10 cutaneous prophylaxis Postexposure oxacin) should prevent to days. for inhalation 60 be continued anthrax (ciprof

bones) or seeding of long due is children bodies). most drug whereas Bone hematogenous the (20% spread infection tissue to cases) cases) and 2° (80% a soft adults, to marrow in more (metaphyses in infection common IV direct bone infection users of of (vertebral is from common in outlined pathogens are Common Table 2.8-12.

joint. limited bone with tenderness adjacent warmth, with of erythema, and along Presents localized swelling, and pain the motion (fevers, may be purulent chills) symptoms Systemic and drainage present.

ESR 100), levels. ↑ WBC count, and CRP Labs: (> Blood be may . cultures

Imaging:

may often 10–14 days. elevation but initially are X-rays within periosteal show scans Bone for osteomyelitis specif are sensitive but are city. also and used lack

will soft in (test MRI ↑ signal marrow choice) of associated and show bone tissue the infection.

and aspiration culture. made by Gram with diagnosis stain is bone Defnitive through Clinical is diagnosis suffcient, a soft to the carries tissue risk of bone usually aspiration by made as probing infection.

AB 2.8-1 T 2. LE in Common Pathogens Osteomyelitis

are for no anthrax. and recommended of as amoxicillin single longer the disseminated treatment Penicillin agents ciproﬂ one Treat oxacin other with two antibiotics. or plus

tissue associated decubitus abuse. IV chronic peripheral ulcers, soft with vascular and drug diabetes, Osteomyelitis injuries, penetrating is disease,

S. Most replacement Pseudomonas, Sickle aureus, epidermidis aureus S. Diabetic wound S. anaerobes cell S. or user Foot Hip people Polymicrobial, S. Chronic Enterobacteriaceae drug Salmonella disease aureus, IV streptococci, Pseudomonas Pseudomonas, puncture Pseudomonas aureus

osteomyelitis treated Diabetic targeting gramorganisms should and antibiotics with anaerobes. be

followed × antibiotics 4–6 necrotic, by weeks. IV bone Surgical of infected debridement organism and stain. selection suspected Empiric based on antibiotic is the Gram

(for ampicillin/sulbactam, aureus); or oxacillin/ (for nafcillin S. ciprofoxacin, vancomycin Consider ciprofoxacin or + gram-bacteria). or methicillin-sensitive clindamycin MRSA); ceftriaxone (for

osteomyelitis, septic Chronic arthritis. sepsis, with to draining squamous osteomyelitis ulcer). Long-standing carcinoma chronic lead (Marjolin’s sinus a eventually tract cell may

injuries commonly Table the presentation outlines and affect treatment of adults. 2.9-1 orthopedic that

f of fractures. contracture ngers compartment Volkmann’s to wrist supracondylar caused syndrome is due the and by

numbness exion aching maneuver: < in f and wrists seconds. Phalen’s in placing 60 the reproduces

in at the over nerve the Tinel’s elicits tingling median nerve wrist sign: the distribution. median tapping

confined space ■↑pressure nerve, a that compromises tissue within soft and perfusion. muscle, injury) compartment or anterior the in lower leg to to and primarily (fracture forearm of the compartment. muscle the trauma 2° Occurs affected

with Presents motion physical paresthesias, pallor, pain the and and passive to proportion findings; pain with toes; and of poikilothermia, fingers pulselessness, out Hx/PE: paralysis. of late. occurs Pulselessness

pressures pressure mmHg); measure Measure pressures (usually ≥ Dx: – compartment 30 delta compartment (diastolic pressure).

↓ Immediate perfusion. ↑ fasciotomy and to tissue Tx: pressures

leading of carpal and wrist median paresthesias, or space by pain, caused the ↓ size the occasionally of tunnel, the to paralysis. nerve at Entrapment of thyroid or be Can overuse diabetes ﬂexors, by mellitus, dysfunction. precipitated wrist middle-aged Commonly pregnant occurs in women. and

the proximal the of hand with forearm. aching over and area Presents thenar extend may shoulder. the Pain to

is in distribution. nerve seen a Paresthesia numbness median or

or at Symptoms worsen wrists or the ﬂexion night in extension. when held are

jars. frequently report to objects may or inability dropping Patients open

shows atrophy CTS (if thenar Exam is long-standing).

Tinel’s are maneuver and . sign Phalen’s

can testing used EMG to be confirm. clinical A although diagnosis,

day at night a if neutral and the in during position possible. Splint the wrist Administer NSAIDs.

the corticosteroid can canal. Conservative carpal injection include of treatment

from may benefit aids. Work-related ergonomic CTS

of usually after delivery. pregnancy resolves CTS

intolerable Surgical the treatment, of fixed symptoms. sensory a accepted for is carpal weakness, or thenar loss, tunnel widely particularly release

loss hand motor strength, and sensation, of skills. fine Permanent

AB T 2.9-1. LE Common Orthopedic Adult Injuries

dislocation axillary Anterior dislocation: at the risk. Shoulder Most common; and artery are nerve rotation. the Patients in external abduction hold arm slight and injure radial Rare; and electrocutions; can seizure associated the with Posterior dislocation: artery. adduction Patients hold and internal arm the in rotation. a and Reduction sling followed swath. by Recurrent surgical repair. may dislocations need internally (“dashboard injury”). common occurs rotated, dislocation a adducted Most directed dislocation: Posterior force via posteriorly fexed, (> on an 90%); Hip hip avascular and with necrosis of Associated (AVN). a risk sciatic injury nerve Anterior the nerve. Can dislocation: injure obturator pillow/ bracing. followed by Closed abduction reduction reduction. with Evaluate CT scan after the Involves radius. fracture Colles’ distal onto leading a outstretched results a an from fall displaced, to angulated Often fracture. dorsally dorsally hand, and Commonly elderly in children. the seen (osteoporosis) open is long-arm by the Closed a application intra-articular. cast; followed reduction reduction fracture if of carpal most The bone. commonly Scaphoid fracture fractured two the fracture. weeks for May take show to radiographs tenderness Assume box. a if anatomical in the there fracture is snuff cast. Thumb spica present, or If treat navicular displacement is with nonunion reduction. open from With may result scaphoid of fractures, AVN f third ow. proximal blood disruption the fracture Fracture ffth metacarpal Boxer’s of neck. to a a fst (e.g., closed punching of Due forward wall). trauma fracture if excessively pinning angulated. reduction gutter splint; and ulnar percutaneous Closed is the irrigation, If infection skin and treat with (covering human oral surgical Eikenella). assume antibiotics by is broken, IV and pathogens debridement, Humerus Direct fracture trauma. wrist have and drop radial 2.9-1). thumb Figure loss (see abduction of to nerve leading palsy May coaptation sling. splint vs. and cast Hanging-arm bracing. Functional arm resulting self-defense shaft blunt Ulnar fracture from against fracture” “Nightstick object. a with the fxation if cantly internal Open reduction signif and displaced. (ORIF) fracture proximal the fracture with subluxation ulna head. radial Diaphyseal the of Monteggia’s of head. diaphyseal fracture (due the blood reduction poor ORIF supply) to shaft closed fracture of radial and of the

AB T LE 2.9-1. Injuries Adult Common Orthopedic (continued)

fracture Femoral trauma. Direct in with platelets. petechiae, fat fever, hypoxia, status, mental and change which emboli, Beware dyspnea, ↓ present of nailing the of femur. Intramedullary open and fractures. debride Irrigate Tibial Direct fracture trauma. compartment for syndrome. Watch vs. nailing. Casting intramedullary ↑ OR owing the to in An taken be Open orthopedic emergency; hours patients infection to must 6 < risk. fractures repair emergently OR to fracture. Treat prophylaxis. with tetanus and antibiotics shot. rif tendon a e a sudden like Presents rupture Achilles “pop” with More with likely conditioning. physical ↓ plantar gastrocnemius exion on exion). Thompson’s shows Exam plantar f (pressure the foot absent f limited to test and leading a for long weeks. leg cast surgically six followed by Treat injuries Knee

of distal fracture with Diaphyseal the the radioulnar of joint. radius dislocation blow radius. direct a the to Results from distal to reduce of radioulnar supination ORIF the of radius the casting the and fractured joint. forearm in

↑ risk osteoporosis. with a and rotated leg. Presents externally with shortened

with femoral AVN, an Associated ↑ neck DVTs. and risk of nonunion, Displaced fractures:

and Present edema, with instability, knee hematoma.

ACL:

noncontact or forced to an Results impact from extended twisting knee. a mechanism, hyperextension,

and anterior tests. Lachman drawer

Rule a or injury. MCL out meniscal

PCL:

hyperextension. from forced Results

posterior test. drawer

Meniscal tears:

acute Result twisting a elderly degenerative in an or from injury tear patients.

present. Clicking or locking be may

and tenderness shows McMurray’s Exam a test. joint line

of neck. pinning parallel the with femoral ORIF in fractures Displaced hemiarthroplasty. require a hip may elderly patients

the DVTs. likelihood to of ↓ Anticoagulate

and meniscal MCL/LCL usually conservative. of is tears Treatment

of surgical hamstring patellar generally tendons. Treatment with injuries is from ACL or graft the

is PCL repair reserved competitive for Operative highly athletes.

respond patients signifcant older tears Operative treatment. to whose symptoms do meniscal conservative is not for repair patients younger with or

E IGU F R 2.9-1. condyle the humerus. of fracture Lateral

from HB. Skinner permission, (Reproduced, with & ed. Treatment Diagnosis Orthopedics, in 2nd Current Lange, CT: & 2000: Stamford, 572.) Appleton

trauma, inf or bursa infection, ammatory Inf ammation of repetitive by use, systemic the disease. a serves buffer synovial attened between of a filled amount bursa protective as and bones a ﬂuid sac ﬂ overlapping that muscles. is A with small Common of trochanteric, bursitis subacromial, infrapatellar and bursae. sites prepatellar, olecranon, include common more superficial is bursae). bursae and Septic prepatellar, infrapatellar bursitis (olecranon, in

have may patients with inﬂ edema, tenderness, motion of trauma localized or a ↓ range (ROM), history Presents ammatory disease. erythema; and of

suspected; Needle indicated if labs is is or imaging aspiration needed. septic is no bursitis

heat elevation, rest, treatment Conservative includes ice, NSAIDs. and and

can suspected). be bursitis considered is injection Intrabursal if septic (contraindicated corticosteroid

treated of be antibiotics. Septic bursitis 7–10 days with should

are f uoroquinolones Oral

ammatory bone an risk condition An associated function. pain at insertions tendinous of associated characterized by into inf impaired or with with swelling ↑ and tendinitis. occurs It rupture tendon commonly

lower back pain Most is rest is contraindicated. bed mechanical;

> loss Red pain, tone. and anal 6 back f severe pain, constitutional 50, age sphincter include > history, for cancer ags lower of pain of previous symptoms, weeks

the patellar, tendons. tibial, in wrist Achilles iliotibial extensor, biceps, and band, posterior supraspinatus, an is cause level. most the includes ↑ activity and Overuse in work-related or common activities

resisted worsens and of the pain a with affected Presents with tendinous group. strength that at insertion stress testing muscle repetitive

the tendinitis worsens elbow) Wrist resisted dorsiﬂexion tennis ﬂexor with wrist. epicondylitis, (lateral or of

diagnosis. A clinical of is there a a radiograph history if Consider trauma.

for first 24–48 with hours. ice rest and Treat apply NSAIDs; the

or Consider immobilization. splinting

has subsided. Begin strengthening once pain exercises

of lidocaine peritendinous injection fails, conservative consider If treatment and corticosteroids. Never risk the ↑ rupture. inject of view in Achilles of the tendon repetitive injection. Avoid

outlines sensory the reﬂex, deficits associated. motor, back is which and 2.9-2 Table low pain with

sprain. degenerative trauma, or changes, include or neck/back Causes strain Most at (95%) in the lumbar L4–L5 and region, L5–S1. especially common

of preceded usually months severe, Presents LBP, aching, several pain. “discogenic” of with by sudden electricity-like onset

older and Common men. middle-aged among

Exacerbated or coughing). (e.g., Valsalva intra-abdominal by ↑ pressure

paresthesias, contractions, spasms. sciatica, atrophy, with or Associated muscle weakness,

AB LE 2.9-2. T Back Sensory Motor Deficits and in Pain

L4 dorsifexion (tibialis of leg. Foot Medial L5 aspect anterior) the S1 lower Patellar hallucis of and dorsifexion None leg. (extensor eversion the Dorsum lower longus), toe of (peroneus the foot Big aspect lateral muscles) foot extension fexion maximus). Plantar (gastrocnemius/soleus), hip (gluteus foot. aspects Plantar Achilles and the of lateral

specific). sensitive but ↑pain straight raise (highly leg A passive not

not pain straight raise crossed ↑ A (highly sensitive). but leg specific herniations equina Large midline can cauda syndrome. cause

other of an and compression Obtain (e.g., causes radiograph back infection, if a pain trauma, suspected plain fracture). ESR are

or neurologic rapidly a progressing severe stat or a MRI for equina Order syndrome deficit. for cauda

management. to an Order MRI if are conservative refractory symptoms herniation disk may show MRI (see 2.9-2). Figure

in in within doses, local cases. physical four therapy, resolution heat weeks of 80% and lead scheduled NSAIDs to

block benefit. may Epidural nerve or be of

are for cauda discectomy. syndrome Severe indications evolving deficits and neurologic equina or rapidly

roots. spinal compression or the nerve leading to of canal, the lumbar Narrowing cervical of due degenerative middle-aged in or typically disease; joint elderly patients. to Most occurs commonly

legs, with neck and the pain and pain, ■Presents buttocks that to radiates numbness/weakness. leg back

and to pain. and the breast, can back metastasize vertebrae cancer prostate cause Lung,

impotence, incontinence), dysfunction a are consistent Bowel ow surgical is (urinary cauda and syndrome, or overf bladder which anesthesia with emergency. equina saddle-area

2.9-2. FIGURE herniation. Disk

MRI reveals L5–S1. of and L4–L5 herniations with from HB. (Reproduced, Skinner permission, ed. & 1st Treatment Diagnosis Orthopedics, Current in Appleton 1995: Lange, & CT: Stamford, 186.)

is bone tumor common benign most osteochondroma. The

cramping (pseudoor neurogenic with at and is Leg claudication). worse walking with rest, standing,

the fexion and hips at with Symptoms improve bending forward.

that disk show space and spondylolisthesis, hypertrophy, degenerative include canal. changes a Radiographs leading narrowed narrowing, to spinal facet

stenosis. CT shows MRI spinal or

abdominal muscle moderate: Mild NSAIDs strengthening. and to

can Epidural provide corticosteroid injections relief. Advanced:

will may many symptoms. of have success, patients a significant Refractory: but recurrence Surgical achieve laminectomy short-term

tumor common most second malignant of (after bone The 1° multiple myeloma). and femur, the to distal metaphyseal the humerus; regions in occur Tends lungs. tibia, proximal of often the metastasizes proximal to preceded Some cases disease. Paget’s by are Risk gender factors and 20– 30. include male age

worse night. intractable eventually progressive that is and at Presents as pain

sweats symptoms be and may loss, Constitutional weight such night as fever, present.

over may seen. Erythema and tumor the be the site enlargement of

vs. Paget’s disease. discussion a Endocrinology osteosarcoma for the of See chapter

of or contrast 2.9-3)—in end to is diaphyseal osteosarcoma Figure the which “sunburst multilayered the show “onion for Codman’s pattern” formation bone at of triangle sarcoma. lesion) Ewing’s skinning,” (periosteal new Radiographs the (see classic a

staging MRI invasion) for and facilitate and planning (soft bony surgery. tissue CT and

postoperative chemotherapy ifosfamide). Limb-sparing cisplatin, surgical (e.g., doxorubicin, methotrexate, preand and procedures

be necessary. may Amputation

A chronic, common, synovial noninﬂ ammatory arthritis the joints. of of osteophyte and the deterioration the surfaces. joint formation bone at Characterized articular by cartilage a joint include of obesity, history, Risk family history trauma. and a factors

FIGURE 2.9-3. Osteosarcoma.

neoplastic of the girl. a bone in of formation femur “Sunburst” 15-year-old appearance tumor. to owing size of the required was Amputation the permission, HB. (Reproduced, with from Skinner in & Current 2nd Diagnosis Orthopedics, Treatment ed. 2000: CT: Appleton Lange, & Stamford, 272.)

with but pain with and rest. improves with and ↓ that worsens ROM, initially bearing Presents crepitus, activity weight 30 lasts stiffness minutes. for Morning < Stiffness (“gelling”). rest of is also after periods experienced

subchondral Figure narrowing, 2.9-4). subchondral cysts bone Radiographs sclerosis, joint osteophytes, (see space show and severity correlate with Radiograph does not symptomatology.

Synovial 2000 and ﬂuid, a < cells/μL. normal WBC count shows straw-colored viscosity, ﬂuid

Physical and NSAIDs. therapy, weight reduction, corticosteroid may temporary injections provide Intra-articular relief. joint cases. arthroplasty) hip/knee total (e.g., replacement Consider advanced in

FIGURE 2.9-4. Osteoarthritis.

MCP. osteophytes, show involving radiographs subchondral degenerative joint the of joints, narrowing, and the space Plain sparing cysts DIP and PIP with (Reproduced, from with permission, USMLERx.com.)

after trauma. dysfunction, usually by A occurring pain function accompanied loss and syndrome autonomic of known Formerly reﬂ sympathetic ex dystrophy. as → The and has phase dystrophic phase. sympathetic underactivity denervation three phases: atrophic → acute disease

distribution. nonanatomic a injury, Diffuse the pain of out in proportion often occurs initial to

the to at any time initial Pain occur can relative injury.

of affected seen. function the limb is of Loss

ﬂ soft occurs by Sympathetic dysfunction and tissue, changes. or may skin, be blood ow documented

Skin growth and or ↑ nail may temperature, ↓. growth, hair Edema be present. may

may growth, be objective hair clinical temperature, skin nail or changes but evidence A growth diagnosis, of in present.

medications oral TCAs, include and calcitonin NSAIDs, gabapentin, consistently (no corticosteroids, pregabalin, Medications effective). low-dose are

modalities ROM ice, desensitization exercises helpful. may as therapy gentle and Physical heat, techniques, be such

relieve may symptoms. blockade Chemical sympathetic

is appropriate complicated a cases. chronic for specialist Referral to pain

axial absence in joint chronic of tissue skeletal the soft centrally A mediated pain disorder pain. pain and characterized by is absent. notably Inﬂammation

sleep in disorders, Most women age; Hx/PE: and of years fog”). depression, associated disorders with common (“fibro anxiety, cognitive 30–50 IBS,

of be diagnosis (≥ diffuse points tender 11 Multiple over axial the all four body and 18), present quadrants Figure Dx: skeleton (see must 2.9-5). for tender or presence non-fibromyalgiaassociated 11 pain The is syndrome. of known < tender as myofascial of points points 18

therapy proven gabapentin, application, heat Antidepressants relaxants, hydrotherapy). physical SSRI/TCA and (an efficacy), Tx: pregabalin, muscle combination has (stretching, narcotics. Avoid

monoarticular acute Recurrent crystals monosodium urate metabolism. resulting due to deposition urate attacks intra-articular of of from of arthritis disorders status gender, Risk factors in postmenopausal and male females. obesity, include

patient sudden ■Presents of onset with that can from excruciating pain joint awaken the sleep.

R E 2.9-5. IGU F points characteristic fibromyalgia. of Tender

paraLLel when to the appear yeLLow Gout crystals condenser.

hyperuricemia: tumor turnover psoriasis) myelodysplasia, cell Causes lysis, (hemolysis, ↑ of crisis, blast

red Dehydration Diabetes insipidus meat, Diet (e.g., ↑ Cyclosporine

gout is a most early and chemotaxis Colchicine effective limited by inhibits during therapeutic f are (use neutrophil narrow window). a used when is

MTP wrists; joint the midfoot, hips knees, the generally Most (podagra) and shoulders are frst ankles, the and commonly spared. affects and

are Joints swollen, erythematous, and exquisitely tender.

seen disease. may Tophi (urate be soft chronic crystal deposits tissue) in with

(see crystals aspirate 2.9-3 Images). Clinical shows Joint birefringent ﬂuid needle-shaped, and Table negatively

aspirate WBC may or be peripheral blood An elevated count the joint in during ares. seen ﬂ

(≥ may patients Serum uric usually normal ↑ but acid 7.5), is levels. have

erosions Punched-out are in cortical gout. bone (“rat-bite” advanced erosions) with seen overhanging

colchicine, steroids. and/ or (e.g., indomethacin), NSAIDs attacks: High-dose Acute

probenecid overproducers, with failure), stones, for therapy: cases; (tophi, renal to probenecid treatment contraindications and Allopurinol undersecretors. renal refractory for those chronic Maintenance

of of loss hyperuricemia attacks triggers prevent will in many Weight avoidance patients. recurrent and

fusion of pelvis the affected that A to the causes joints. leading disease sacroiliitis inﬂammatory spine chronic of and Strongly associated HLA-B27. with history. factors include gender a male family Risk and

and 20s. the in early onset is Typical late teens fatigue, and pain, hip with inactivity and the intermittent Presents worsens in with LBP that mornings.

stiffness, loss hip lordosis, Schober ↓ lumbar spine expansion of and seen ( and disease are chest pain the as ﬂ ■↓ exion test), progresses.

Anterior and heart uveitis may occur. block

forms Other the of be seronegative must spondyloarthropathy ruled out, following: including

syndrome): of (formerly as arthritis disease A men. Reiter’s Reactive known young follow arthritis, The Campylobacter, Shigella, or conjunctivitis, uveitis, Ureaplasma. urethritis usually characteristic and an Salmonella, with Chlamydia, infection

Psoriatic DIP joints. An the that arthritis: include oligoarthritis can

TABLE 2.9-3. Gout Pseudogout vs.

changes (dactylitis). and with digits Associated sausage-shaped psoriatic skin

usually spondylitis–like with disease sacroiliitis associated is and ankylosing asymmetric by spondylitis: IBD. characterized An is ■Enteropathic that

found of is HLA-B27 in 85–95% cases.

syndesmophytes, may squaring spine. the vertebrae, joints, and Radiographs fused sacroiliac show of bamboo development lumbar of vertical

in cases. CRP or ↑ 75% ESR of is

ANA. RF;

exercise and (e.g., improve NSAIDs breathing. indomethacin) for posture to pain;

necrosis can Tumor (TNF) factor refractory inhibitors cases. in be or used sulfasalazine

inﬂ disease tissue by is connective muscle characterized striated progressive, a immune-mediated ammation. systemic Polymyositis cutaneous is different. with Dermatomyositis symptoms involvement, of although pathogenesis plus presents polymyositis the affect 1:2. is age; of years the Most 50–70 male-to-female patients often ratio Caucasians. African-Americans are than affected often more

as follows: Distinguished

pain, symmetric, or with breathing proximal swallowing Presents muscle difficulty and disease). weakness, progressive (advanced Polymyositis:

of rash papules violaceous upper rash shoulders, the and/or the and may rash), involving chest, (a heliotrope dorsa back), hands, Patients the scales Dermatomyositis: papular “shawl on (a over (a sign” have bony periorbital with Gottron’s rash prominences). located

Patients conduction myocarditis also develop may deficits. and cardiac

lung especially associated and be an carcinoma. malignancy, Can with underlying breast

are Table CK anti-Jo-1 (see 2.9-4). and seen ■↑serum antibodies

reveals muscle fibers stages and of regeneration. in necrosis ■Muscle inﬂammation and varying biopsy

weeks maintenance High-dose with the ↓ corticosteroids dose. 4–6 to taper after

used Azathioprine methotrexate can and/or agents. as be steroid-sparing

AB T LE 2.9-4. and Common Associations Disease Their Antibodies

Anti-dsDNA Anti-Sm SLE Vasculitis, p-ANCA Rheumatoid connective Mixed CREST disease biliary microscopic Anti-TSHR RA Antihistone Scleroderma syndrome factor Vasculitis, U1RNP Polymyositis/dermatomyositis Primary SLE Anti-Jo-1 SLE Drug-induced Antimitochondrial especially tissue antibody SLE RA Anti-Scl-70 Wegener’s polyangiitis c-ANCA disease Graves’ ANA Anti-CCP cirrhosis Anticentromere

of arthritis. Sjren’s common a sicca) manifestation is syndrome ocular (keratoconjunctivitis rheumatoid

by rheumatoid syndrome arthritis, neutropenia. is splenomegaly, and Felty’s characterized

formation, in bone, joints inﬂammatory arthritis leading characterized autoimmune disorder with involvement and erosion adjacent both tendons. small A systemic and of hypertrophy large chronic, of results destructive, by to pannus and that ultimately synovial symmetric cartilage, factors 35–50, age gender, include HLA-DR4. and female Risk

of symmetric 6 elbows) MCP onset (wrists, 1 for and with of stiffness swelling warm joints multiple shoulders, hour > for joints, Presents > with hips, morning knees, ankles, painful, weeks. along insidious

seen. malaise, may be loss and fatigue, also anorexia, Fever, weight

the Ulnar of Figure fingers with joint deviation hypertrophy is 2.9-6). (see MCP seen

deformations keratoconjunctivitis presents risk), tendon ligament (e.g., Also and and sicca. boutonnière and swan-neck subluxation vasculitis, deformities), (intubation atlantoaxial with

IGU 2.9-6. F R E Rheumatoid arthritis.

and deviation PIP the Note the hyper severe the of involvement digits, of deformities MCP of joint fingers, trophy, ulnar joints. the boutonnière permission, drasoma Chan (Reproduced, 3rd from Concise Pathology, with ed. P. 1998: 978.) & Lange, CT: Stamford, Appleton

Fc 75% is of ■↑RF antibodies (IgM seen cases. against > in IgG) Labs:

spe RF. citrullinated anti-CCP cific of more peptide) than is The presence (cyclic also ESR ■↑ be may seen.

Anemia of disease. chronic

shows WBC turbid Synovial aspirate count (3000–50,000 and cells/μL). ﬂuid an uid, ﬂ viscosity, ↓ ↑

Radiographs:

tissue juxta-articular swelling and Early: demineralization. Soft

erosions. space Joint and Late: narrowing

reduced [DMARDs]). treatment with disease-modifying antirheumatic discontinued (can or drugs following NSAIDs be successful

started early and sulfasalazine, DMARDs include hydroxychloroquine, should methotrexate. and be unomide. and include inhibitors, rituximab agents leﬂ (anti-CD20), Second-line TNF

Also characterized tissue leads by sclerosis; type III called deposition progressive and inﬂammation through type fibrosis systemic of excessive collagen. to I that Commonly can a (limited as syndrome cardiovascular renal, form), diffuse involving the GI, form as manifests in also CREST systems. skin but well the and GU, pulmonary, occur as include female gender Risk factors and age 35–50.

reveal face may distal skin and/or symmetric extremities. thickening the of of Exam

CREST and Calcinosis, Esophageal dysmotility, involves Sclerodactyly, Telangiectasias. Raynaud’s syndrome phenomenon,

(lupus cerebritis,

vegetations seen mitral noninfectious SLE endocarditis: syndrome. valve the Libman-Sacks on with often antiphospholipid in association and

f cor acute hypertension. can form ■The and renal malignant pulmonary to brosis, diffuse pulmonale, failure, lead

be RF and . ANA may

Anticentromere (see antibodies 2.9-4). for are syndrome Table CREST specific

antibodies with are prognosis Anti-Scl-70 1) a and (antitopoisomerase associated diffuse (see poor 2.9-4). disease Table

seen. may be Eosinophilia

changes. Corticosteroids penicillamine ﬂares; skin used be acute for for can

for Calcium Raynaud’s blockers channel phenomenon.

scleroderma and for a renal crisis. prevention disease of renal ACEIs

is of Mortality pulmonary complications hypertension pulmonary due to hypertension. and

antigen-antibody deposition disorder multisystem and cellular complexes. of autoimmune related antibody-mediated A attack to African-American highest at women are risk. childbearing age. affects of Usually women

pain. Presents such symptoms nonspecific joint as symmetric anorexia, and weight loss, fever, with

DOPAMINE 2.9-7 The RASH also (see Images). Clinical mnemonic Figure criteria and SLE the diagnosing summarizes for likely have are the sensitive to and Patients (96% of criteria specific). four with SLE

A ANA not sensitive but is highly specific. are anti-Sm Anti-dsDNA highly Table and 2.9-4). but not (see sensitive antibodies as specific

Drug-induced of but 100% are SLE: in antibodies antihistone seen cases are nonspecific.

antibodies to transmitted from with SLE: anti-Ro Associated mother neonate. Neonatal

be following seen: also may The

Antiphospholipid antibodies.

Anemia, leukopenia, thrombocytopenia. and/or

casts. Proteinuria and/or

mild NSAIDs symptoms. joint for

for exacerbations. acute Corticosteroids

Corticosteroids, and refractory or azathioprine progressive cyclophosphamide, hydroxychloroquine, for cases.

R E 2.9-7. F IGU lupus erythematosus. Systemic

SLE, in plaques patches predominantly and Erythematous sun-exposed of areas. across the of the malar bridge the Note nose. rash Hurwitz (Reproduced, RM. from permission, with Atlas the ed. of Pathology Clinical-Pathological 2nd of Correlation, Skin: & Lange, Stamford, Appleton 1998: CT: 39.)

including the carotid and granulomatous called of vertebral the ammation to subacute vessels, aorta, the temporal large branch), arteries. due inﬂ Also giant external arteritis; (especially cell occlusion of The retinal blindness to internal (a feared carotid of the is artery 2° most branch the central artery). manifestation age include female and of Risk (affects almost > patients), TA 50, polymyalgia gender. half factors rheumatica

Presents (unilateral or new with tenderness; scalp and temporal jaw and claudication. bilateral); pain headache

blindness, loss, are seen. weight and Fever, hips) and of permanent (especially monocular also the myalgias/arthralgias shoulders

ESR (usually 50 100). > >

Ophthalmologic evaluation.

plasma of the lymphocytes, cells, and thrombosis; media; and Temporal necrosis biopsy: giant Look for artery cells.

High-dose involvement involvement the ocular (or blindness). eye of immediately prednisone begun monocular of after onset prevent remaining to biopsy, but treatment. delay a not do Obtain follow-up eye a Conduct exam.

include age Risk 50. and factors gender female >

Hx/PE:

stiffness arms lifting getting of or with Presents and above the difficulty the girdle the pain musculature of a shoulder chair pelvic head. with and out

include weight symptoms and fever, Other loss. malaise, not Weakness generally on exam. appreciated is

associated with Dx: markedly reveal anemia. a ↑ESR, often Labs

Tx: prednisone mg/day). Low-dose (10–20

the pediatric Table injuries. and of common 2.9-5 outlines treatment orthopedic presentation

recessive resulting from protein. disorder dystrophin, An a of a cytoskeletal deficiency X-linked at 3–5 years usually of Onset is age.

distal proximal Affects muscles muscles. than and axial more

fatigability, off (gastrocnemius on or gait. (using Gowers’ hands and present thighs ﬂoor), toes waddling with shortening), walking, May progressive the standing from push rising the difficulty walking difficulty maneuver when the to clumsiness,

seen. also of Pseudohypertrophy gastrocnemius muscles the is

Mental is retardation common.

outlines DMD Table of and 2.9-6 the differential muscular dystrophy. Becker diagnosis

dystrophin ↑ CK. immunostain;

EMG potentials ↑ and shows polyphasic recruitment.

necrotic degeneration in from Muscle size biopsy from fibers fibrosis muscle with regeneration. fiber variation and shows

is and ambulation to contractures. maintain to therapy necessary Physical prevent

Liberal tendon use may of release surgery ambulation. prolong

cardiopulmonary → pneumonia cardiac congestion pulmonary → Mortality and muscles fibrosis respiratory complications arrhythmias by skeletal due to is cardiac failure. and weak → failure; caused high-output

AB LE T 2.9-5. Orthopedic in Children Injuries

Clavicular fractured long children. The in fracture commonly bone most be associated birth (especially palsies. large can infants) related be with nerve and brachial May in superiorly displaced the the middle owing third the sternocleidomastoid. of to fracture the proximal with involves end the pull Usually of clavicle, sling vs. Figure-of-eight sling. arm of one fracture cortex fracture only side involving Greenstick Incomplete of the the bone. casting. with Reduction flms 10–14 days. at Order being a Radial by hand. elbow occurs head the subluxation Nursemaid’s or that pulled of result typically as lifted refusal the Presents and pain elbow. bend with to Manual exion. of elbow by f degrees the reduction gentle supination at of 90 immobilization. No long 2° fracture the of bone Torus Buckling trauma. a to of cortex ulna. occurs or distal the in radius Usually 3–5 Cast weeks. for immobilization age. years fracture humerus occur to at Tends Supracondylar 5–8 of of from compartment artery the of the risk Proximity contracture to Volkmann’s (results the brachial forearm). ↑ syndrome reduction with immobilization; signif percutaneous if pinning cantly closed Cast displaced. tibial of Osgood-Schlatter the tubercle. Overuse disease apophysitis Causes in especially pain, young localized boys. with contraction, quadriceps active activity months 2–3 for asymptomatic. until or ↓ relief. brace may A neoprene symptomatic provide the in growth fracture Salter-Harris Fractures plate of children. (growth I: plate). ■ by location: Classifed Physis fracture Metaphysis II: ■ physis. and and physis. III: Epiphysis ■ metaphysis, IV: and Epiphysis, ■ physis. ■ injury V: Crush the physis. of I II: and Types Conservative. inequality. prevent Types complications repair as length III–V: leg to such Surgical

the Hip Dysplasia of Developmental

hips. the degenerative disease to in hip of or congenital early called can dislocation; dislocated leading dislocatable, result Also joint heads, subluxed, femoral stretching lax to adducted from uterine hip presentation), the to capsule packing Dislocations musculature development excessive and exed and and of excessive from leading in posterior result (e.g., muscle breech contracture. adductor the position hip due of poor and the ﬂ acetabulum

LE 2.9-6. T AB DMD Becker vs. Muscular Dystrophy

years. Onset 3–5 5–15 beyond. years and Teens. expectancy Life 30s–40s. Mental Common. retardation Uncommon. or Dystrophin Western is ↓ blot markedly absent. abnormal. normal, but is protein are Dystrophin levels

position. f the born females found in rst-born breech in Most commonly

the inner maneuver: on Barlow’s then placed abducted “clunk” hip audible to of adducted, leading aspect is posteriorly. the dislocates the the is femoral Pressure thigh, and an head as

trochanter. thighs are greater pressure abducted midline on from maneuver: the gently The the Ortolani’s with anterior signifies soft the acetabulum. reduction into A the of femoral head click

dislocated knees sign: (Galeazzi’s) The heights is are and lower). at the knees ﬂexed hips Allis’ unequal (the side when are

limited also abduction folds Asymmetric are affected and of the skin seen. hip

is detection Early for critical development. proper to allow hip

helpful, of age. be Ultrasound may 10 especially after weeks

Radiographs head. > radiolucency because neonatal of femoral months of patients unreliable are are the until of the age 4

Begin treatment early.

Splint ﬂ with < (maintains abducted). the exed a Pavlik and months: harness 6 hip prevent the hips ﬂex not AVN, degrees. do > To 60

6–15 months: Spica cast.

reduction Open 15–24 followed spica months: cast. by

AVN the contractures head. femoral and Joint of

Without treatment, patients age. years of in likely is defect 2 < a significant

head (see 2.9-8). Idiopathic the of femoral AVN Figure found boys in 4–10 commonly of years Most age. symptoms self-limited lasting < a with 18 Usually disease, months.

Legg-Calvé-Perthes R 2.9-8 E IGU F disease.

AVN femoral head. of the HB. from with permission, Skinner (Reproduced, Current ed. & 2nd Treatment Diagnosis Orthopedics, in 2000: & Stamford, CT: Appleton 543.) Lange,

patients can asymptomatic develop first, limp. painless at a but Generally

referred or to or the anterior can it be is If groin present, in the it pain may knee. thigh, be

Limited of leg. affected the atrophy abduction internal and rotation;

Usually unilateral (85–90%).

involvement full is if or sufficient head if ROM present. Observation is femoral there limited is

abduction if cast, consider bracing, osteotomy. is extensive If an hip Petrie or a there ↓ or with ROM,

good of has ROM, < stable and and age head full if involvement, prognosis 5 years is joint. The patient femoral a the ↓ is

the proximal medial to growth to the femoral head through posterior Separation (relative the epiphysis leading of displacement femoral plate, of neck). the femoral and between an hormone due imbalance be May hormones. to growth sex and obesity, include gender, 11–13, and age ethnicity. Risk African-American male factors with other and endocrinopathies. hypothyroidism Associated

a insidious and or knee acute limp. painful or with ■Typically thigh presents pain

pediatric limp— of diagnosis Differential

commonly, weight. cases ROM bear Acute restricted to with and, present inability

Bilateral in 40–50% cases. of

hip. limited the Characterized rotation internal by and abduction of Flex-ion physical 2° an rotation with further ex-ion. hip rotation ﬂ loss internal to results obligatory external of displacement in hip the is that observed of as

(see posterior AP of views medial hips displacement 2.9-9). femoral and Figure the Radiographs lateral of and in head reveal frog-leg both

hypothyroidism with Rule TSH. out

The promptly. is begin treatment progressive, disease should so

defect be allowed bearing is No the surgically until stabilized. weight should

only Gentle closed slips. in appropriate acute is reduction

IGU E R 2.9-9. F femoral epiphysis. capital Slipped

AP x-ray. femoral the drawn The neck. displacement medial a with line epiphysis seen left lateral best femoral up is the of not epiphysis protrude line. The this beyond abnormal does

x-ray. lateral Frog-leg epiphysis displacement the characteristic. of is Posterior femoral Skinner from HB. permission, (Reproduced, with Orthopedics, Diagnosis in Treatment Current 2nd & ed. Appleton CT: Stamford, 2000: & Lange, 546.)

arthroplasty. premature Chondrolysis, of leading hip osteoarthritis to hip the head, AVN femoral and

of spine sometimes kyphosis the spine associated and > rotation occurring the of vertebrae the with 10 excessive curvature and/or lordosis. lateral of thoracic lumbar and in A or degrees commonly Most developing in adolescence. early idiopathic, Other are neuromuscular, etiologies vertebral, or or congenital disease. spinal cord with associated is and that curves 1:7 male-to-female for progress require The treatment. ratio

physical during usually identified school is screening. disease Idiopathic

Vertebral a bending rib accentuated forward by rotation are and deformities test.

views). the and anterior, of full-length Radiographs spine (posterior,

20 for degrees Close observation of < curvature.

20–49 of Spinal for bracing degrees curvature. with Curvature progress may even bracing.

Surgical degrees > for curvature. of correction 50

lung can disease. create restrictive Severe scoliosis

6 destruction lasts > years patients occurs ≤ in nonmigratory, that A with monoand 16 polyarthritis and of age bony weeks. nonsuppurative juvenile arthritis. Formerly rheumatoid known as of puberty. resolve by Approximately cases 95% common girls in boys. than More in

by nodules, rashes, Can pericarditis, and be fatigue. fever, accompanied erythematous

Subtypes are follows: as

involves arthritis asymmetric weight-bearing Pauciarticular: joints. that An if to leads Associated left blindness untreated. that risk ↑ iridocyclitis an with of

RA small Polyarticular: multiple symmetric (≥ Resembles with 5) joints. involvement of carries of risk less features a are ↓ iridocyclitis. Systemic prominent;

with rash. fevers common as least maculopapular, febrile: evanescent, a salmon-colored high, The arthritis daily Acute subtype; and spiking manifests also and serositis seen. may Hepatosplenomegaly be year. may occur is within No remission iridocyclitis one present; equally and boys. in Occurs girls

diagnostic test There JIA. for no is

Labs:

15% in of cases. A found RF is

may pauciarticular subtype. , ANA in especially be the ESR, platelets. and WBC ■↑ count,

osteoporosis Soft may swelling be tissue and seen. Imaging:

corticosteroids; methotrexate second-line is therapy. or NSAIDs

LAMBERT-EATON LATERAL MULTIPLE MYASTHENIC SCLEROSIS 301 300 SCLEROSIS the SYNDROME MYASTHENIA 303 301 302 300 of Disorders Junction GUILLAIN-BARRÉ AMYOTROPHIC GRAVIS SYNDROME Neuromuscular

spinal anatomy LMN Tables UMN and and 2.10-1 clinical 2.10-1 common functions; outline presentation signs; exes. cord of lesions; including critical and through cranial 2.10-5 of the clinical clinical Figure aspects nerve nerve and functions; facial reﬂ neuroanatomy, pertinent

of Acute of neurologic circulation. deficits resulting cerebral focal disruption from onset classifications but exist, common Many the comparison most involves

TABLE 2.10-1. Nerve Cranial Functions

disability common the cause of leading States. cause and death third is most of the major in United the Stroke

blood Facial lacrimation, III arch movement, and closing II salivation Motor eyelid Motor sensation, and tongue, buccal Eye talking, movement sensation and tongue, the the (including carotid Eye vessels) (submandibular monitoring X V Taste oropharyngeal But Brother the constriction, Sensory swallowing My two-thirds Sensory Both and Abducens (stylopharyngeus), IX salivation posterior of Eye movement taste teeth, from Mastication, body aortic chemoand from swallowing, Vagus Facial baroreceptors Oculomotor Big third sinuses, Both viscera, sublingual palatal VIII Trochlear sinus eyelid Both Marry tongue, glands), of Money baroreceptors. monitoring balance opening I region, lens Glossopharyngeal mucosa), (including the VII VI Trigeminal IV the epiglottic elevation, meninges intracranial chemoand movement, facial Says pupillary Sight Some orbits, thoracoabdominal Taste Sensory sensation gland), Smell accommodation, Hearing, (parotid Optic Say from Olfactory anterior Vestibulocochlear Motor et shrugging al. Le movement V XI XII Motor Hypoglossal T, Head shoulder Brains Bhushan Most Matter permission, turning, Tongue Both with Motor Accessory from Adapted, 2009. USMLE Aid Step the 1 First for York: 394. 2009: McGraw-Hill, New

TABLE 2.10-2. Lesions Facial Nerve

the facial Bell’s lesion cortex UMN lesion Lesion between of or palsy motor and cortex connection nucleus. the LMN the the Contralateral lower face the only. paralysis of face. upper Ipsilateral and lower the of paralysis of the fbers itself destruction efferent (facial its branchial Complete nerve nucleus facial proper). or paralysis Peripheral facial close side. inability to on with ipsilateral involved the the eye cases. seen occur recovery most Can in is idiopathically; gradual in disease, Sarcoidosis, Tumors, AIDS, as Lyme complication Diabetes. a and Seen Lyme, with ALexander Diabetes. Sarcoid, AIDS, STD: Tumors, Bell Bhushan Le V al. T, with et permission, from Adapted, Aid 2009. Step for 1 First USMLE the York: 397. New 2009: McGraw-Hill, (LMN VII nucleus lesion CN Upperdivision Lower Cortico-bulbar of Facial palsy) lesion LMN Bell´s = central (UMN cortex lesion division facial) = motor tract area Face

TABLE 2.10-3.

hemorrhagic vs. (80%) ischemic (20%). factors with stroke. associated nonmodifiable Table 2.10-6 and risk modifiable contrasts Etiologies as follows: are

vessels (internal/common and of vertebral basilar, arteries). Atherosclerosis the carotid, extracranial

regions diabetes). (result hypertension, vessels by Lacunar from supplied hypercholesterolemia, in infarcts or perforating

or marantic prosthetic (aortic (via emboli atherosclerosis), endocarditis), paradoxical (bacterial hypokinesis, Thromboemboli arch endocarditis), valves, emboli patent atheroemboli ventricular foramen infectious Cardiac ovale). emboli: (AF, aortic

with OCPs C antibodies, of Hypercoagulable protein antiphospholipid associated context states: in smoking. Include resistance, and activated the malignancy, those

ammatory/infectious diseases. females), dysplasia fibromuscular dissection: Craniocervical Trauma, inﬂ (young

at vibration, spinal Dorsal muscle conscious tendon Pacini’s Free temperature Fine disks, Arcuate and bers cord junction white at tactile medial at Lateral organs spindles, proprioception nerve limbs the commissure 1° Meissner’s medulla Ventral cervicomedullary motor lemniscus fbers of cortex corticospinal level and Golgi pain f Spinothalamic Movement contralateral the Pain, column endings, Pyramidal, touch,

Bhushan et al. Le permission, V from Adapted, with T, the for USMLE 2009. First Aid 1 Step York: 2009: New 105. McGraw-Hill,

TABLE 2.10-4. vs. UMN LMN Signs

cell (↑); other signs (initially sinus anemia, (e.g., CNS (↓) sickle DTRs ↓Miscellaneous (arm Pattern Variable exors) thrombosis, leg ■ cell weakness vasculitis signs Other (↓) causes: ↑ giant initially or ↓ Pyramidal Atrophy, Tone fasciculations f Spastic Venous extensors, f of normal) arteritis). Flaccid accid Babinski’s,

are Symptoms the territory vascular affected: dependent on

in (MCA): loss (nondominant hemisphere), preference and artery the neglect hemisphere), side paresis Middle face hemianopia. Aphasia the (dominant homonymous toward and of gaze lesion, sensory the cerebral arm, contralateral

personality Anterior leg; paresis the loss changes. Contralateral artery cerebral (ACA): sensory or cognitive and in

deficits, artery Homonymous Posterior dyslexia/alexia. memory hemianopia, (PCA): cerebral

the symptoms, palsies contralateral drop vertigo, cranial apnea, (e.g., “locked-in” sensory and diplopia), nerve Basilar loss artery: body. weakness and visual affecting syndrome, face attacks, dysphagia, dysarthria, ipsilateral Coma, “crossed”

Lacunar: hand or syndrome, hemiparesis. dysarthria–clumsy sensory ataxic motor stroke, Pure

A and is 1 determined that 24 TIA: < to deficit < of be etiology. transient lasts (most hours ischemic hour) last neurologic asymptomatic diffusion-weighted on MRI. TIAs strokes Many with associated (~30–50%) small, are

identify head therapy. contrast differentiate ■Emergent for to thrombolytic Figure 2.10-2) hemorrhagic ischemic (see candidates and to potential CT from stroke without

2.10-5. TABLE exes Reﬂ Clinical

CHANGes: MCA stroke cause can

in of and the face sensory and the lesion paresis arm Contralateral loss the side

= root. nerve Biceps C5 = C7 root. nerve Triceps nerve Patella root. = L4 Achilles S1 = nerve root. sign other normal Babinski––dorsifexion and big the fanning life. UMN the refex of but in toe lesion, of toes; of year frst of order. up in Refexes count C7, L3, C5, S1, 4 L3, 2 C7, 8 2 6 S1, 4 6 8 C5,

T, Le V permission, Bhushan et from al. with Adapted, USMLE the First Aid 1 Step for 2009. New 392. McGraw-Hill, York: 2009:

2.10-1. FIGURE lesions. cord Spinal

permission, Bhushan et al. from T, V (Reproduced, Le with Aid Step USMLE 2009. First 1 for the 2009: McGraw-Hill, New York: 389.)

to for (e.g., MRI ischemic early diffusion-weighted stroke). is acute identify sensitive MRI changes

echocardiogram suspected. ECG is and embolic an if stroke

ultrasound, Vascular of 2.10-3). Doppler, angiography include disease intracranial (see transcranial and extracranial Figure and studies MRA, carotid

0-6. AB LE T 2.1 Modifiable Nonmodifiable Stroke Risk and for Factors

60 Diabetes Asian) Carotid f (cocaine Obesity “Live history Age Drug SHoulDD”: Smoking > Atrial Hispanic, or MI Male IV Hypertension stenosis the a (African-American, stroke COACH Family way FAME: of drugs) or CAD gender use Ethnicity brillation Hypercholesterolemia

0-2. 2.1 E R F IGU in in stroke right the MCA findings ischemic territory. CT/MRI

(arrow). horn shows anterior and arrowheads) (A) of ventricle of compression (between and low lateral CT of cortical sulci the the effacement density (between markings MRI T1-weighted (B) arrowheads) and horn anterior of loss sulcal of the of shows lateral ventricle compression the (arrow). MRI intensity ventricular (arrow). shows signal and T2-weighted scan arrowheads) compression (C) (between increased with MJ. Aminoff permission, from (Reproduced, Clinical 3rd Neurology, ed. & CT: Lange, 275.) 1996: Stamford, Appleton

F 0-3. R 2.1 IGU E postendarterectomy. studies Vascular preand

tPA Contraindications therapy— to

last the trauma head Stroke or months within three

PTT > prolonged INR 1.7 or with Anticoagulation

platelet (< count Low 100,000/mm3)

> BP Systolic diastolic or Elevated 185 > 110 BP:

past in 14 Surgery days the

symptoms) (mild improvement or of rapid TIA symptoms

urinary days 21 or GI in past bleeding the

showing internal carotid the present at arteriogram Seizures stenosis Carotid the onset stroke proximal artery. of (A) of restoration Postop of (B) with endarterectomy. normal size luminal arteriogram following the erative

permission, with Way (Reproduced, LW. from & Treatment, 10th ed. Surgical Diagnosis Current CT: 763.) 1994: & Appleton Stamford, Lange, hypercoagulable patients or ■Screen with years of age. first history a the 50 of stroke, setting for thrombosis, states of in a < in

Acute: ■

symptom out onset, Ischemic is if but indicated of first hours tPA three contraindications. within stroke: rule administered angioedema. Be aware potential of bleeding or from for occlusion hours major used patients within IV Intra-arterial of MCA thrombolysis be candidates are for suitable if select patients not can tPA. stroke such six

of Hemorrhagic stroke: discussion parenchymal hemorrhage. the See

to especially those unable their should protect for ICU for for comatose who or intubation. patients airways admission are considered, be possible

swelling, herniation. for and symptoms signs ICP, brain and ↑ Monitor of Serial helpful are CTs evaluation in of the deteriorating patients. measure, hyperventilation. with As mannitol treat temporizing a and

and ischemic 48 ↓ hours from ASA with presenting associated in onset. acute mortality stroke ≤ is morbidity

tissue. to hypertension permissive maintain ischemic perfusion and hypoxemia Allow cerebral of > However, (SBP infusion. hypertension stroke, hemorrhagic setting or nicardipine the treat >120) DBP 220 or of or IV with in labetalol severe < SBP and to DBP 110. 185 be must tPA, < administer Additionally,

with of fever are both and Treat prognoses associated in setting the acute stroke. hyperglycemia, worse as

post-stroke and DVT. pneumonia, complications such and aspiration Prevent UTI, as treat

CBC include BUN, lipid labs enzymes with PTT, and creatinine, obtained platelets, Immediate glucose, PT, and troponin, profile, to be serum saturation. INR, electrolytes, oxygen cardiac

treatment: Prevention and long-term

If small stroke or thrombosis, vessel contraindicated. is disease if or anticoagulation clopidogrel: is to ASA, 2°

asymptomatic in Carotid endarterectomy: occlusion). in > (contraindicated symptomatic is stenosis in patients > 70% or If 60% 100% patients

or hypercoagulable is In AF INR Anticoagulation: 2–3. new target states, the involving 3–4 target cases the is antiplatelet a In INR prosthetic or an add agent. valve,

greatest hypertension, (hypertension single and risk hypercholesterolemia, is of Management the stroke). for diabetes factor

include circle the trauma, of SAH to berry Willis. aneurysms, Etiologies of trauma AVM, and

photophobia, stretch followed “thunderclap” and neck by SAH stiffness presents with meningeal of including other abrupt-onset, often meningeal an Aneurysmal and signs intensely headache, signs. painful irritation, nausea/vomiting, often of arousal absence death the and or of obstructive ↓ in leads Rapid intervention. to neurosurgical frank hydrocephalus development or seizures coma

transient give matter history of of a days to that often completely in “sentinel nausea/vomiting, with More a one-third bleed” headache, will resolved of minutes earlier abrupt-onset than marked weeks diplopia by a hours. to or an patients

Immediate the look 2.10-4) contrast to (see subarachnoid space. head Figure in blood for without CT normal in 95% lower status. patients is severe SAH mental is with those in much > with Sensitivity but

and xanthochromia protein LP due is to ICP. RBCs), the for of breakdown look ↑ RBCs, ↑ (yellowish CT if to RBCs), Immediate CSF (from yet 24–28 xanthochromia 6–12 first developed) the has hours can first hours the resolved). xanthochromia has (because and Note after not that (because LP falsely results be in

as CT should once angiography angiography angiography SAH noninvasive confirmed. with is Four-vessel equivalent be reconstructions) 3-D (or such performed LP high-risk unrevealing. clinical is and Noninvasive CT are warranted cases those if and even in angiography high suspicion in with

neurosurgery. Call

is or in first maintaining to aneurysm the (most rebleeding the likely occur systolic 150 hours) BP by coiled. < clipped Prevent 48 until

neurologic and occur ﬂuids, IV maintain associated administering to calcium BP. days Prevent (CCBs), vasospasm likely 5–7 and pressors to after channel (most blockers deterioration by SAH) prophylaxis. Give phenytoin seizure for

ICP the ■↓ by instituting of hyperventilation. raising head bed the and

or through lumbar hydrocephalus Treat a serial drain LPs.

aneurysms. is palsy III with involvement associated with berry CN pupillary

SAH aneurysms Atherosclerosis MAKE (familial) cell more dominant, Sickle associated syndrome likely: berry anemia that polycystic) Conditions History Ehlers-Danlos an can with

(peak life” comes to on characteristic minutes). of headache “worst of > intensity contrast SAH The migraine quickly, 30 my in

R IGU 2.1 0-4. E F hemorrhage. Subarachnoid

to with status expanding within hours have an minutes changes associated interval. a hematoma epidural and classically lucid Mental occur mental days weeks. occur status With changes within hematoma, to can a subdural

reveals scan base without the subarachnoid blood brain the (arrows). contrast of space the (A) in CT at contrast density shows this in A without (B) normal CT scan no (arrows). region

(Reproduced, Aminoff with permission, MJ. from 3rd ed. Clinical Neurology, Stamford, CT:

Lange, Appleton & 1996: 78.) aneurysms. clipping Surgical ■ treatment defnitive for the is option coiling surgical poor candidates. an Endovascular is for

factors include (in vascular Risk elderly), (AVMs, the malformations hemangiomas). anticoagulation, amyloid angiopathy and cavernous hypertension, tumor,

Hx/PE: that Presents the defcits as with and hematoma motor expands. often worsen sensory focal nausea/ sudden onset, of Severe vomiting, also seen. may obtundation lethargy, headache be seizures, or

2.10-5). head noncontrast Dx: CT (see Immediate Figure that or edema mass herniation. Look for predict effect may

SAH. to that Tx: of Similar head institute and bed Elevate the the of prophylaxis. anti-seizure present. is mass Surgical necessary if effect be may evacuation occur, Several Table of subfalcine, may and types 2.10-7). and 2.10-6 uncal, central, (see Figure including tonsillar herniation

between and and to veins bridging the following blood trauma membranes. head (usually occurs or accumulation leading Typically arachnoid falls of rupture of assaults), dura alcoholics. and in Common the elderly

mental Presents and hemiparesis. Hx/PE: headache, with status, contra-lateral changes in or subacute be may Changes chronic. in pseudodementia May present as the elderly.

0-5. R 2.1 E F IGU Intraparenchymal hematoma.

the CT hyperdensity with midline choroid Head of shift irregularly shaped reveals without the contrast plexus. (Reproduced, permission, with Saunders CE. from Treatment, sis Current Diagno 4th & ed. Emergency Stamford, CT: 248.) Appleton 1992: & Lange,

crescent-shaped, does hypodense acutely not concave a (see chronically) that the demonstrates mid-line 2.10-7A). cross CT (isodense Dx: hyperdensity Figure subacutely,

Surgical evacuation symptomatic. Tx: if blood chronic. Subdural spontaneously regress if may it is

1.

2.

3. herniation 4. Uncal tonsillar the magnum herniation Cerebellar into Tentorium foramen

herniations result stem the and death compress when brain these Coma

0-6. IGU E 2.1 R F of syndromes. herniation Sites

RP permission, Simon from (Adapted, al. et with Neurology, 4th ed. Clinical & CT: 314.) Stamford, Lange, Appleton 1999:

0-7. TAB LE 2.1 Presentation Herniation Clinical of Syndromes

the of mass frontal lobes. lesions Cingulate Occurs to herniation 2° seen on No CT. specifc symptoms; head or frequently signs mass large transtentorial lesions herniation Downward Occurs when midbrain inferiorly. supratentorial (central) push the and mental and bilaterally Presents fexor respirations; reactive small rapid change with in Cheyne-Stokes a or extensor status; pupils; posturing. 2° mass to Occurs Uncal lesions the fossa. herniation middle of localizing”) entrapped, hemiparesis results mass compression followed lesion) the (opposite is peduncle the (“false deviated ipsilateral fxed leading against the edge. a Ipsilesional “down out.” from pupil and tentorial to dilated cerebral eye CN by of that becomes III an and fossa posterior the 2° to mass Cerebellar foramen magnum Occurs into lesions. herniation tonsillar compression herniation medullary → arrest. Tonsillar respiratory → fatal. rapidly Usually

leading result a Usually of to fracture of tear meningeal skull a the middle a lateral artery.

followed induces an severe Obvious, a of lucid (minutes hours). consciousness trauma Hx/PE: to immediate interval loss by herniation Uncal

2.1 IGU R E F 0-7. vs. hematoma. epidural Subdural

Subdural hematoma. (A) the midline Note the shift. mass crescent shape with effect and with classic (B) biconvex shape. lens Epidural hematoma from with permission, Aminoff MJ. (Reproduced, Clinical Neurology, 3rd ed. CT: 1996: Lange, & Appleton 296.) Stamford, to hemiparesis. a and with and “blown pupil” pupil) ipsilateral ipsilateral ultimately (fixed dilated coma leads

■Dx: by shows Figure CT lens-shaped, convex hyperdensity a the limited (see 2.10-7B). sutures

■ evacuation. Tx: Emergent neurosurgical May 2° brain and of to the niation evolve death to her- quickly bleeding. source arterial

compression.

Causes include following: the of headache

onset SAH, stroke/intraparenchymal cyst, cerebral not angle-closure apoplexy, dissection, thrombosis, thrombosis, hydrocephalus), angina obstructive ↑ manifestation). (e.g., severe craniocervical hypertension presenting glaucoma), (rare), to ischemic cavernous usually acutely colloid venous aneurysmal pituitary pheochromocytoma), migraine/cluster disease acute the (headache ICP (new; sinus headache, ocular seconds hemorrhage (e.g., (e.g., New Acute minutes): acute is

sub-acute vs. hypertension in keratitis, progressive hematoma, pseudotumor infection), arteritis, or lead dental to sickness, ↑ sinusitis, (e.g., ICP temporal media/mastoiditis), orbital altitude monoxide, cranial cerebri), migraine/tension-type (e.g., orbital headache post-LP), tumor, New hydrocephalus, subacutely days): scleritis, severe infections, iritis, otitis (new; carbon (e.g., hypertensive onset cavernous encephalopathy, viral (acute other eclampsia), encephalitis. subdural infections infections, (e.g., children (rare), large ocular Subacute hypotension poisoning infections, sub-acute hours meningitis, spontaneous, disease syndrome intracranial sinus

tension-type postherpetic), Chronic/episodic: or overuse other cluster Migraine, sinusitis. cervical caffeine withdrawal, trigeminal analgesic headache, (e.g., NSAID headaches medication headaches disease, overuse), (e.g., or TMJ arthritis, “rebound” headache, glossopharyngeal, chronic neuralgias from

and including neurologic funduscopic exams, Conduct a full exam. general

the Evaluate following:

Chronicity: workup 1° if they Recent headache or other changed disorders. recently or are headaches warrant immediate migraines clearly not

Characteristics:

headaches all but are dangerous to Severe temporal severely be not more (e.g., likely dangerous, intense arteritis). headaches Intensity: are

are less to headaches Posterior children. be in likely Location: benign, especially

> 72 Duration: lasting are migraines. Headaches hours not

night. variation: elevated Diurnal and usually occur from Cluster ICP headaches or at those worsen

Triggers: wine. Examples red include and chocolate

make may high-ICP worse. may headaches standing factors: Provocative Lying worse; headaches low-ICP down up make

Palliative Sleep migraines. clears factors:

workup! warrant Recent-onset immediate headaches cits, If or MRI. is CT serious def etiologies neurologic focal associated with more headache with rule out in symptoms typically if or missed consider dural by LP causes abrupt CT (e.g., are CT other and dissection, apoplexy). out then SAH thrombosis, onset; Rule a with

a think wine, red drinking after 20-year-old develops If female headaches migraine.

meningitis Significant symptoms/signs: conditions). (associated (consider or infectious as (specific loss causes), Associated or arteritis), for such jaw neoplastic, include other symptoms weight inﬂammatory, with claudication findings temporal constitutional rash infectious fever or or more likely the to latter two. aneurysmal accompany and Photophobia, nausea, associated migraine, meningitis, SAH, with and stiffness are but neck vomiting is

symptoms syndrome). (partial palsy Look changes disturbances), abnormalities (numbness, ataxia, visual pupillary diplopia, or papilledema, dizziness, CN Neurologic weakness, status mental sequelae: associated or for or Horner’s III

or High-risk years immunocompromised, risk age, with preexisting are factors: of > patients malignancy. 50 Patient

If suspected, head a is without obtain SAH CT contrast.

, LP If is is CT mandatory.

CBC. Obtain a

suspected, is temporal obtain If ESR. arteritis

suspected focal findings. SAH, CT/MRI ↑ is A neurologic ICP, or needed for hemorrhage. evaluate acute CT to Use contrast without

males; females more be than familial. may often Affects brain neurotransmitter (serotonin) changes. and with vascular Associated brain in linked the stem. trigeminal ultimately Pain is activation nucleus to

from occur (electrical pain or brain, the to to with without in a result channel may ion appear pathomechanism depression dysfunction) different possibly of spreading migraine the headache. linked and Auras early the 20s. occurs Onset usually by

Triggers menses, red (e.g., OCPs, light, patterns. stress, include sleep fasting, bright foods wine), and disruptions certain in normal

Hx/PE:

is with and 24 photophobia, duration) < < in usually hours vomiting, 2 but a noise headache hours, that throbbing always nausea, hours and (> sensitivity. 72 associated almost Presents with relieved by and Headache is usually sleep darkness.

and or visual field the by Classic in lights) ﬂashing (bright Often of preceded cuts. migraines: scotomas visual aura either scintillating or form unilateral a

be preceding May auras. migraines: without Common periorbital and bilateral

on Dx: history. Based

Tx:

known Avoid triggers.

after includes Abortive OTC various analgesics. (first NSAIDs metoclopramide, therapy triptans and failed), line have symptomatic nausea. treatment Consider for

(e.g., topiramate), CCBs. Prophylaxis gabapentin, TCAs β-blockers includes and amitriptyline), severe or anticonvulsants (e.g., (propranolol), for frequent migraines

of 25. Males often affected females; onset more are than average is age

Hx/PE:

unilateral hours, extremely headache excruciating, three periorbital brief, to 30 restless. that lasts as to the during a patient minutes Presents tends which be

of day at occur time season the and the same Attacks to in sleep) certain a the clusters, part in during (commonly affecting year. of the same tend of head

Associated stuffiness. eye, of nasal include ipsilateral the lacrimation injection, and syndrome, Horner’s conjunctival symptoms

period of extended Dx: time presentations an history over Classic of evaluation. a repeated with no require attacks episodes workup require exclude dissection First associated cavernous sinus disorders to artery with infection). a Horner’s syndrome (e.g., or carotid

Tx:

non-rebreather), dihydroergotamine, ow High-ﬂ therapy: (100% O2 octreotide, sumatriptan Acute zolmitriptan. or

ergotamine), methysergide, Transitional topiramate). valproic lithium, therapy: Prophylactic (prednisone, acid, (verapamil, maintenance

to some Considered by form milder headache. a migraine of be More in in females males. common than

Hx/PE: that pain associated is or nausea/vomiting, auras with stress. tight, not bandlike and or phobia, by Presents fatigue brought with is on sensory be may difficulty Nonspecific concentration, poor seen. also anxiety, symptoms (e.g., sleeping) or frontal, neck in intense most May regions. the occipital, and generalized be Usually the at day. of end occurs the

diagnosis Dx: exclusion. of A vascular patients headaches obtain an and constitutional unassociated with 50 headaches; giant are of symptoms. of age always > new years cell or if mild particularly even ESR arteritis in with aware Be There no signs. focal are neurologic

of exacerbating hot Tx: and factors. baths, Relaxation, massage, avoidance acetaminophen and are abortive therapy, be also may NSAIDs considered. trip-tans but first-line

the sinus. usual leads of central thrombosis that the sinuses, orbit, suppurative involves or face of cavernous septic etiology nasal process a The to rare; Non-septic agent. is is causative aureus most S. the common thrombosis syndrome nonbacterial or Aspergillus The species). seen (Mucor can be also particularly agents, with fungi antibiotics both Current have and mortality. incidence ↓ greatly

the presenting most symptom. common is Headache

present (2° with sinusitis pain, may oculomotor, may trochlear Patients orbital describe or nerve a or disturbances infection. or visual involvement), recent to edema, abducens, history diplopia and of facial have they a and On ill appear fever. exam, typically

periorbital wakes night ipsilateral a cluster pain male repeatedly up If associated with with during 25-year-old headache. unilateral think lacrimation, the

female headaches day worsen at with of that If stress relaxation tension-type and think with of 30-year-old headache. improve complains the end massage, the or a

in headache adults. Tension-type most diagnosed type common the are headaches of

of include proptosis, may eye (partial affected complete). the ophthalmoplegia Additional or ptosis, eye, red signs or Diminished also and/or constriction dilation may be present. (Horner’s) pupillary (CN III)

or coma Changes drowsiness, to such sepsis. spread the as status in or confusion, suggest mental CNS of Late findings or include signs systemic meningismus sepsis.

studies WBC count. an Lab show ↑

Blood of cases. in the to up causative reveal agent 50% cultures

reveal is consistent unless frank CSF reaction there exam may a parameningeal with meningitis. ↑ protein

confirming may or (with MR pituitary the venography anatomic diagnosis; principal important is means the protocol) be adjuncts. CT gadolinium, MRI of

fungal culture. other or tissue paranasal of cases affected histology identification for Biopsy often sinuses organism necessary in by and is

or empirically Treat thirdor and aggressively plus penicillin culture pending cephalosporin broad-spectrum provide ceftriaxone with coverage or (e.g., fourth-generation (nafcillin a results. to a penicillinase-resistant blood oxacillin) cefepime) with metronidazole. dental be sinus or infection sources Potential should covered from anaerobic added potential address to Vancomycin be can MRSA involvement. Antifungal for therapy is required cases. fungal

3–4 at for are antibiotics recommended IV least weeks.

perception in brain behavior. electrical with by detectable associated neurologic to changes in leading or EEG, events the Paroxysmal aberrant activity by with epilepsy. is 50–60% experienced of aura patients An Table 2.10-8 age. etiologies common by for See seizure, of etiology assess a following: narrow To down the further the

(i.e., and unprovoked a whether a epilepsy history history has seizures). of recurrent the Determine of patient underlying treated. once be and may Other may condition been seizures an resolve has medical self-limited immediate postictal seizure Elevated epileptic in are with prolactin an the levels period. consistent serum

2.10-8. TABLE Group by Seizure of Causes Age

hypoglycemia, encephalopathy, hypoperfusion. porphyria, withdrawal eclampsia, drug hyperthermia, lidocaine), other neuroleptics, head uremia, sedatives), and include (cocaine, hypocalcemia, methylxanthines, (alcohol drug overdose encephalopathy, trauma, antidepressants, hepatic etiologies hypertensive cerebral states, hyponatremia, Non-neurologic hyperosmolar and

focal (or focal onset deficit) focal a Seizures with pathology. CNS postictal suggest stroke, tumor, the They a of abnormality. or AVM, presenting developmental sign hemorrhage, may be infection,

First episode single resolve cause untreated that after a frequently unknown. is when left the underlying seizures are

secondarily “epileptogenic lead or an generalize. focus,” of one Arise they discrete hemisphere in cerebral do to region, not from a and unless consciousness loss

successive fear, hallucinations) consciousness. the features seizures: of of or progressive as alteration include as partial or jacksonian well motor vu, May regions) without (e.g., jerking psychic déjà march, features autonomic, body sensory, (e.g., Simple (e.g., is resolves hours. usually neurologic or A within deficit hemiplegia/hemiparesis, and Todd’s focal 24 paralysis) possible postictal by confused acute Often MRI). stroke out with (ruled

involve temporal (70–80%) electrical spread the of seizures: bilateral partial Typically discharge. Complex with aberrant lobe the impaired (e.g., and and hallucinations, vu, walking), an amnesia. consciousness, or or of lip even smacking, confusion/disorientation automatisms by visual postictal Characterized auditory level chewing, déjà

EEG. Obtain an

CBC, panel, systemic toxicology Rule a LFTs, a and calcium, RPR, out ESR, causes with screen. electrolytes, renal glucose, fasting a

a focal focal A lesion. implies seizure brain Rule by a with or contrast. MRI CT mass out

cause. Treat underlying the

oxcarbazepine, administered carbamazepine valproic phenobarbital, partial acid and be (Tegretol), as seizures: Phenytoin, Recurrent can mono-therapy. is phenobarbital anticonvulsant. In children, first-line the

anterior temporal Consider seizures: lobectomy. temporal lobe Intractable

Primarily idiopathic. Partial seizures. tonic-clonic generalized evolve can secondarily into seizures

progressive successive loss seizures. regions hallucinations of wth but a without If partial body consciousness, of and patient think simple presents jerking

of episode If of confusion, by an level an patient smacking and associated presents followed consciousness with lip think partial complex seizures. with impaired a

evolve mal) partial generalized tonic-clonic and seizures. partial simple Both (grand 2° into seizures may complex

(grand presents and mal) If associated consciousness patient movements a with tonicclonic seizures. think loss of incontinence, clonic with

child episodes a brought (petit from into seizures. school think to her is f after pediatrician experiencing staring ve-second mal) space, of absence If

symmetric with of the consciousness Presents back 1–2 extension tonic with of with and movements. continuing of sudden onset extremities, repetitive, loss of minutes clonic

by and Marked incontinence biting. tongue Patients appear the period. during cyanotic may ictal postictal and to slowly Consciousness prefer muscle but be confused regained headaches in is and sleep; patients are period, the present. aches may may

during clonic slow the the phase during typically waves activity EEG shows 10-Hz and phase. tonic

airway. the Protect

Treat known. the if cause underlying

1° valproate generalized seizures: therapy. or Phenytoin, tonic-clonic fosphenytoin, first-line constitutes as may or topiramate be adjunctive used therapy. Lamotrigine

tonic-clonic that seizures: partial seizures. the for as generalized same Secondarily Treatment is

childhood; before Begin subside in adulthood. Often familial.

episodes Present up hundreds often of of per times impaired day. unnoticeable (5to with to brief 10-second), occurring Hx/PE: consciousness and may during be amnestic or to daydreaming staring. appear and are Patients after seizures immediately common. or is Eye smacking ﬂuttering lip

classic spike-and-wave discharges. EEG three-per-second Dx: shows

the is Tx: Ethosuximide agent. first-line

10-minute) consciousness. repetitive consisting (> a or to seizures prolonged without return medical A occur baseline that emergency of be nonconvulsive. May medically more either (the convulsive urgent form) or

trauma, and head withdrawal disturbances EtOH/sedative intoxication, drug (e.g., other infection. Common anoxic include injury, hyponatremia), withdrawal/noncompliance, metabolic brain or causes anticonvulsant

epilepticus. may occur the status and medical Death results in of of cases condition 10% from underlying usually

levels, underlying with calcium, antiepileptic electrolytes, cause drug ESR, pulse CBC, toxicology the BUN/creatinine, screen. LFTs, ABGs, a Determine oximetry, glucose, and

until testing an patient Obtain but the and defer EEG brain is imaging, stabilized.

evaluate intracranial a hemorrhage. Obtain for to head stat CT

scan to of or LP. in an the done fever LP of the assess the but Obtain after a meningeal having only CT safety signs, setting

airway consider intubation rapid for protection. Maintain ABCs;

thiamine, and to Administer naloxone potential presumptively treat glucose, etiologies.

a IV diazepam) loading benzodiazepine or plus (lorazepam fosphenytoin. dose Give of

and If intubate phenobarbital. with seizures load continue, EEG an IV Consider or pentobarbital) initiate (midazolam and sedative continuous monitoring.

search cause. a for Initiate meticulous the underlying

of six A generalized within months begins that epilepsy form birth. typically of injury, tuberous hypoxic-ischemic infections, or be May idiopathic PKU, perinatal variety 2° and to of sclerosis. a conditions, including

associated females; Affects more a history. males with family often than

of symmetric that Hx/PE: 5–10; trunk, psycho-motor and occurs age tonic, occur onset. of the seizure at to extremities bilateral, arrest jerks head, with of tend clusters the in Presents of development of The have retardation. patients mental majority

for Look Dx: EEG by hypsarrhythmia. an interictal characterized abnormal

or Tx: therapy with valproic and acid. Hormonal prednisone, ACTH, clonazepam but treat impact spasms little may on patients’ prognosis. Medications long-term the have

Begin Naloxone. Then Thiamine, Fosphenytoin, Benzodiazepine, Naloxone: Treatment First ABCs, of ABCs, status Giving epilepticus: Glucose,

a with same problem, syndrome). infantile the infant male spasms muscular the an jerks who uncle and hospital brought think If (West to had is

cause a common semicircular leads recurrent disturbances (95% posterior, canals dislodged horizontal). in that the of vertigo 5% resulting from peripheral to otolith A

reaching and with in/out posterior of canal with getting in Hx/PE: in bed, position changes vertigo bed, mixed head present while < turning minute) nystagmus transient, or (classically BPPV by triggered overhead). (lasting 1 Patients episodic upbeat-torsional lightheadedness. dizziness patients of complain feelings or of nonvertiginous Some the are Nausea stimulus. vomiting owing to and short-lived uncommon

Dx:

his 45 to go or supine left or the and quickly (Dix-Hallpike side the right a while Have sitting the position patient her maneuver). head from head turn degrees a turning to the are BPPV the vertigo is and likely nystagmus affected toward and diagnosis. reproduced, If typical the shoulder) (upbeat

proportion to > disturbance, should raise concern that persists central a nausea/ for vomiting nystagmus 1 gait that or minute, Nystagmus lesion. of for is out

Tx:

testing Dix-Hallpike the resolved the the bedside rotation of Epley can modified 270-degree using position). (a be cases Some head maneuver at from 80%

the With in all BPPV, name: it’s

= Benign a tumor). otolith (not

temporary = 1 Paroxysmal minute. < lasting episodes sudden,

starts reaching in bed Positional = or turning overhead. while

vertigo dizziness symptom. is or = main Vertigo the

been one diagnosed viral think If vestibular week neuritis. after a with who vertigo infection, 27-year-old see male you for having acute vomiting presents and with a

spontaneously in often recurs usually ■The months weeks months years or but subsides later. to condition inhibit as to they which central unsteadiness (e.g., lead contraindicated, compensation, generally elderly. meclizine) chronic the in may tend falls Antivertigo are to and medications

once causes of cerebellar out. have ruled vertigo exclusion (e.g., serious been a Typically the stroke) diagnosis more of

by intolerance, and onset Hx/PE: with vomiting, Presents of unsteadiness nystagmus. and head-motion severe gait nausea, accompanied acute vertigo, loss. unilateral may tinnitus, fullness, hearing symptoms ear (“labyrinthitis”) Auditory or or include aural as is auditory neuritis.” (more known or Without the aural “vestibular condition common), symptoms

Dx:

Acute the vestibulopathy following: peripheral demonstrates

center as bedside examiner’s test determined impulse lateral reﬂex from rapid head by while vestibulo-ocular at the rotation (i.e., head to a (VOR) abnormal staring An nose).

lesion. one beats predominantly horizontal in always direction, A that opposite the nystagmus

by testing. No vertical cover alternate eye misalignment

signs, cannot or of stroke > have pain, have be by factors), stand or age, If or are one atypical years neck neurologic patients “high (i.e., any imaging. imaged diffusion-weighted if are eye they 50 with risk” more risk MRI or have should symptoms head independently, findings they or

the diagnosis. for caloric support as For ancillary consider testing low-risk patients,

stroke symptoms) territory). by is arterial auditory (AICA pontine/ cerebellar mimicked (with lateral Labyrinthitis symptoms) (without mimicked is lateral auditory by territory). arterial neuritis medullary/cerebellar (PICA stroke Vestibular

< Acute meclizine). Tx: vestibular onset treatment and 72 sedatives after symptom consists given (e.g., corticosteroids hours of within condition subsides spontaneously weeks The months. usually to the engagement activities should normal stage and physical hyperacute cautious be has exercise in encouraged. Once passed,

the A 1 at 500 recurrent in vertigo least affects that States. cause with symptoms in auditory United of common females. More among

fullness, episodes hours days. Hx/PE: recurrent lasting vertigo, often to tinnitus, loss, or ear severe of Presents with hearing vomiting and are Nausea typical. may side. affected become hearing the Patients progressively lose years and over low-frequency on deaf

is exam. based thorough and a on and Dx: history clinically is Diagnosis made physical ruled aural out. with are episodes minutes between at audiometry, causes TIA, or once remission symptoms tinnitus of make least (lasting otosyphilis) 20 to been fullness have more) loss the documented and (e.g., diagnosis hearing episodes, needed with other or once Two brain A

(e.g., disease. may help pathology, MRI cerebrovascular imaging MRA) assess vascular with particularly intracranial potential

a Classically, and first-line diuretic were low-sodium treatments. diet ■ therapy Tx: antiemetics. prophylactic many lifestyle and occasionally As changes, benzodiazepines antimigraine other “migraine” to theories have shifted, begun of pathogenesis with have medications, or patients diets, treat clinicians have therapies For nerve some labyrinth, section) damage been gentamicin unilateral intratympanic (e.g., to the with ablative used success. cases, severe vestibular

of (usually roughly of cause 10% recurrent without auditory sufferers. A migraine that vertigo affects symptoms) among common More females. (ion related be pathogenesis to Its in electrical the dysfunction channel) may cerebellum. intermittent

recurrent Hx/PE: dizziness severe lasting with minutes episodes days. of mild vertigo Presents to to and common; be vomiting, or may are headaches are Nausea, severe. variably and present photophobia mild are decades. substantial deteriorate Patients left in although between may over with no balance deficits spells,

Dx:

exam basis causes. clinically is diagnosis physical exclude The of on made history thorough the other usually and a to

Patients the who would hearing documented migraine. a save for Ménière’s to of have auditory and likely diagnosis are loss qualify absence of vestibular symptoms otherwise patients. during phonophobia highly photoor is history if of such in headache, associated is particularly dizziness episode, with A suggestive the

patients do should have taken due and of TIA. that dizziness The is exclusion, one intermittent to care diagnosis not to ensure be or severe, recent with a should years trauma patients (> < TIAs. 50 of vertebral age, of raise or In 72 history pain persistent for concern artery hours) dissection abrupt-onset, of

A (e.g., with MRI MRA) assess indicated to particularly sometimes pathology, disease. is cerebrovascular brain intracranial vascular imaging potential

2 Episodic can testing. type be by ataxia genetic corroborated

usually Tx: lifestyle changes. through or migraine prevented medication, be diet, Can Benzodiazepines or tried. may be antiemetics indicated. not Surgical therapies are

perfusion. consciousness of to of in of loss abrupt causes an cerebral One common the most drop 2° cardiac causes. syncope, obstruction, TIAs, and hypotension, vasovagal micturition-related Etiologies include cardiac and outﬂow arrhythmias idiopathic basilar orthostatic syncope, as without Presyncope described a of consciousness of actual loss feeling imminent is fainting. Commonly confused seizures. with

Hx/PE:

trigger long (e.g., maneuver). Patients report a Valsalva for fear/sight standing of time, of blood, may period

of Ménière’s but to disease these recurrent episodes, last consists hours BPPV, usually days. unlike

Unlike auditory associated Ménière’s, symptoms. no aural has migraine usually vestibular or

vertigo. Rule and vertebral artery those pain dissection head out isolated dizziness or in persistent intermittent neck with or

constricting lightheadedness weakness, follows muff dizziness, vision, of prodrome a diffuse sounds, pallor. or diaphoresis, ed or ■Typically and 30 muscle Leads to seconds. within tone of loss consciousness < for recovery seconds and

Dx:

mental CNS neurologic of hydrocephalus) who examination rare consciousness. a return and are have patients causes TIA, loss among obstructive status normal Structural intermittent to basilar normal (e.g., brief after a

patient unilateral the of are likely lateral the if bites jerking after > there is is episode; or if aspect seconds; Seizures more tongue. or the if prolonged limb 30 their confusion lasts

young factors, and an and all cardiac a or risk for Holter ECG evaluate enzymes. patients out chemia disease cardiac telemetry to arrhythmia, a Unless monitoring there in myocardial patient clear place with is is on without rule vasovagal or faint EEG an rule out seizures. Obtain to or test, tilt-table especially echocardiogram, an neuroimaging, a vascular. Consider

avoid the underlying cause; Treat triggers. Tx:

at caused antibodies postsynaptic acetylcholine neuromuscular An bind disorder that autoimmune the junction. to receptors by (ACh) located adult associated females, other can disorders. affects and often and with be thyrotoxicosis, thymoma, Most young autoimmune

uctuating or (e.g., symptoms dysphagia), ptosis with dysarthria, proximal weakness. and fatigable double Presents vision, muscle ﬂ bulbar as the day typically Symptoms worsen dramatically. f uctuate progresses but

rising climbing swallowing. report brushing their chair, stairs, may from and difficulty hair, a Patients

is respiratory and lethal crisis the but aspiration. compromise of potentially complications includes rare Myasthenic

to Edrophonium Anticholinesterase test): leads (Tensilon symptoms. amelioration rapid of to the Rarely of bradycardia. today owing risk used

for Ice a one Place ptosis five transiently. eye pack of minutes; on ice resolves test:

abnormal response a yield decremental single-f to repetitive ber stimulation and/or can nerve EMG An confirmation. additional

antibodies ACh patients; in antibodies (anti-MuSK) kinase 5%. are 80% in anti–muscle-specific are of

is used CT thymoma. evaluate for Chest to muscle. percent have with of patients thymoma antibodies against striated Eighty-five

to serial need Follow to FVCs the determine intubate.

(pyridostigmine) treatment. Anticholinesterases symptomatic for are used

treatment. cyclosporine, azathioprine, and the Prednisone of immunosuppressants (e.g., mainstays other mycophenolate) are

In provide relief severe temporary IVIG or may to plasmapheresis (days weeks). cases,

Resection can of thymoma be curative.

giving certain (e.g., aminoglycosides) drugs (e.g., β-blockers) antibiotics myasthenia with to patients gravis. and Avoid

toward antibodies by caused channels disorder calcium junction. autoimmune neuromuscular the directed An presynaptic in (60% is of cases). lung Small carcinoma a cell risk significant factor

proximal and with absent weakness fatigability or of with along muscles Hx/PE: Presents depressed DTRs. Extraocular, bulbar respiratory, spared. muscles and are typically

incremental nerve stimulation Repetitive response. a reveals characteristic Dx: of a and chest a by to indicative neoplasm. autoantibodies channels CT calcium presynaptic lung Also diagnosed

cell Treat resection symptoms. Tx: may small tumor carcinoma; reverse lung guanidine acetylcholinesterase added inhibitors can to be can be or given; (pyridostigmine) 3,4-diaminopyridine regimen. either used for and immunosuppression. can be Corticosteroids or combined alone azathioprine

viral environmental exposed is MS susceptible evidence there who pathogenesis unclear, of triggers infections. in such Although is individuals to the autoimmune of are etiology as an genetically etiologies are mediated. Such T-cell to be thought potential between typically 20 and is age. female-to-male is and 40 The onset 3:2, of years ratio the from farther common becomes more one as MS away moves equator. 2.10-9). Table (see are and Subtypes progressive progressive, primary secondary progressive, relapsing relapsing-remitting,

are explained and multiple separated are space a that in neurologic time complaints with not by Presents single and lesion. the permanent accumulate. disease As deficits may progresses,

impairment diplopia, nystagmus, dysfunction, sexual vertigo, depression, bowel unsteadiness, and retention, gait optic seen. paresthesias, also urinary and are cognitive weakness, neuritis, Limb transiently with classically showers. worsen Symptoms hot

for lasting Attacks years, on 6–8 are every 1.5 average unpredictable occur weeks. but

can be come Neurologic go progressive. symptoms and or best prognosis The with history. is a and remitting relapsing

of up back by traveling and myelitis. sharp cervical the generally the pain presence suggests sign, neck ﬂexion, down with or demonstrated Lhermitte’s

Repetitive decremental in a gravis. response myasthenia reveals myasthenic and Lambert-Eaton response characteristic stimulation in incremental syndrome, a nerve

triad scanning in classic nystagmus. ophthalmoplegia, and intranuclear The is MS speech,

of with Pregnancy associated be ↓ symptoms MS. may a in

LE T AB 0-9. 2.1 Subtypes of Multiple Sclerosis

Relapses Yes. acute No episodes. Yes. Yes. None. Progression From onset. progress Not at to begins later. onset; From onset. of each after Full episode. def recovery, remain Course or symptoms cits may progression. during remissions and Minor plateaus take place may remissions, during take minor Relapses, progression. plateaus and may place each after or recovery, remain def may cits progressive episode. Full 19% 66% relapsing-remitting type. after Develops 15% Best. Worse. Worse. Worse. Percentage of Prognosis onset at cases

For optic neuritis, corticosteroids. oral, not IV, give

shows periventricular asymmetric, lesions fingers), matter often white the multiple, callosum. in corpus (Dawson’s MRI especially gadolinium. enhance with lesions Active

cells/μL), (> pleocytosis 5 or ↑ index, oligoclonal reveals an (nonspecific). bands mononuclear CSF IgG

present. may somatosensory potentials visual be Abnormal or also evoked

during be should acute Corticosteroids given exacerbations.

copolymer-1 MS alter (Copaxone). include (Betaseron), and in relapsing-remitting (Avonex/Rebif), Immunomodulators interferon-β1b and relapse interferon-β1a rates

or progressive given relapsing/remitting worsening for can be MS. Mitoxantrone

IVIG, include and cyclophosphamide, plasmapheresis. treatments Alternative

urinary cholinergics painful anticholinergics baclofen for is incontinence; for depression. includes spasticity; paresthesias; clinical retention; and or antidepressants for and for amitriptyline Symptomatic therapy for urinary crucial carbamazepine

the disorder weakness. of peripheral nerves An acute, autoimmune results progressive, demyelinating that acquired in rapidly inﬂ acute as polyneuropathy. demyelinating known Also ammatory jejuni vaccination. infection, or viral Campylobacter infection, with recent inﬂuenza Associated Approximately a of (may patients complete make recovery one up to take or year). 85% near-complete < rate The is 5%. mortality

proximal) trunk, the involving (distal to ascending Classically (over diaphragm, days), with paralysis presents cranial symmetric, and progressive nerves. involve common, begin presentations unpredictably variants including progress are or to that respiratory the Atypical muscles. with involvement cranial

may dysesthesias present. be dysregulation, and Autonomic areﬂexia,

EMG conduction and velocity. nerve demyelination of is show seen conduction on Evidence nerve which studies, ↓ diffuse

by pleocytosis CSF with mg/dL no 55 or dissociation). Supported level protein (albuminocytologic > little a

to failure. Admit the ICU respiratory impending for

first-line are and IVIG treatments. Plasmapheresis are not indicated. Corticosteroids

physical rehabilitation is imperative. Aggressive

lower disease motor etiology and upper loss A characterized of neurons. chronic, unknown degenerative progressive by of Also known Gehrig’s disease. Lou as usually unrelenting and respiratory always within ALS almost of death, five diagnosis. and years failure course to an has progresses 40 is females, than and Males onset ages between 80. more and are commonly generally affected

the lower to progressive weakness (over Presents nerves. and diaphragm, slowly affecting legs, asymmetric, months with years) arms, cranial fasciculations. with initially Some patients present is Weight common. loss

signs with (see and/or Table LMN Associated UMN 2.10-4). sphincter generally and spared. movements Eye are tone atrophy apparent. Tongue may fasciculation be and

a common is Emotional feature. lability

presentation clinical The diagnostic. usually is

the XII) generally pathology tongue oropharyngeal cervical muscles above cause. Involvement as “bulbar” excludes a and IX, differential, myelopathy, as (CN with foramen suggests of the or known the X), spondylosis compressive most magnum (CN involvement, common

studies reveal denervation EMG/nerve fibrillation and conduction potentials. widespread other are exclude Such demyelinating studies motor neuropathies. to principally performed

the CT/MRI involvement. cervical bulbar exclude spine those lesions, particularly in without is done structural to of

with upper 55-year-old male later associated with extremity slowly with left right, and disturbance a his cervical in progressive his MRI. but A weakness without fasciculations normal presents bladder and ALS. Think

and education. measures Supportive patient

mnemonic 5 in chronic, the A’s global the cognitive decline multiple areas of dementia). A (see progressive, for cases. Alzheimer’s accounts disease of 60–80% the mnemonic described differential diagnosis in is DEMENTIAS. The (see and Take the Psychiatry not chapter). care confuse to delirium dementia

Risk history, low age, status. syndrome, for family include educational gender, AD factors female a and Down loss. amyloid plaques neurof neuronal and brillary Pathology amyloid tangles, involves with angiopathy, deposition, neuritic

agitation, Amnesia presenting apraxia psychosis, movements). depression, perform language (inability newly deficits, by acquired first acalculia, is the to and skilled followed usually for sign, information

by cognitive Mild years. precede AD 10 impairment may aspiration onset from Survival symptoms, occurring 5–10 or years the infections. other of death with 2° pneumonia to is usually physical the normal. exam for generally the is state, Except mental

substantial cognitive diagnosis autopsy; an by by only without insidiously that course progressive of and impairment. motor on exclusion diagnosed A be defnitively features suggested can clinical

hydrocephalus, other out and particularly hematoma. normal can vascular dementia, atrophy or chronic pressure subdural causes, and MRI may show CT rule shows imaging PET hypometabolism. temporoparietal nonspecific bilateral normal. CSF is

dementia testing can depression. help distinguish Neuropsychological from in out should ruled neurosyphilis be atypical cases. and vitamin B12 Hypothyroidism, deficiency,

symptoms: associated of Prevention

for supportive patient the family. therapy and Provide

delusions. disorders, and Treat depression, agitation, hallucinations, sleep

are rivastigmine, inhibitors of Prevention progression: Cholinesterase and therapy. tacrine) galantamine, disease first-line (donepezil, is and used. often is Tacrine hepatotoxicity associated less with antagonist, decline Memantine, severe NMDA in an may receptor disease. slow moderate to

dementia. associated cerebrovascular with Dementia a disease the common and is type most of history of second stroke age, a embolic diabetes, hypertension, factors stroke. include of sources, history Risk and

include the vascular for two following: of of more presence diagnosis Criteria dementia or the and of the dementia

signs exam. Focal on neurologic

Symptom or stroke. abrupt, was onset to related stepwise, that

showing ischemia. matter old of 2° imaging or changes evidence to infarctions Brain extensive white chronic deep

are and stroke. Protocols same treatment those the dementia the for vascular of for as prevention

dementia A and temporal of the of characterized progressive frontal atrophy rare, form lobes. by bodies intraneuronal are inclusions as Pick known pathologic Round classic finding. the

with and in early present signifcant behavior disease. the in personality Patients changes and inattentiveness, speech occasionally signs. Other extrapyramidal symptoms disturbance, include rarely age begins dementia Parkinson’s Unlike after frontotemporal disease, 75.

frontotemporal CT. The features of evidence by is or by and diagnosis revealed circumscribed atrophy MRI suggested clinical by

curative made is symptomatic available. no has therapy been only; yet Treatment

that outﬂow CSF impaired to thought brain. treatable arise is from form dementia the A from of potentially

gait and triad incontinence. dementia, the Symptoms urinary classic apraxia, include of of continuous ↑ and signs other not ICP appear, monitoring of elevated ICP (e.g., do pressure. Headaches spikes reveal typically may although papilledema)

think decline, over shows a symptoms than vascular steady patient dementia. a in If abrupt rather changes time

of over decline course presents If with to cognitive CJD. rapid weeks months, a the patient think

diagnosis by The is features. suggested clinical to is The the “feet described as “magnetic” is ﬂoor,” with as forefoot classically the glued gait dorsally completely not extended. or

continuous symptoms. days or patient’s CSF but pressure of LP clinically normal several significant the cause may lumbar drainage for improvement reveals

atrophy. enlargement or of proportion CT shows ventricular sulcal MRI out to

of the shunting is treatment choice. CSF Surgical

of the rare prion remains common dementia. extremely form an Although most is it CJD disease, all loss, member which encephalopathies, spongiform is by spongy are the of characterized of CJD transmissible proliferation. and astrocytic neuronal a degeneration, brain. accumulates abnormal protease-resistant In an in CJD, protein prion the

with or that ataxia after months subacute onset. is dementia causes to decline weeks CJD jerks a myoclonic clinical symptom noted rapid with

features. Suggested by clinical

Hashimoto’s lithium or includes (steroid-responsive) and encephalopathy, encephalopathy encephalitis, differential toxic often bismuth). The (e.g., diagnosis viral

EEG and signs periodic shows waves. pyramidal sharp

the and of the to exclude the may T2 intensity FLAIR diffusion-weighted also with lesions. in imaging MRI and head is and caudate ↑ show putamen used brain structural

CSF normal. is usually

Definitive by autopsy. only can or diagnosis be brain biopsy made transmission. with handled precautions avoid must special Specimens be to

treatment. no effective is there Currently, onset. one patients die of Most within year symptom

triplet on the disease abnormal is A 4. normal) gene (< repeats 29 chromosome within involving CAG autosomal-dominant rare, HD hyperkinetic, multiple in earlier severe leading of and The repeats (anticipation). expression to expands generations, number subsequent typically disease more diagnosis. of from 20 expectancy Life years is time the

Presents involuntary age clumsiness, 30–50 and at antisocial (sudden and with behavior). movements), of of altered years behavior, dancelike chorea fidgetiness, onset irritability, gradual dementia of purposeless, (begins moodiness, as onset also and depression Weight seen. may loss be

A by confirmed diagnosis genetic testing. clinical

putamen). cerebral caudate (especially show and atrophy the CT/MRI of is repeats. the Molecular conducted of testing number CAG genetic determine to

no progression disease and cure, is be halted. cannot There symptomatically. Treat

minimize Reserpine movements. to or given be unwanted can tetrabenazine reduce Psychosis of preferably to dyskinesia. risk with side effects or tardive antipsychotics be extrapyramidal the atypical should treated for first-line depression. are SSRIs therapy

be offered Genetic offspring. counseling should to

nigra. depletion attributable begins the that disorder dopamine idiopathic is age 50–60 An to in after substantia hypokinetic and usually bodies, Lewy by inclusions. is are characterized which eosinophilic It intraneuronal pathologically

“Parkinson’s of tetrad” The the consists following:

(e.g., “pill rolling”). Resting tremor

combined of Rigidity: to “Cogwheeling” effects rigidity tremor. the and due

Slowed difficulty Bradykinesia: and movements. movements initiating seen. gait also stance Festinating without arm (a with swing steps) is accelerating wide leg short

instability: reﬂ impaired Stooped righting exes, falls. Postural posture, freezing,

Other include facies, memory and masked micrographia. manifestations loss,

and rigidity the broader substantial or tremor). clinical (with bradykinesia phenotype without Parkinsonism of is disease, by subcortical infarcts idiopathic multiple commonly most often It other is than caused disorders parkinsonism”). Parkinson’s (“vascular

and causes neuroleptics toxins [designer of and, (e.g., (postencephalitic numerous viral pugilistica), encephalitis MPTP [tardive Nonidiopathic parkinsonism parkinsonism), (dementia drugs], dyskinesia]). trauma iatrogenically, manganese, include are failure a produce levodopa/carbidopa of the on Some these clinical diagnosed disorders of of basis response. to

Parkinson’s atrophy. progressive include multiple disease Other dementias mimic and palsy may and system supranuclear idiopathic

male of patient antisocial onset a chorea, presents disease. older behavior 43-year-old slightly If father sudden think at Huntington’s and a symptoms his these age, irritability, with experienced and

between of abnormalities Parkinson’s difference in in gait signif and arm swing cant NPH. preservation that NPH is of A

Parkinson’s: are Rigidity There Slowed movements (cogwheeling), and Postural PaRTS to Tremor rolling”), (bradykinesia). four instability, (“pill

uncontrolled with pramipexole A is side associated effect gambling.

metastatic. are Most CNS tumors meningioma. 1° common most glioblastoma CNS tumors adults in The are and multiforme medulloblastomas and 1° in tumors common are astrocytomas. The most children CNS

Liver, Liver and BRain: Skin GI, to Breast, Skin, Renal. the Go

brain are supratentorial. adults in 1° Two-thirds of tumors in of are children supratentorial. One-third those

are Levodopa and dopamine carbidopa, both which precursors, of mainstays the are therapy. of

for pramipexole, be used bromocriptine) treatment agonists Dopamine can (ropinirole, early in disease. is needed. for sudden therapy Apomorphine is a agonist that dopamine used another additional can if dose rescue be

levodopa. may inhibitor) MAO-B be need neuroprotective ↓ for and may (an Selegiline the

availability may motor (COMT) inhibitors but ↓ the uctuations. (entacapone of brain the given and Catechol-O-methyltransferase or are levodopa to ↑ alone not ﬂ tolcapone)

rigidity, has akinesia, activity antiparkinsonian improve may and tremor. mild and Amantadine used for It the temporary, early monotherapy of disease. can be the short-term course in

deep brain benefit. stimulation pallidotomy fails, medical or chronic surgical therapy may clinical produce If

Intracranial metastatic neoplasms (30%) 1° be (70%). may or

spread the are and CNS. brain benign, all beyond rarely Of 1° these 40% tumors,

and neoplasms and tract from tumors melanoma. kidney, Metastatic lung, 1° are GI breast, often most the rapid neovascularization. necrosis, nodules; growth, are discrete multiple occur at may They characterized invasiveness, be gray-white and and by junction;

in in meningiomas. males common More for females, except than

(see location 2.10-10), on to cerebral obstruction. depend type 2° and growth edema, mass elevated tumor Symptoms ventricular and local or resulting ICP effect, Table and diagnosis at 8% of headache 31% thought feature. only headaches presenting main symptom, with the Although presenting sole patients of are as as headache the have often only present

features. most slowly presenting motor focal deficits Seizures the progressive common or are the diplopia and nausea/vomiting, symptoms VI is palsies). When headache, include ICP ↑ presenting (false localizing feature, CN in with of ↑ it patients the However, rare relatively ICP. to for present neuroimaging, is era

often Hemispheric changes, aphasia, visual including and decline, produce field and cognitive syncope, abnormalities neuropsychiatric apraxia, lethargy, depression. personality tumors symptoms, visual present Parasellar and/or lesions usually loss diplopia. with cranial with ICP deficits Posterior obstructive ataxia lesions from or tend nerve fossa gait and/or ↑ present hydrocephalus. to

with Metastases that present melanoma. include hemorrhage renal and tend intracranial to cell thyroid choriocarcinoma, carcinoma, cancer,

gadolinium with determine extent to and CT MRI localize ■Contrast the the of without lesion. and and CT vascularity, for tissue but and soft better generally is visualizing for tumors Gadolinium-enhanced MRI better is

TABLE 2.10-10. Neoplasms 1° Common

Astrocytoma brain Arises parenchyma. in Low-grade uncommon. astrocytomas relatively are defcits, Presents or headache. seizures, focal with Has protracted a course. (see than multiforme a prognosis better Has below). glioblastoma radiation. if Resection possible; tumor, or on activity Glioblastoma lesions to IV proliferation (grade mitotic multiforme MRI. in either High leading ring-enhancing astrocytoma) necrosis endothelial and and III difference is major grade IV. between There a grade common 1° brain most The tumor. headache Presents with and seizures, def headache. or focal cits, ↑ the Progresses poor (< rapidly from prognosis). a and 1 time of year has prognosis Surgical removal/resection. Radiation have and variable chemotherapy results. mater Meningioma or dura Originates from the arachnoid. Presentation on incidental location; depends cranial often neuropathy nding. f to related is or an Good prognosis. with Incidence ↑ age. tail. Imaging reveal dural may unresectable for resection; tumors. radiation Surgical cells. Acoustic neuroma (schwannoma) from Derived Schwann loss, vertigo, V–VII stem with tinnitus, compression. Presents of hearing late signs CN ipsilateral or brain and Surgical removal. tumor. neuroectodermal primitive A ICP. Arises and from ↑ fourth ventricle causes the Common in children. malignant; subarachnoid Highly space. seed may the obstructive hydrocephalus. May cause and coupled radiation resection with chemotherapy. Surgical the May from ventricle arise cord. a ependyma fourth) the of or the (commonly spinal in low Common grade. children; cause obstructive May hydrocephalus. resection; radiation. Surgical Medulloblastoma for and evaluating cannot when (e.g., Ependymoma be acquired. skull rapidly obstructive emergencies an hydrocephalus) MRI base lesions

CT-guided or removal. tumor debulking/ surgical via ■Histologic biopsy diagnosis

(if and possible), Resection radiation, chemotherapy.

Therapy tumor site highly is (see histology, 2.10-10). Table dependent on type, progression, and

↓ to edema can ↓ and vasogenic Corticosteroids be used ICP. palliative. often Management is

seizure. had can prophylaxis have used patients in who a be Seizure

of ↑ Symptoms ICP:

worse recumbency in that the with morning is Headache or

In with relative (2 OT Axillary (Freckling, FAI NN spots) NF1) you— glioma) NF1, Neurof (OpTic bromas)

NF2 by clinically respectively. ages are and evident and NF1 15 20,

If see a the the on hypopigmented trunk, consider in setting lesion tuberous infantile of spasms sclerosis. child’s you

The neurocutaneous common most disorder. There 2 von 1 syndrome) and neurofibromatosis major (NF2). (NF1, Recklinghausen’s types: two are neurofibromatosis or autosomal-dominant inheritance. obey Both for respectively, 17 located 22, NF2. genes are The on and chromosome and NF NF1

criteria Diagnostic following: the or NF1 for more two of include

Six adults). 15 café 5 spots children in lait mm (each ≥ or au in ≥ mm

type. neurofibromas any Two of

the or axillary inguinal in area. Freckling

Optic glioma.

Two (pigmented nodules iris hamartomas). Lisch

Bone abnormality kyphoscoliosis). (e.g.,

f NF1. with A rst-degree relative

as are criteria follows: Diagnostic for NF2

neuromas acoustic Bilateral acoustic or and a or of or meningiomas, the of gliomas, schwannoma. NF2 unilateral either neurofibromas, following: any with neuromas first-degree two relative

features Other café lait include nodules, au and skin seizures, spots.

the brain, and MRI stem, brain spine of with gadolinium.

exam, complete and history. a exam, family dermatologic ophthalmologic Obtain testing Auditory recommended. is

tumors). cure; no There (e.g., debulking surgery kyphoscoliosis or symptomatic for of treatment is is

optic surgery Acoustic can neuromas with radio-surgery. be and or gliomas treated resected. be Meningiomas may

organ CNS, skin, kidneys. systems, including the retina, Affects and many heart, Obeys autosomal-dominant inheritance.

the and on early spasms (↑ convulsive in likelihood with infants),“ash-leaf” onset). of (infantile extremities, retardation with seizures trunk Presents lesions age and hypopigmented mental

shagreen nose in patch consistency). papule and (a nodules a manifestations orange-peel Other rough a in butterﬂy) an lumbosacral the on shape and of the skin adenomas red the (small include region with sebaceous cheeks

round, located gray head; the mulberry retinal retina. ﬂat, are peripherally Two lesions are arise in and (2) lesions nerve the from recognized: which tumors, phakomas, (1) which

Symptoms and grow that on kidney, tumors are benign organs. other to the face, eyes, 2° brain, small

cardiac seen. CHF rhabdomyoma and Mental be also retardation may from

renal Renal angiomyolipomas, may hamartomas, carcinoma. cell include or, involvement rarely,

clinical. usually is Diagnosis

Skin enhanced lesions by UV lamp. Wood’s are a

Imaging:

calcified Head area. within the CT: periventricular tubers in Reveals cerebrum the rare malignant transform occasion may Lesions astrocytomas. on into

of (affects the especially for apex in of Evaluate heart, the ECG: of > left patients). the 50% rhabdomyoma ventricle

reveal May polycystic Renal hamartomas, disease. ultrasound: renal or masses,

CT: or cystic show Renal May fibrous (causing changes). angiomyolipomas pulmonary

lesions cardiomegaly pulmonary rhabdomyoma. 2° to or reveal May CXR:

surgery be Treatment based adenoma cosmetic should symptoms on sebaceum). for (e.g.,

seizures or partial with Simple be given complex can oxcarbazepine can partial carbamazepine; seizures. controlled lamotrigine or be for generalized spasms ACTH Treat vigabatrin. or with infantile

Surgical with focus the intervention or for or an associated severe ICP be setting epileptogenic may delay. developmental ↑ seizures in of indicated

disorders. A language for term and speech general (the > of (e.g., “dominant hemisphere” left people). strokes, 60–80% from to right-handed abscesses) and the 95% of insults in left-handed results hemisphere tumors, people Usually

A intact language including with writing, production, disorder of comprehension. ■ an the in insult posterior inferior area to Due to Broca’s fron

gyrus. also Broca’s tal aphasia known is Often superior 2° to MCA stroke. a left as Also known aphasia. motor

with of Hx/PE: with frustration aphasia. awareness impaired Presents repetition, oral loss, deficits, hemiparesis, apraxia and muscles. of hemisensory and the arm facial pauses. and agrammatical is Speech frequent “telegraphic” with described as

therapy prognosis). (varying with Speech Tx: intermediate outcomes

receptive f yet of Aphasia comprehension or as known ■ uent also with Wernicke’s language production. Wernicke’s nonsensical is A aphasia intact disorder aphasia. sensory known as Also aphasia.

and is Wernicke’s BROca’s is BROken Wordy.

insult to gyrus. temporal the superior posterior Wernicke’s an area to (perisylvian) in left Due inferior/posterior to left MCA stroke. Often embolic 2°

quadrantanopia preserved show impaired and Patients Presents of repetition make to to Hx/PE: deficits; words) substitutions); Meyer’s loop. upper “word neologisms exhibit of to of leading 2° language with commands; right use and are awareness involvement unable with errors salad.” and of paraphasic (word (made-up frequent homonymous comprehension, follow of uency f lack

underlying and speech the therapy. institute Treat Tx: etiology

of profound state unresponsiveness). of unarousable A stimuli by external internal suppression state responses (i.e., marked of a unconsciousness a and to Lesser as either metabolic “obtundation” injury or dysfunction. to of due “stupor.” states diffuse structural impaired arousal known catastrophic or is Coma CNS are usually brain both structural, bilateral (pons the cerebral of Coma bilateral when or results higher); or stem pathology. dysfunction hemispheres indicates coma from include Causes the following:

Diffuse encephalopathy (e.g., postcardiac hypoxic/ischemic arrest).

trauma high-acceleration MVA). from Diffuse (e.g., axonal injury

obstructive mass herniation Brain (e.g., SAH hydrocephalus). lesion, with cerebral

meningitis). Widespread viral advanced or (e.g., infection encephalitis bacterial

hemorrhage Massive or pontine infarction brain (e.g., myelinolysis). stem

hypoglycemia). disturbances (e.g., Electrolyte

EtOH, toxins opiates, other drugs). benzodiazepines, Exogenous (e.g.,

seizure or postictal Generalized states. activity

thiamine (e.g., dysfunction Endocrine hypothyroidism) metabolic severe (e.g., or deficiency).

sedatives). witnesses, (e.g., current history complete a including Obtain from medications medical

mental if been activity, stimuli the noxious movements tone, pupillary limbs, (including to tickle). of cleared muscular and spontaneous pressure, and gag (e.g., trunk or pattern, retromandibular medical eye exams, funduscopy, including neurologic and responses maneuver fracture), cold-water has response, motor autonomic motor from testing, face caloric ex, the doll’seye neck corneal breathing reﬂ assessments nasal thorough status, reﬂex, to Conduct applied

history/physical combination neuroimaging. laboratory and made the Typically of by tests or a

CSF glucose, Check electrolytes, a blood ABG, and cultures. and toxicology a renal panel, screen, calcium, LFTs, index TSH) may the based on be metabolic suspicion. performed of clinical Other (e.g., tests

structural Obtain contrast imaging a other head CT for hemorrhage before without or changes. evaluate to risk the light precede of Imaging should LP herniation. of in

to exclude an changes (e.g., Obtain and ischemia structural MRI brain stem). diagnostic be EEG prognostic. and both may

or or vegetative of 2.10-11). (PVS), (see can Rule coma with Table out be “locked-in” all persistent confused hysterical conversion catatonia, which state true unresponsiveness, syndrome,

“Locked-in” eyes are but and move only alert their eyelids. syndrome: can and Patients awake ALS. pontine Associated stem stroke, brain central myelinolysis, and with advanced

the normal of wake-sleep by but awareness PVS: Characterized cycles environment. lack self or of most common The or injury. diffuse hypoxic trauma injury causes ischemic are with cortical

following the of consist Initial should measures: treatment

Attend the ABCs. Stabilize to patient:

Oxygen, DONT—Dextrose, Naloxone, reversible: the Administer and Reverse Thiamine.

and the cause treat and Identify associated complications. underlying

damage. Prevent further

deficiencies. with 2.10-12 nutritional Table describes neurologic associated symptoms commonly the

areas the they are which Figure illustrates with defects associated. field anatomic and common visual 2.10-8

0-1 1. T LE AB 2.1 Differential of Diagnosis Coma

Wakeful cognitive retained alert with abilities. and Alertness without awareness. Wakefulness cycles. no Unconscious; sleep-wake sleep-wake Unconscious; cycles. no Most myelinolysis, brain ALS. common pontine stroke, stem advanced Central causes cortical injury ischemic injury. Diffuse or hypoxic above. See as coma. Same Voluntary ability motor eyelids. and Eyes None. None. None. Yes. Respiratory drive Yes. Yes. None.

0-1 T 2. LE AB 2.1 Neurologic Deficiencies Nutritional with Associated Syndromes

palsy, cerebellar and leading palsy, coma), gaze vertical dementia dysfunction gaze Thiamine ataxia lateral conjugate palsy), Korsakoff’s problems (vitamin encephalopathy inattentiveness, encephalopathy Wernicke’s standing triad (disorientation, vestibular and classic B1) rectus to (polyneuropathy; ophthalmoplegia confusion, (nystagmus, The of or consists walking). retrograde anterograde and horizontal Above, and nystagmus, plus confabulations. amnesia, hyperemesis, AIDS. dialysis, renal starvation, Alcoholics, brought exacerbated administration. Can be on glucose or by high-dose as above. Same was treated inadequately. late phase of in the Wernicke’s Usually occurs that syndrome “resolution” or immediately thiamine with administration. almost Reversible before Always thiamine give glucose. Irreversible. neuroanatomy); of peripheral subacute the of B12)a columns (see posterior degeneration (CSD) Combined cord clinical the Cyanocobalamin of system neuropathy. (vitamin discussion lateral or the spinal disease combined and Gradual, onset. progressive sensory dysfunction, and paresthesias, bladder tongue. sore bowel stocking-glove spasticity, Symmetric paraplegia, stiffness, neuropathy, leg Dementia. others vegetarians; strict with anemia; with status Crohn’s); resection; (e.g., disease alcoholics pernicious post malnutrition. ileal or gastric ileal or Patients B12 injections large doses. or oral CSD. Irritability; personality ciency neurologic def of changes Folatea Folate without the symptoms pernicious with patients Alcoholics; anemia. if early. Reversible corrected vascular risk and homocysteine with Associated events. of a ↑ ↑

the body through the is the of chamber, humor travels by anterior the aqueous trabecular and into eye, the then the anterior angle the drained is ciliary on iris, In pupil the produced meshwork chamber. via in

field (IOP), intraocular process the damaging nerve pressure visual causing that ﬂ ■Any deficits. ↑ can and natural disrupts optic this ow nerve. the is damage the to Glaucoma such result of

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

Left hemianopia with sparing macular

FIGURE 2.10-8. Visual field defects.

Rt. visual eye field Lt. Defect in of fissure loop Rt. Optic radiation Optic 1 cortex nerve eye 1 5 3 Dorsal Visual 2 2 optic 3 Calcarine 4 Optic Lt. chiasm tract much glaucoma more Lateral in geniculatebody closed-angle ■Open-angle glaucoma. is common United the States than

of into against aqueous dilates ﬂow the lens disrupting chamber. of the eye, Occurs pushes anterior iris the the and when humor forward chamber angle. pushes the posterior the then in the Pressure and blocks iris peripheral

factors a Asian (prolonged stress, history, in hyperopia, ethnicity, lens family dark anterior and dilation Risk age, area, pupillary medications), include time dislocation. prolonged older uveitis,

pain, blurred Classically and vomiting. nausea, extreme eye headache, presents vision, Hx/PE: with and pupil a nonreactive (from seen A the angle); acute eye red narrow is hard, of closure light. is chamber anterior dilated to IOP ↑. is in sunlight), eyes. reveal one may ophthalmologic it angles with If to pupillary examination resolves presentation or prior (e.g., spontaneously narrow in constriction both

history examination. Dx: based on is Diagnosis and clinical Those mimic dilation) likely the blurred the by may by to pupillary than be rather triggered to headache (due and lights that resolve that headaches (migraine). a bright blurred vision vision; is with darkness migraine are more distinction

medical is emergency blindness. Tx: that a can This cause or include apraclonidine) Treatment acetazolamide, IOP IV pilocarpine, to mannitol). or IV (timolol, ↓ (oral systemic may medications eyedrops iris, and prophylactically. creates may iridotomy, be performed the peripheral a Laser is which curative hole peripheral in

creasing of meshwork ■Flow humor aqueous limited, the is IOP. generally trabecular through bilaterally, in- occurs A pressure drainage in leading and proper of ↑ meshwork vision diseased gradual obstructs to progressive trabecular loss. a eye, the unilaterally. occurs

visual in States, the United the the macular elderly. degeneration leading In bilateral cause is permanent of loss

40 ethnicity, include age diabetes, myopia. African-American and Risk years, > factors

to may clinical in until patients late deficits. asymptomatic the course, begin visual Hx/PE: Usually when notice impaired to Should have adaptation age headaches, frequent darkness. lens and suspected mild > and 35 changes need visual in patients of be disturbances, years who nasal the defect fields. seen peripheral is The earliest visual in is seen exam. on the funduscopic nerve of Cupping head optic

visual field nerve, the visualization Tonometry, testing most important. ophthalmoscopic of are optic Dx: and loss. obstructs increasing and leading gradually diseased the A progressive proper to eye, drainage of trabecular vision meshwork pressure

(timolol, outﬂow. betaxolol) pilocarpine Tx: to Treat production aqueous aqueous with or with humor ↓ ↑ to β-blockers topical be Carbonic used. may inhibitors also anhydrase or trabeculoplasty improve If fails, laser medication a aqueous trabeculectomy drainage. can

smokers, females, and Caucasians, those among with common More history. a family

with central vision. loss Presents painless of

degeneration: Responsible cases. of macular 80% for Atrophic (“dry”) gradual vision Causes loss.

but Exudative (“wet”) severe degeneration: associated macular more and with rapid Much common, vision neovascular or damage. less

an pigmentary reveals AMD. in ophthalmologist by patients with changes drusen Funduscopy atrophic and/or AMD. suggestive of ﬂuid are and Hemorrhage subretinal exudative

AMD: Atrophic

although E, No combination vitamin to (vitamin C, progression. currently available, is beta-carotene, found treatment slow zinc) a been disease and vitamins has of

E of rate an incidence this modification vitamin high doses require An individuals ↑ regimen smokers. from for mortality on of supplementation lung beta-carotene elevated and may among cancer

Exudative AMD:

to shown have slow (pegaptanib) vision with inhibitors bevacizumab) in VEGF visual (ranibizumab, patients exudative improve AMD. been or loss

use target involves of selectively a may in conjunction useful inhibitors. VEGF with be to laser with therapy which vessels, Photodynamic retinal verteporfin,

often elderly Occurs patients in and idiopathic. is

Hx/PE:

with painless, Presents sudden, artery blindness. retinal unilateral Central occlusion: light. to to is sluggishly near a reacts pupil stimulus direct The but reactive (whitish retinal on a the may swelling nerve fiber that appear and with appearance arteries layer), fovea, bloodless. the retinal cherry-red Patients present to spot

of severity. loss painless occlusion: vein rapid, variable retinal by Characterized vision Central and with may be on the choked, seen disk retinal A hemorrhages, of funduscopic exam. stasis spots, optic swollen macula venous edema cotton-wool hemorrhages,

Tx:

produce in eight within of patients, may although Intra-arterial hours remains occlusion: benefit artery ophthalmic retinal the artery Central controversial. symptoms onset some thrombolysis of of evidence of anterior drainage include treatments increasing of IOP the Other or applied benefit IV but through acetazolamide. chamber unclear ensue. treatments and If applied should infarction before blindness immediately implemented, retinal be permanent irreversible

Central variable results. vein occlusion: retinal Laser photocoagulation has

321 OF THE BASICS 321 of Pregnancy PREGNANCY PREGNANCY NORMAL PHYSIOLOGY OF 321 Normal Physiology

326 Elective Maternal-Fetal Delivery Spontaneous and Abortion Infections Teratology Pregnancy of 329 329 328 Labor Normal Termination 325

PREECLAMPSIA AND CHRONIC 336 340 of HYPERTENSION 338 336 ECLAMPSIA HYPEREMESIS DIABETES ANTEPARTUM HEMORRHAGE 342 IN 340 Complications PREGNANCY Pregnancy GRAVIDARUM Medical GESTATIONAL AND

of POLYHYDRAMNIOS MALPRESENTATION TROPHOBLASTIC SHOULDER SECTION 350 FETAL PRETERM 353 351 Pregnancy ISOIMMUNIZATION MULTIPLE 344 348 348 346 Abnormal RESTRICTION Labor PROGRESS OLIGOHYDRAMNIOS Rh MACROSOMIA PREGNANCY Obstetric FAILURE DISEASE 351 ECTOPIC 349 GESTATIONAL RUPTURE INDICATIONS 345 Complications 345 GROWTH Delivery 345 and 342 FOR MEMBRANES GESTATIONS 348 OF INTRAUTERINE 342 CESAREAN 345 LABOR 348 TO DYSTOCIA FETAL EPISIOTOMY

of Pregnancy Basics The

pregnancy and an processes following The are Figure terms of the understanding 2.11-1). to concepts central (see physiologic of also

a been woman has of Gravidity: times number The pregnant.

to a of weeks’ Parity: gestational age The an beyond infant g. pregnancies > 500 20 weighing number led that birth or

days weeks (DA): Developmental age since of fertilization. The number and research, known. commonly as exact of only not date the Typically in used is fertilization

day frst age (GA): from measured (LMP). menstrual Gestational of of The and the the period last weeks number days GA determined also by: be can

is 20 umbilicus height: the the weeks, grows cm/week. approximately At 1 at Fundal uterus and

occurs movement: Typically at Quickening, weeks. fetal or appreciation of 17–18

Fetal 10–12 by heard heart at Can tones: be weeks Doppler.

diameter length measures femur crown-rump circumference 5–12 Measures and and at (BPD), (FL), (CRL) abdominal weeks. fetal length 13 Ultrasound: (AC) from weeks biparietal rst of f reliable trimester. the GA most during Ultrasound measurement is

Pregnancy of Normal Physiology

physiologic 2.11-2 that and system 2.11-3. in according to illustrated normal Figures changes The occur are during pregnancy graphically

+ Nägele’s period seven menstrual rule: date days. + nine months = last due

F IGU 2.1 1 -1. R E Perinatal by nomenclature date.

L. Current Gynecology, from AH, Nathan Obstetrics (Reproduced, Treatment: & 10th with & DeCherney Diagnosis ed. permission, McGraw-Hill, York: New Fig. 2007: 9-1.) 8th & ed. Endocrinology, Shoback permission, (Reproduced, from D. with Basic DG, Greenspan’s Gardner Clinical New York: Fig. McGraw-Hill, 2007: 17-2A.)

to adverse diagnose, that and goal is can The pregnancy. conditions of care treat in outcomes prevent, lead prenatal to gain, recommendations in 2.11-1. Table Expected exercise nutrition, and weight outlined are

Get a β-hCG: quantitative

To and pregnancy. ectopic diagnose follow

To disease. trophoblastic monitor

To aneuploidy. fetal screen for

A. inhibin = trisomy 18: estriol, ↓β-hCG, UNDERage AFP, 18 Still at ↓ ↓ ↓

Table testing by diagnostic prenatal 2.11-2 outlines typical a schedule week. The sections detail. further recommended modality in follow screening describe each that

standard diagnosing The pregnancy. for

by gesta the tion. at placenta; by mIU/mL 100,000 peaks of Produced weeks 10 trimester. in ■↓ off the second levels third throughout the trimester;

approximately double levels 48 every early hCG pregnancy. during hours ectopic to This when abnormal. pregnancy is often used is diagnose doubling

in small which produced placenta and (MSAFP), the crosses amounts by fetus, the circulation. Maternal maternal serum α-fetoprotein the is enters Measurement are the accurate gestational multiples dating. and results of on (MoMs) reported median depend as

(anencephaly, abnormalities defects placental placental omphalocele), dating, Associated death, spina 2.5 wall (> multiple (e.g., fetal with and MoMs): Elevated abdominal open bifda), MSAFP gestation, (gastroschisis, abruption). gestational defects tube incorrect neural

trisomy fetal and with 18, inaccurate Decreased 0.5 (< and MoM): Associated dating. demise, gestational MSAFP 21

inhibin chromosomal by is adding rarely because ↑ abnormalities MSAFP and now estriol, MSAFP alone (quad screening). its β-hCG, A performed for is detecting sensitivity to weeks. quad by 28 addi 10% an as tional follows: increases of gradually Results are screening

term. increase Peripheral venous Progressive to distention

term. to vascular Progressive Peripheral decrease resistance +40 +30

Unchanged. Pulmonary rate Respiratory +20

capacity rate, Respiratory vital

30–40%. by Tidal Increases volume

decrease. Gradual reserve Expiratory

Vital capacity Unchanged. +10

Increases Respiratory 40%. minute by volume

Unchanged. ElectrolytesElectrolytes trimester. second 0 Decreases slightly. +20Hematocrit Increases. +10Fibrinogen

tone Decreases. Gastrointestinal Sphincter

0 Gastric emptying Increases. with DG, 8th time & Basic Shoback ed. Gardner permission, Endocrinology, from D. Clinical (Reproduced, Greenspan’s Fig. 2007: York: McGraw-Hill, New 17-2B.)

TABLE 2.11-1. Prenatal Care Standard

100–300 500 pregnancy: in additional kcal/day for gain during Guidelines gain weight gain: kcal/day; ■Recommended breastfeeding. Weight An kg/mo. ■Excessive gain: 1.5 > ■Inadequate 1 kg/mo. < gain: according body to (BMI): index prepregnancy Guidelines (BMI kg 12–18 19.8): gain. mass < ■Underweight gain. ■Acceptable kg 19.8–26.0): (BMI 11–16 26.1–29.0): gain. ■Overweight 7–11 kg (BMI gain. overweight kg 29.0): (BMI ■Severely 7 > Nutrition a 0.4 defects neural tube neural tube supplements women pregnancies. reproductive-age mg/day Guidelines women): or with history for prior defects for acid mg/day, of all nutritional supplementation: in for (↓ 4 ■Folic elemental mg/day mg frst 30 150 iron at visit, the ■Iron: sulfate). iron (or Starting of of > ■Calcium: years of 1000 19 of for mg/day age; those 1300 for women < 19 years mg/day age. or vegetarians: 10 D: 400 guidelines for IU/day. ■Vitamin Additional complete μg ■Vitamin 2 μg/day. B12: exercise is moderate daily of Exercise minutes Thirty recommended.

Trisomy are All ↓. four 18:

A. AFP estriol; inhibin 21: Trisomy and ↑ ↓ β-hCG and

↓ inhibin up, ↓ ↑ 2 A. down: 21 estriol, = AFP, ↑β-hCG, trisomy 2

9–14. Recommended at weeks

Down and cases trisomy of fetal ~97% neck) of ~85% transparency plasma (a fuid + ultrasound-determined + of 18. protein cases in of detect (PAPP-A) nuchal the A β-hCG can of Pregnancy-associated syndrome measure free

age); of earlier low-risk (< women villus and invasive pregnant of 35 Advantages: sampling available than chorionic Screen below). years (see less

at weeks Recommended 10–12.

transabdominal Involves aspiration villi) of or transcervical placental (chorionic tissue.

that gestation. diagnostic available weeks’ a to 10–12 accuracy Has of at comparable amniocentesis; Advantages:

risk fetal a Disadvantages: (1–2%); detect tube neural cannot loss open of defects. Carries

Limb been with ≤ have CVS associated weeks. 9 performed defects at

1 -2. T LE AB 2.1 Testing Diagnostic Prenatal Schedule

Prenatal 0–28: weeks. Every four Weeks visits two Every weeks. 29–35: Weeks Weeks 36–birth: Every week. Initial CVS. nuchal + Offer transparency 9–14 free weeks +/– + β-hCG PAPP-A visit and +/– estriol, β-hCG, weeks quad amniocentesis. screen 15–20 inhibin (AFP, MSAFP or Offer A) anatomic full screen. Ultrasound weeks 18–20 for for challenge diabetes glucose test screen. weeks 24–28 One-hour gestational

CBC, Rh screen. type factor, Heme: and titer, Pap antibody disease: Infectious and RPR/VDRL, check gonorrhea dysplasia). and rubella HBsAg, HIV, culture, (to chlamydia, cervical UA for PPD, smear screening. cell HbA1c, If indicated: sickle CF. Tay-Sachs, Discuss screening: genetic

weeks. 15–20 Recommended at

using ultrasound-guided and Consists cells for of aspiration fuid needle studies. of transabdominal an genetic fetal amniotic of evaluation

of ~60% of Detects of neural syndrome, of ~80% open ~85% tube Advantages: trisomy Down and 18. of cases cases defects,

and premature rupture result hemorrhage, include membranes chorioamnionitis, Disadvantages: Risks (PROM), in fetal-maternal loss (0.5%). which can fetal of

for the Indicated following:

of women In 35 time who will > years delivery. of at age the be

quad abnormal an conjunction with screen. In

fetal Rh-sensitized blood detect pregnancy type to to or hemolysis. fetal In obtain

a fetal during to ≥ the evaluate (done of via lung lecithin-to-sphingomyelin detect presence 2.5 trimester). ratio third or maturity the phosphatidylglycerol To

apparent roughly by in children are births of and age. of in Major ve about 3% 4.5% defects f of years classif risk for Table use cations products pharmaceutical of pregnancy. during lists 2.11-3 FDA Table teratogenic outlines 2.11-4 common agents.

1 -3. LE AB T 2.1 of Drugs Risk for During Classifcation FDA Pregnancy Use

trimesters). risk later the well-controlled Adequate a in fetus is to women in there Category (and risk the studies demonstrate and A in frst fail no trimester to of possibility harm The seems remote. fetal vitamin E, acid allowances). B6, Vitamin the recommended (within daily folic not animal was reproduction adequate the trimesters). no animal but shown pregnant an reported, of in is Category adverse been later in trimester Either to studies no frst have reproduction demonstrated fetus there effect (and B have in not that and have women studies studies evidence risk or women well-controlled controlled the in confrmed in studies risk acetaminophen, bupropion. Ampicillin, studies animals controlled women not have are on studies but in been women in available. C the or Category revealed fetus and effects animals have reported, no Either adverse studies in only should the the given fetus. if Drugs to risk be t the potential benef justifes potential Diphenhydramine, (AZT). zidovudine rifampin, Positive the in of pregnant exists, the be acceptable risk. women fetal from evidence D Category benefts human despite use risk may but phenytoin, Alcohol, tetracycline. human of Isotretinoin, based on clearly X the fetal animals demonstrated any fetal possible thalidomide, risk abnormalities, warfarin. humans benef outweighs evidence exists women both, in t. or and or pregnant or risk in experience, Studies have Category

women not change cat’s should the litterbox. Pregnant

First-trimester severe. less infection but more is toxoplasmosis common Third-trimester more infection common but is less severe.

during occur May labor, delivery. time pregnancy, any and at jaundice, CNS include sequelae and growth anemia, delivery, abnormalities, retardation. premature hepatosplenomegaly, Common 2.11-5): mnemonic common TORCHeS of be remembered use can Table the The pathogens also through (see most

1° Toxoplasmosis: feces. occurring transmission, with infection or meat consumption of raw via cat Transplacental contact with hydrocephalus, c and chorioretinitis, CT. ndings Specif on lesions f calcifications, head ring-enhancing intracranial include

fungi. malaria, Listeria, varicella, Other: Parvovirus, TB,

Transplacental transmission Rubella: the frst in trimester. f Specif (PDA). arteriosus loss, cataracts, ndings muffin” retardation, purpuric and include “blueberry mental rash, patent hearing ductus c a

primarily most common infection; transmitted transplacentally. The CMV: congenital periventricular a to include fndings Specif c rash) petechial (similar rash and calcifications. “blueberry muffn”

has lesions. Intrapartum transmission active the Herpes: if mother infections Can skin, cause and or eye, infection. life-threatening CNS/systemic mouth

Transmission delivery, via at of utero, or occur the milk. time can in HIV: breast mothers. of in Occurs to births 13–39% infected treatment AZT The weeks the transmission rst and delivery intrapartum, of life) lower cesarean can for neonatally (prenatally, of to f six and combination 2%. asymptomatic. with often are congenitally Newborns acquired HIV Failure to

2.1 -4. AB 1 T LE Agents Common Associated Teratogenic Defects and Their

restriction (IUGR), renal Fetal cranial ossif neonatal of failure, tubular oligohydramnios, and ACEIs cation. lack growth renal intrauterine dysplasia and birth, hypoplasia, midfacial after retardation, Alcohol mental alcohol defects). syndrome Fetal renal restriction before cardiac and (growth 6 drinks alcohol with day 40% associated syndrome. per fetal of is Consumption risk a > of females; of genital Androgens advanced males. Virilization development in developmental microcephaly, defects, hypoplasia, tube fngernail Neural delay, Carbamazepine IUGR. and cerebral the face, Bowel atresias; of Cocaine congenital microcephaly; tract; malformations heart, IUGR; limbs, infarctions. GU vaginal cervix uterus cell testes, abnormalities and cervix, of Clear vagina or or adenocarcinoma the possible the (DES) Diethylstilbestrol infertility. adenosis, of ↑ abortion Lead (SAB) rate; spontaneous stillbirths. (Ebstein’s heart disease anomaly). Congenital Lithium ↑ Methotrexate SAB rate. microcephaly, atrophy, blindness. spasticity, Cerebral Organic seizures, mercury mental retardation, f hypoplasia. microcephaly, craniofacial Phenytoin features, IUGR, cardiac ngernail retardation, mental dysmorphic defects, retardation. Microcephaly, Radiation mental 0.05 to Gy radiation fetus diagnostic the has Medical < risk. teratogenic no delivering Streptomycin kanamycin and CN VIII Hearing loss; damage. teeth; hypoplasia of deciduous tooth Permanent of discoloration Tetracycline enamel. yellow-brown Bilateral defciencies, GI anomalies. cardiac and anotia and microtia, Thalidomide limb Cleft retardation. cardiac lip paramethadione palate, and microcephaly, cleft defects, or Trimethadione mental defects. tube minor acid bifda); defects Neural craniofacial Valproic (spina and cardiovascular lip retardation. cleft mental microphthalmia, A derivatives defects, ↑ palate, craniofacial cleft thymic Vitamin SAB rate, microtia, dysmorphism, agenesis, or bone developmental Nasal the delay, (wages and stippled ophthalmologic abnormalities. fetus) epiphyses, hypoplasia on IUGR, Warfarin war

2.1 1 LE -5. T AB Diagnosis Treatment Common Congenital Infections and of

testing during + to sulfadiazine cat Serologic Pyrimethamine feces exposure Avoid Toxoplasmosis pregnancy. trimester. third for Spiramycin the prophylaxis titers vaccinate if the Serologic serologic . testing remain after delivery Immunize before pregnancy; mother Rubella testing amniotic ganciclovir at Perform Postpartum Acyclovir lesions a present uid delivery. if HSV culture, PCR C-section of Serologic are CMV f Urine load treat women breastfeeding. avoid HIV; is AZT; blot with AZT viral Western perform if C-section with elective prophylactic > ELISA, infants nevirapine pregnant 1000; or in Dark-f FTA-ABS eld VDRL/RPR, who . women pregnant Penicillin in test Penicillin microscopy, may to common lower for and ↑ and organisms, months years. early be delayed infections upper respiratory with an diseases Syphilis incidence bacterial of or appear thrive, may HIV not breastfeed should HIV-mothers be their infants. counseled to

Primarily transmission. intrapartum Syphilis: maculopapular fndings a skin rash, “snufﬂ es” Specif lymphadenopathy, (mucopurulent c osteitis. rhinitis), hepatomegaly, include and triad: deafness, childhood, saber Hutchinson’s late involvement, congenital peg-shaped (photophobia, central nose, characterized incisors, interstitial and saddle CNS lacrimation). by is In upper shins, keratitis syphilis and

of loss pregnancy. Defned the to of (POC) of week prior conception 20th as products Approximately of clinically pregnancies 15– evident terminate SAB. 20% and a in 60% pregnancies of chemically diagnosed 80% More trimester. frst in occur the than will factors Risk follows: are as

50% third-trimester approximately abnormalities: losses. in of Chromosomal trimester, in losses, the A in 20–30% in frst second-trimester SABs factor and 5–10%

factors: Maternal

↑ ciencies. age, infection, maternal Maternal dietary def trauma,

Inherited S, proteins C prothrombin, (hyperhomocysteinemia). reductase V thrombophilias: methylene antithrombin, tetrahydrofolate Leiden, and Factor

alloimmune factors. Immunologic antibodies, issues: Antiphospholipid

cervical incompetent or loop DES issues: (LEEP), Uterine cervical abnormalities, excision of Anatomic conization cervix. procedure anatomical the cervix, electrosurgical exposure, abnormalities injury,

def progeste Endocrinologic mellitus issues: (DM), ciency. hypothyroidism, Diabetes rone

caffeine/day), toxins, alcohol, Environmental (> mg is 14 500 factors: twofold), cigarettes/day, caffeine radiation. (with drugs, Tobacco risk > the

factors: Fetal malformation. Anatomic

Table 2.11-6 SAB. of types for See

hCG. ■↓ levels of

Ultrasound:

six fetal Can activity and fetal LMP, pole weeks. weeks from a the 5–6 gestational 6–7 at weeks, at the sac cardiac identify

With fetal on small, irregular ultrasound is transvaginal pole a diagnostic a pregnancy. without dating, intrauterine an abnormal of accurate sac

type determined given Rh is . if the Maternal Rh and be type should RhoGAM

been estimated unintended. the has pregnancies States are United that 50% all of in It 25% all elective abortion. of pregnancies end in Some 2.11-7). on GA elective abortion patient Table and depend Options preferences for (see

determine maneuvers or used possible, (longitudinal to cephalic). presentation fetal fetal if Leopold’s lie (breech and, or transverse) are

examination: Cervical

effacement, dilation, and cervical cervical position, station, Evaluate consistency. (see Use of the to delivery an induction. Bishop and probability 2.11-8) Table score with of the favorability succeeding evaluate the is failure. interpreted Indicates follows: a as of 45–50% chance Scoring 0–4: induction. for prostaglandins Give

failure. 5–9: a chance of to 10% Points Give induction. pitocin for

of Associated probability with high a 10–13: very success. intervention need no There induction. is for for

Confrm determine or fetal presentation.

palpation of fontanelles. Determine position fetal through and sutures the fetal

membranes suspected. if Conduct of speculum a sterile is rupture (ROM) exam

depict stages 2.11-9 2.11-4 Table the labor. and of normal Figure

the monitoring the is obstetric States. is most common procedure live in and births in of 85% FHR United used electrode It be performed with at an may

2.1 LE T -6. AB 1 Types of Abortion Spontaneous

POC expelled. Complete is spotting ceases, Pain may persist. but os. Closed shows an uterus. empty Ultrasound conf fetal should to rm sent tissue. POC be to pathology None. POC expelled. Some is Incomplete Bleeding/mild cramping. exam. on tissue Visible os. Open fetal shows tissue. retained Ultrasound D&C. aspiration (MUA) or uterine Manual Threatened No POC is expelled. Uterine bleeding abdominal +/– pain. Closed os + membranes motion fetal + on cardiac ultrasound. intact for and rest Pelvic hours conceptus. viability follow-up assess the 24–48 ultrasound of to POC No Inevitable expelled. is and Uterine bleeding cramps. ROM. os +/− Open management. MUA, or expectant D&C, misoprostol, is POC Missed No expelled. cardiac No motion. fetal uterine bleeding. No Brownish discharge. vaginal os. Closed activity; fetal No ultrasound. fetal retained cardiac on tissue or misoprostol. MUA, D&C, septicemia. leading Septic Endometritis to Maternal 10–15%. mortality is hypothermia, count. ↑ Hypotension, WBC and MUA, D&C, antibiotics. IV Intrauterine activity. demise of Absence fetal fetal cardiac fetal movement on tones no GA; small heart Uterus for ultrasound. or to 16 the weeks. GA evacuate (D&E) Induce uterus at prevent labor; > DIC due abnormalities. If in Recurrenta to early chromosomal often pregnancy, in S often Leiden, If hypercoagulable due factor protein later pregnancy, V (e.g., to def ciency). SLE, states be should cervix 32 between a and cervix a painless dilation of the delivery suspected history and with Incompetent of weeks. 18 normal fetus of of Karyotyping parents. both Hypercoagulability mother. of workup for uterine abnormalities. Evaluate ROM removal cervix Surgical to labor until the with occurs procedures suture cerclage subsequent delivery. prior or to closed of activities. Restriction or SABs year. more Defned a three or two one a SABs consecutive as total in of

precise using (a ultrasound or conducted results), invasive option). be yields less that can more method to fetal scalp tached external monitoring the Doppler (a FHR continuous more shown monitoring. effective be than has to not electronic appropriate been monitoring However, intermittent

TABLE 2.11-7. Termination of Pregnancy Elective

56 Up ■Oral 13–24 methotrexate (90% trimester aspiration buccal Up to: three 49 misoprostol dose) days’ on sublingual days’ misoprostol 49 (high D&E abortions Same to therapeutic to and aspiration TABs) with First of state amniotomy, Surgical vacuum trimester or oxytocin) or prostaglandins, laws) (10% (depending ■IM/oral (low Induction weeks’ Second days’ mifepristone ■ Obstetric above up oral/vaginal ■Vaginal GA 13 times GA misoprostol management: Medical labor [TABs]) as Surgical GA oral/vaginal management: (typically GA + dose), management: weeks’ management: with + GA repeated Manual ■D&C

labor. and minutes Patients the without the 30 tracings Review complications: FHR stage of of labor 15 every second every stage minutes in frst in

frst tracings complications: in FHR of the and with labor 15 in every every stage stage the of minutes 5 second labor. minutes Review Patients

Rate = bpm): 110–160 (normal

< FHR Bradycardia. 110 bpm: congenital malformations to or heart prolapse, cord Can severe rapid hypoxia be or fetal descent). uterine by (2° hyperstimulation, caused

160 > bpm: FHR Tachycardia. by anemia. caused be Can hypoxia, maternal fetal or fever,

Figures See variability beat-to-beat Variability (normal bpm): 6–25 2.11-6. 2.11-5 and =

Undetectable variability: Indicates fetal severe distress.

TABLE 2.11-8. Bishop Score

2.11-9. TABLE of Stages Labor

of 6–11 (10 4 to Active cm/hr) 4–8 (1.5 complete Prolongation and contractions. uterine (1.2 Onset seen hrs dilation sedation hrs dilation 4–6 hrs 3–4 to labor Latent 2–3 cm/hr) hrs hypertonic cm) cervical cm with excessive cm First Prolongation seen disproportion. cephalopelvic with all through min delivery. hrs 0.5–3.0 to infant of Second cardinal 5–30 dilation delivery goes Complete of movements cervical Baby Delivery placenta placenta hr Uterus Third and separates 0–0.5 establish hr 0–0.5 delivery contracts of to to of hemostasis. infant

6 Minimal < bpm. variability: Indicates or fetal magnesium. distress effects of the or opioids

bpm. Normal variability: 6–25

25 bpm. variability: Marked > ↓ may distress; in before occur May indicate fetal a variability.

fetal occur variability: to meperidine serious also anemia; during Sinusoidal maternal use. Points may

2.11-4. FIGURE Stages of labor.

presentation of occipitoanterior of level various stages orientation labor. dilation, descent, of and Cervical during AH. from with DeCherney (Reproduced, permission, & & 8th Treatment, Gynecologic Diagnosis ed. Current Obstetric 211.) Lange, CT: 1994: Stamford, & Appleton

-5. E 2.1 1 IGU F R heart Varying rate (variable) decelerations. fetal

acceleration with of compared deceleration “shoulders” B A. Deceleration exhibits (Reproduced, Cunningham et FG al. permission, from with Williams 22nd Obstetrics, ed. Fig. McGraw-Hill, New 2005: York: 18-21.)

-6. F 2.1 E R IGU 1 Late rate heart fetal decelerations.

decelerations to abruption. Late resulting insuffciency from uteroplacental placental due delivery Immediate was cesarean performed. was and Umbilical 11 pH was artery PO2 7.05 mmHg. permission, FG with al. from (Reproduced, et Cunningham ed. 22nd Williams Obstetrics, York: McGraw-Hill, New 2005: Fig. 18-17.)

↑ Accelerations: in in seconds. 30 to peak < Onset FHR a an of ability respond environment. fetal because appropriately the Reassuring indicate to they to

2.11-10. Decelerations: Table See

pregnancies which in demise of fetal general, fetal the risk antepartum in used antepartum ↑. In is is surveillance initiated most patients Testing is in at-risk

2.11-10. TABLE Types of Fetal Deceleration

sec) in baseline gradual uterine FHR mirrors ↓ apparent, (onset A in return 30 that with Early the > visually contraction. a to nadir to contraction the uterine compression Head from (normal). visually FHR with recovery occur nadir, gradual in to 30 end and nadir respectively. whose and peak, to return ↓ onset, > uterine Late (onset of in A sec) baseline the beginning, after apparent, contraction, insuff hypoxemia. ciency and Uteroplacental fetal (onset but < visually FHR below nadir min. An sec apparent ≥ ↓ to abrupt 30 2 sec), in 15 lasting in Variable baseline < compression. Umbilical cord al. FG Illustrations from et reproduced, with permission, Cunningham ed. 22nd Williams Obstetrics, Figs.18-14, York: 18-16, and New 2005: 18-18. McGraw-Hill,

there if worrisome at present). risk (or are factors 32–34 26–28 weeks multiple weeks following assessments are made: The

assessment: hour. one of the fetal mother number the movements movement Assessed as Fetal by over to 10 minutes. obtain The time 20 average movements is the by means below. reports ↓ should evaluated fetal described of tests Maternal of movements be

Nonstress in supine tilt position test lateral resting hypotension). Performed the with (NST): (to prevent mother the FHR to uterine monitored contractions. detect is by tocodynamometer Doppler along with externally a may stimulation be Acoustic used.

period ≥ 2.11-7). at accelerations “Reactive” lasting 15 over bpm 15 baseline Two seconds response): least above for (normal of a (see 20-minute Figure

two “Nonreactive”: 20-minute a over Fewer than period. accelerations further (e.g., a tests profle). Perform biophysical maternal Lack 32 fetal following: CNS with occur fetal administration. and or sleeping, of FHR weeks, narcotic sedative of the GA may < any accelerations anomalies,

in stress Performed (CST): position. Contraction lateral test the recumbent stimulation spontaneous or induced during monitored (via is oxytocin) nipple FHR or contractions. heart is from NST. monitoring, Reactivity as the fetal determined with preterm at placenta women membrane labor. a The is known women and rupture are procedure contraindicated high or with risk history uterine preterm previa; in of for surgery; who women with

2.11-7. FIGURE test. Reactive nonstress

et al. permission, (Reproduced, FG from Cunningham with Williams Obstetrics, ed. 22nd New 2005: York: McGraw-Hill, Fig. 15-7.)

A is bad. one positive good; negative is a CST

When BPP, performing remember a to–

Test the MAN! Baby,

contractions CST: raises window; by concerns 10-minute a in decelerations 50% about fetal late or “Positive” Defned compromise. of more following usually is warranted. Delivery

and “Negative” contractions. late within CST: or three as 10 at decelerations no minutes least variable Defned signifcant predictive Highly normal of conjunction NST. with well-being fetal in a

significant late by Def intermittent decelerations. variable or ned decelerations “Equivocal” CST:

real-time breathing, to NST. 2 amniotic a (BPP): or to ultrasound fuid 0 of volume, fve and score Uses parameters: profile fetal tone, (normal) movement, (abnormal) assign Biophysical 8–10: is Reassuring Scoring for well-being. follows: as fetal

equivocal. Considered 6: prof delivered this pregnancies le. with Term usually are

worrisome should found. to delivery explanation consideration no strong is 0–4: fetal be immediate given other for Extremely if asphyxia;

profile the measured of the deepest Modified the biophysical Combines (mBPP): amniotic of (AFI, in NST fuid of or the with each index the abdominal measurements sum fuid the quadrants). amniotic cord-free normal cm. test considered is an and with 5 The reactive AFI > a NST

diastolic With even and is umbilical reversal Doppler velocimetry: fow. of IUGR, reduction Umbilical artery there artery IUGR t of suspected. is when only test The is benef

workup. warrants (AFI always cm) Oligohydramnios 5 < further

Uterine pain contractions result in dilation and cervical (T10–L1). visceral head the (pudendal Descent S2–S4). and on nerve, and vagina somatic the of fetal pain pressure in perineum result suffcient of the is absence In medical contraindication, pain relief during maternal request labor. indication for medical a a Absolute also regional (epidural, combination) 2.11-11): Table or the to contraindications include spinal, anesthesia following (see

of use low-molecular-weight dose a heparin (LMWH) 12 of within once-daily Maternal hours

infection Skin over lesion mass site needle placement of ■↑ caused the by ICP a

gravidarum. trimester, persists after think “morning f If the sickness” rst hyperemesis

vomiting weight). and starvation from related to ↓ 5% Persistent not causes, ketonuria), prepregnancy acute least other a (usually weight loss (usually large at Occurs 0.5–2.0% of pregnancies. in molar multiple common and pregnancies. in pregnancies, f More rst gestations, implicated in its and ↑β-hCG been estradiol pathophysiology. ↑ have

1 LE AB 1. 2.1 -1 T of Anesthesia Analgesia Methods and Available

and effects. known No massages, repositioning) ambulation aromatherapy, side breathing, (social Nonpharmacologic support, with pain eliminating by increasing than Works rather pain. coping Limited pain relief. pain women level Provide without of for an regional associated relief the risks with anesthesia. Opioids adequate some and a pudendal anesthesia block episiotomy before of perform block. be Local Excellent lacerations; repair (lidocaine) during can to used cause Rarely, arrhythmias. hypotension, and cardiac seizures, may The used also ligation. or pain Epidural form delivery postpartum most relief; of for tubal can cesarean effective be transient fever, pruritus, hypotension, and deceleration. FHR result Can in excellent for Spinal (30–250 of analgesia duration that provides pain limited Rapid-onset procedures relief minutes). postdural hypotension, symptoms. and puncture duration; Limited headache, patients transient risk neurologic at for puts Combined epidural General spinal

infusion. to onset prolong analgesia with of ability the the epidural combined duration analgesia with continuous spinal rapid Offers of

and delivery fails. cases absolutely contraindicated emergent FHR or anesthesia in in where be abnormality; of regional cases cesarean is indicated some Used useful can in

of variability Apgar and naloxone neonatal 7. administration ↑ and effect ↓ opioids The f the FHR for possible scores sedative need < ve-minute

cesarean the may alone. both and analgesia ↑ of over risk risks delivery bradycardia epidural the of procedures; Carries emergent

aspiration the cross maternal airway morbidity associated higher rates carries maternal and control; signif Requires cant placenta); with readily of than anesthetic epidural agents neonatal a anesthesia. depression (inhaled risk

conditions. from sickness,” and hyperthyroidism, neurologic Distinguish refux, gastroenteritis, acid “morning

Rule pregnancy: ultrasound. β-hCG and Check out level molar

severity: and hypochloremic ketonemia, Determine hyponatremia, hypokalemic, for alkalosis. ketonuria, Evaluate metabolic and enzymes, amylase/lipase. bilirubin, Measure liver serum serum

out The f β-hCG. +/– to the hyperemesis rule step of diagnosis ultrasound in gravidarum molar is rst with pregnancy

step IV uids doxylamine severe if rst management gravidarum is hyperemesis or in and if B6 the f The antiemetics of severe. and vitamin f not

is at 24–28 weeks. so a one-hour asymptomatic, diagnosis diabetes rst the typically Gestational glucose step is in f challenge 140 If ≥ test. challenge a mg/dL, three-hour perform glucose

beginning management the diabetes: (2) insulin of fetal and the ADA to weeks. (3) if growth; 30–32 NST (4) gestational at diet; (1) ultrasound for Keys needed;

Administer step: B6. vitamin First

(an step: PO. Doxylamine antihistamine) Second

step: Third dimenhydrinate Promethazine or PO/PR.

or severe: Metoclopramide, If promethazine prochlorperazine, ondansetron, IM/PO.

dehydrated: IV. dimenhydrinate fuids, IV nutritional IV and If supplementation,

diabetes. is and in diabetes, pregnancy, pregnancy in into which occurs onset Diabetes during gestational two categories: divided pregestational Table The their nature is classify the diabetes classif to the cation used according of risk. women commonly and to 2.11-12) White (see associated

variable severity of is intolerance that during frst diagnosed pregnancy. Carbohydrate pregnancy. all in of 3–5% pregnancies, Occurs late in usually

Typically asymptomatic. a 90th large-for-GA polyhydramnios, or Edema, (> may percentile) warning be signs. infant

First one challenge glucose weeks). plasma hour One-hour test; glucose 50-g 24–28 later step: (at is measured venous 140 ≥ are considered abnormal. Values mg/dL

140 an glucose Confrm showing mg/dL; fasting 180 step: mg/dL. > two two > mg/dL; three-hour > hours test Next three 95 hour hours (100-g) one 155 following: oral mg/ with any of tolerance > dL; the

Mother:

First diet, a and the exercise, glucose regular times step: with strict monitoring Start day). ADA (four outcomes. < postprandial glucose improves 100; two-hour Tight control glucose maternal (fasting 150) oneto < glucose

is insulin Next step: control if Add cient. dietary insuff

maintain during delivery. tight insulin Give control and to dextrose intrapartum

Fetus:

wellbeing. to ultrasound Obtain periodic fetal assess and and growth NSTs

39–40 necessary to may induce at be labor weeks. It

develop type in intolerance than go and/or to DM on later 2 patients life. glucose 50% of More

-1 2.1 T AB LE 1 2. Classifcation Pregnancy of Diabetes White in

diabetes; insulin Gestational A1 required. not Gestational diabetes; insulin required. A2 onset or years. B 10 Age < duration or 20 years older of years. Age onset 10–19 of duration or years C 10–19 20 < D years > onset Age duration of years. 10 or F Nephropathy. Cardiomyopathy. H R Proliferating retinopathy. nephropathy. Retinopathy RF and Renal T transplant.

all 1% of in pregnancies. Observed much Insulin threefold. as ↑ may as requirements risk ↑ congenital is maternal/fetal labor an fetal of loss, Poorly malformations, and morbidity delivery. with during associated and DM controlled

Mother:

ophthalmologic, evaluation damage. for cardiac and assess to Renal, end-organ

to 2 frequent type exercise, fetal Strict type defects. diet, (with 1 therapy, and minimize for glucose insulin DM) self-monitoring control and

Fasting mg/dL. morning: 90 ≤

mg/dL. Two-hour 120 < postprandial:

for growth; evaluate weeks: to anomalies. screen Ultrasound and fetal for developmental cardiac 18–20 anomalies polyhydramnios; Fetus: to quad and screen age determine

Close weeks: CST, (e.g., fetal NST, 32–34 surveillance BPP). or are Admit controlled poorly parameters concern. maternal has been a DM fetal if Serial growth. for ultrasounds fetal

and postpartum: Delivery

drip (80–100 labor mg/dL) an Maintain insulin hourly IV normoglycemia and measurements. glucose with during

Consider poor maturity. fetal maternal preeclampsia, or early in the of of control, lung delivery glucose setting evidence macrosomia,

> Cesarean considered an g. estimated weight for fetal be 4500 should (EFW) delivery

than investigate! eight, Greater look HbA1c congenital 8%, for > is abnormalities. If

pregestational UA think If weeks before diabetes. glycosuria, reveals 20

diabetes diabetes. preexisting be the managed should pregestational trimester in f rst suggests and as Hyperglycemia

with an breastfeeding caloric appropriate Encourage in intake. ↑

Continue monitoring glucose postpartum. rapidly after delivery. Insulin ↓ needs

2.11-13. Table See

Distinguished follows: as

pregnancy-induced (< hypertension hypertension develops hypertension): 20 signif > Gestational weeks’ (formerly mg/L) that known 300 as cant without Idiopathic proteinuria gestation. at many go As on 25% as develop patients to may of preeclampsia.

> for and or Present persist at 12 20 postpartum. Chronic conception weeks may before gestation, hypertension: < weeks’ one-third to preeclampsia. may patients of Up develop superimposed

labetalol, and closely BP nifedipine). Tx: appropriate antihypertensives (e.g., Monitor treat with methyldopa, to or diuretics, ACEIs Do of known plasma ischemia, the give to are can not diuretics low uterine uterine ischemia. to aggravate ACEIs point as and volume lead

to preeclampsia Cx: those similar Complications are (see below). of

as Distinguished follows:

gestation. a ≥ proteinuria protein 300 period) > at 20 hypertension (> New-onset 140 mmHg) DBP in and mmHg mg Preeclampsia: 90 weeks’ ≥ of occurring (SBP 24-hour or

preeclampsia. seizures with Eclampsia: mal New-onset in grand women

(hemolytic with preeclampsia of a enzymes, A HELLP liver and poor elevated platelets): prognosis. low syndrome anemia, variant

hemorrhage but necrosis. are leading clinical unknown, ■The is manifestations by to organ etiology vasospasm and explained

LE 1 AB -1 T 3. 2.1 and type SLE Mellitus (e.g., renal multiple of injury of IUGR molar Polycythemia 35), distress factors or labor hyperinsulinemia history Complications Hyperbilirubinemia C-section for agenesis) or Respiratory macrosomia) Perinatal Postpartum (e.g., Macrosomia extremes from 1 Infection syndrome 20 disease Hypoglycemia chronic Polyhydramnios hemorrhage mortality a gestation, preeclampsia, sacral include (due family and Pregestational age Preterm and African-American shoulder Cardiac defects Hypocalcemia tube ethnicity, Maternal IUGR (< dystocia) of need defects ■Risk mortality Birth Diabetes (RDS) or Neural to > hypertension. pregnancy, DM), renal nulliparity,

signs symptoms See and preeclampsia and the of Table eclampsia. 2.11-14 for

is for The delivery cure only the of preeclampsia/eclampsia fetus.

Preeclampsia:

to delivery term oxytocin, prostaglandin, IV is If or preeclampsia or induce with patient worsens, amniotomy. the close

and If bed rest with management. from modifed expectant treat far term,

preeclampsia: Severe

a with (goal ow). step: blood fetal labetalol < hydralazine of BP First maintain with 90–100 to f 160/110 DBP Control and/or

with sulfate continuous Second step: magnesium seizures Prevent drip. respiratory for DTRs, Watch of (loss toxicity magnesium paralysis, coma). signs of postpartum. hours seizure prophylaxis for 24 Continue Treat magnesium IV calcium with gluconate. toxicity

mother C-section step: stable. Third when is or induction by Deliver

Eclampsia:

ABCs O2. with supplemental step: First

step: Seizure Second control/prophylaxis with magnesium. If IV seizures recur, give diazepam. levels blood and toxicity; monitor magnesium status. fetal Monitor magnesium Control hydralazine). and/or BP (labetalol strict for fuids; Limit I/Os. Foley

1 2.1 AB T LE -1 4. Presentation and of Eclampsia Preeclampsia

preeclampsia headache or other cerebral disturbances, of hyperreactive epigastric or persistent persistent ref and are pain, severe visual exes. Signs

Usually preeclampsia asymptomatic. Mild on ≥ occasions > 140/90 apart. two BP 6 hours mg/24 300 dipsticks). 1–2 (> Proteinuria or urine hrs Edema. 6 apart. two Severe on > occasions preeclampsia > hours 160/110 BP 3–4 or hrs). g/24 (< dipsticks) hrs Renal: mL/24 or 5 urine Proteinuria 500 (> oliguria Cerebral Headache, somnolence. changes: scotomata. Visual Blurred changes: vision, ref Hyperactive exes/clonus. pain. RUQ elevated liver syndrome). enzymes, thrombocytopenia Hemolysis, (HELLP most headache, eclamptic visual signs changes, RUQ/epigastric are preceding an attack The and Eclampsia pain. common not controlled Seizures severe therapy. are if anticonvulsant with

anatomically: bleeding, third-trimester With think

show, bloody trauma Vagina:

lesion cervical cancer, cervical/vaginal Cervix:

previa placental abruption, placenta Placenta:

fetal Fetus: bleeding

of ■Third diagnosis: and ectopic the PAVEs convulsions pregnancy stable The delivery if are way for Initiate classic step: the controlled. is patient triad as Postpartum the preeclampsia. is for that management same most within antepartum (50%), occur after intrapartum 48 or Seizures hours delivery. occur (25%); (25%), postpartum may

serous stillbirth, fetal fetal/ seizure, abruption, Prematurity, DIC, cerebral maternal death. hemorrhage, placental detachment, distress, Preeclampsia: retinal

death. pneumonia, encephalopathy, aspiration hemorrhage, Cerebral events, Eclampsia: thromboembolic hypoxic fetal/maternal

gestation. that occurs bleeding after as 20 weeks’ Defned any

of 3–5% weeks, is pregnancies referred Complicates to as (prior threatened abortion). to 20 bleeding

(see Figure Table 2.11-15 causes placenta The 2.11-8). and previa most common and placental abruption are (e.g., placentation placenta tract accreta), and forms lesions, causes include genital uterus, trauma. other Other abnormal of ruptured

Most be cervical. but ovarian, abdominal, tubal, often can or

patients vaginal spotting/bleeding, some Presents are abdominal with and although asymptomatic. pain

of cause endometriosis. tubes, history a to surgery, or that PID, including scarring Associated fallopian pelvic DES with use, the etiologies

PID, cyst. ovarian The differential ovarian ruptured abdomen, abortion, surgical torsion, includes and

Approach woman a ruptured a of ectopic reproductive abdominal pain pregnancy age until as with otherwise. presenting proven follows: Proceed as

First uterus. showing a transvaginal empty step: an and ultrasound test pregnancy

with Second a step: without doubling. appropriate hCG serial hCG Confrm

for (methotrexate) treatment suffcient Medical unruptured pregnancies. tubal small, is

salpingectomy laparotomy). for Surgical or with vs. salpingostomy (laparoscopy evacuation options

(an hemoperitoneum rupture Tubal and emergency). obstetric

T 2.1 5. 1 LE AB -1 Abruption Placental Placenta vs. Previa

(before implanted delivery) Premature placenta. normally separation of placental covers cervical os. Abnormal Total: ■ Placenta implantation: the the of margin to Marginal: the Placenta extends os. ■ ■ Placenta close os. Low-lying: the is proximity to in in 1 100. 200. in 1 decompression tobacco or factors rapid cocaine excessive abruption, Risk overdistended an use, trauma, stimulation. previous Hypertension, of uterus, abdominal/pelvic age, grand gestation, previa. C-sections, multiple prior advanced Prior placenta maternal multiparity, does Symptoms dark spontaneously vaginal not bleeding Painful, that cease. Abdominal hypertonicity. pain, uterine Fetal distress. 1–2 ceases bleeding without or often hours uterine with Painless, red contractions. that in bright Usually fetal no distress. Primarily clinical. Diagnosis most is previa. ruling sensitivity ultrasound out for Transabdominal/transvaginal 50%; useful clot; for look only retroplacental look sensitivity > for an abnormally is placenta. Transabdominal/transvaginal positioned 95%; ultrasound Pathophysiology Incidence

abruption expectantly bed manage and mild and Stabilize fetal patients monitoring; start cross rest). premature and fetus; blood; type a IV (hospitalize; with

and to delivery Moderate mother or amniotomy delivery stable maternal Immediate distress). severe abruption: for are fetal fetus (vaginal and expected C-section delivery is if soon; with

exam! No vaginal manage with premature Stabilize a expectantly. patients fetus;

tocolytics. Give

partial previa. Serial assess growth; fetal ultrasound resolution to of

help fetal to maturity. Give lung betamethasone with

C-section. by Deliver 36 documented and life-threatening distress, labor, bleeding, lung maturity, fetal delivery for GA. Indications include weeks’ fetal

Hemorrhagic shock. ↑ risk of placenta accreta. Coagulopathy: in 10%. DIC os). the previa vessels crossing internal (fetal Vasa 25% congenital 5–16% is two Preterm PROM, previous abruptions. IUGR, to and delivery, risk after rises Recurrence anomalies. Fetal hypoxia. Recurrence is risk 4–8%.

E IGU 2.1 R F 1 -8. Placental implantation.

Normal placenta. (A) Low (B) implantation. Partial previa. placenta (C) (D) Complete previa. placenta AH. with from (Adapted, permis DeCherney sion, Obstetric Treatment, Gynecologic 8th Diagnosis Current & ed. & Stamford, Appleton CT: & 1994: 404.) Lange,

than as the less 10th EFW an GA. Defned percentile for

insuffciency to infants with are uteroplacental born to systemic diseases hypertension, women that infection, Affected commonly lead anemia). (intrauterine

multiple abuse, gestations. previa, maternal and substance include Other risk placenta factors

height confrming fundal step: by measurements serial with ultrasound. First Diagnose

unreliable). fetus as estimates for step: pregnancy become Second (although EFW weight ultrasound increasingly Ultrasound the advances, fetal

etiology step: the underlying correct Explore and First if possible.

accelerate If fetal maturity. date: betamethasone) Administer due near to steroids (e.g., lung

Perform fetal artery monitoring velocimetry. umbilical NST, BPP, Doppler with and Then: CST, may prompt nonreassuring A status term delivery. near

morbidity ↑ perinatal mortality. and

percentile. birth as 90th > Defned a weight common A gestational sequela diabetes. of

at birth newborn imprecise). Dx: by weighing Diagnose (prenatal is the diagnosis

Tx: diabetes cesarean 4500 > with be in delivery EFW an considered may diabetes. women g for Planned EFW > without in 5000 an and for women g

to brachial birth injury (leading ↑ plexus ↑. as palsy) shoulder dystocia of Erb-Duchenne weight Cx: and risk

Defned ultrasound. as 20 > on an AFI chromosomal be abnormalities but present pregnancies, be developmental considered. May in normal must fetal

transfusion DM, syndrome. maternal gestation, include anencephaly), tracheoesophageal malformations), isoimmunization, atresia, abnormalities (e.g., lung fstula, fetal Etiologies anomalies twin-twin multiple pulmonary cystic duodenal and (e.g.,

asymptomatic. Hx/PE: Usually

than Fundal expected. Dx: greater height fetal Rh anomalies, DM, and Evaluation glucose testing includes ultrasound for for screen.

specif Etiology Tx: c.

Preterm labor, prolapse. fetal Cx: malpresentation, cord

on cm 5 AFI ultrasound. < An be distress fetal may asymptomatic, present. or IUGR Usually but insuff tract abnormalities uteroplacental agenesis, ciency, Etiologies obstruction), and include ROM. urinary (e.g., fetal chronic GU renal

all ultrasound. abdominal of Dx: fuid amniotic the four The in pocket quadrants deepest on sum

Rule dates. gestational inaccurate out Tx: cause the if possible. Treat underlying

Cx: mortality. in a 40-fold perinatal with Associated ↑ facial complications distortion), IUGR. hypoplasia, clubfoot, musculoskeletal (e.g., abnormalities pulmonary Other cord and compression, umbilical include

the IgG RBCs Rh that leading into RBCs maternal fetal In of fetal leak (erythroblastosis condition, and fetalis). the form hemolysis placenta, circulation, cross anti-Rh this to can antibodies maternal previous who ↑ an as among have an had There those no SAB who given. well delivery a undergone have or Rh-women among a with previous TAB is RhoGAM risk as

fetal of monitored and with for > titers be amniocentesis ultrasound with closely evidence serial hemolysis. 1:16 Rhmothers should Sensitized

preterm initiate lungs are when fetal In cases, mature. delivery severe to a Prior given may correct blood transfusions be fetal delivery, low to intrauterine hematocrit.

or weeks and 28 father unknown, is at is the give the globulin). mother RhoGAM If Rh (Rh immune Rh

is RhoGAM , the postpartum. baby give If Rh

vaginal abruption. who placental or ectopic RhoGAM abortion Give had who bleeding, previa/ to pregnancy, placenta have or amniocentesis, an undergo Rh-mothers β-hCG one prevent pregnancy screen critical; is for and follow Type and closely year.

occurs Hydrops 7 fetalis to fetal drops < when g/dL. hemoglobin

acidosis, and death. and hypoxia prematurity, kernicterus, fetal include complications Other

abnormalities can benign range of or trophoblastic that malignant. A proliferative be

result from (paternally Usually 46,XX sperm fertilization empty Complete moles: of ovum; an derived).

is 69,XXY sperm when moles: haploid and (or Incomplete normal that (partial) by its duplicates usually a Occur fetal ovum sperm contain a fertilized chromosomes); tissue. two

with Presents at than hyperemesis dates. size rst-trimester and preeclampsia/eclampsia uterine gravidarum, < uterine greater common), bleeding (most weeks, f 24

20 in folate years) beta-carotene. (< or diet and cient 40 a age Risk extremes or include > def factors of

No detected. is fetal heartbeat may ovaries cysts) or expulsion Pelvic into grapelike theca-lutein molar of (bilateral enlarged clusters reveal exam vagina. the

pelvic Labs mIU/mL), ultrasound Figure reveals sac a markedly (usually present 2.11-9). with serum no > gestational show ↑ “snowstorm” fetus 100,000 β-hCG (see or and appearance

2.11-10). CXR show tissue reveals (see Figure D&C lung may metastases; “cluster-of-grapes”

FIGURE 2.11-9. Molar pregnancy.

regions characteristic appearance have Transvaginal that shows mass intrauterine the ultrasound of cystic complex large, with grapes. a JE et permission, al. (Reproduced, from Tintinalli with Comprehensive ed. Guide, A Study Medicine: Tintinalli’s Emergency 6th 2004: New Fig. York: McGraw-Hill, 113-27.)

the weekly Evacuate with β-hCG. and uterus follow Treat disease malignant highly are disease chemotherapy and and (methotrexate dactinomycin) or irradiation residual with for effective uterine chemotherapy hysterectomy; with metastases.

1 2.1 IGU F R -1 0. E of hydatidiform Gross specimen mole.

an mole or villi characterized by enlarged abundance is fetus of no hydatidiform fetal A classical membranes. or chorionic complete but edematous grossly are There ovaries theca-lutein in (arrows). cysts both Cunningham with (Reproduced, al. et FG from permission, 22nd Obstetrics, Williams ed. 2005: McGraw-Hill, New York: Fig.11-1.)

(2–5%) metastases. moles including or (10–15%) choriocarcinoma Molar CNS and to may GTD, malignant progress pulmonary pregnancy invasive with Trophoblastic be emboli pulmonary may also seen.

births. live 3% Affect all of

and (most frequency of ↑ twins high-order in technology). dizygotic 65% due Since there been advent of reproductive has to the and (fraternal) in triplet ↑ 1980, a 500% the a assisted births of (identical) incidence monozygotic steady. twins The has remained

uterine on maneuvers. more Leopold’s excessive rapid large palpation weight Hx/PE: Characterized and gain, maternal three or fetal parts growth, by of

elevated Dx: HPL, MSAFP are and Ultrasound; hCG, for GA.

termination higher-order Multifetal antepartum multiple fetal fetal pregnancies; is surveillance for Tx: reduction option IUGR. for an and selective by specialist Management recommended. a high-risk is

Cx:

(PPROM), PROM Patients pyelonephritis, are likely complications—e.g., postpartum hemorrhage. times be preeclampsia, preterm six hospitalized placental to with abruption, labor, Maternal: and more preterm

preterm twin-to-twin labor. Complications include and syndrome, transfusion IUGR, Fetal:

United all States. in the deliveries of 0.6–1.4% Affects history infant, factors dystocia. prior history a of Risk and a a of include shoulder obesity, diabetes, macrosomic

Diagnosed labor, second the restitution. a prolonged spontaneous perineum and stage by of (“turtle sign”), recoil of lack of

the event mother’s HELPER: In the dystocia, of be

reposition. Help

Episiotomy.

maneuver). Leg (McRoberts’ elevated

Pressure (suprapubic).

Enter and rotation attempt the (Wood’s screw). vagina

Reach fetal arm. the for

Progress Failure to

birth nulliparity, posterior weight. and chorioamnionitis, position, with elevated Associated occiput

of change. adequate fails Labor cervical or that protraction First-stage rates produce arrest: progressive to

arrest: second-stage Prolonged

3 without. after > > Inadequate hours 2 anesthesia; cervical hours Nulliparous: with dilation regional

cervical dilation Inadequate hour 1 > hours anesthesia; > 2 regional Multiparous: after without. with

2.11-16. Table See

and pneumonia, fetal infection, leads Chorioamnionitis to bacteremia.

injury, are those hemorrhage, 10% Some postpartum permanent risk of fourth-degree have have affected of of and at laceration. 3.8% risk 11% a

Rupture of (ROM) Membranes

as Distinguished follows:

Spontaneous hour of onset ROM: before Occurs labor. 1 > be or precipitated cervical abnormal infections, vaginal or May incompetence. membrane physiology, cervical by

gestation. 37 occurring Rupture weeks’ of at PPROM: < membranes

ROM: Defned rupture hours > 18 delivery. Prolonged as to prior factors smoking, young include and maternal status (SES), STDs. socioeconomic age, low Risk

of often uid. ﬂ Patients a amniotic clear blood-tinged report or “gush” may contractions present. be Uterine

TABLE 2.11-16. Progress to Failure

Close First ■Prima: and > > fetal 2 with 2 hours have > ■Multi: cm continued hrs in oxytocin. with hours reaching ■Multi: change: epidural hr; Active hours hrs; progressive ↓ hrs > rate 2 > epidural 3–4 of to ■Multi: epidural 1 observation cervical Second > Arrest 2 > 14 after with Failure 20 3 > hrs Latent ■Prima: descent: ■Prima: delivery vacuum). (forceps Assisted or vaginal C-section.

parenteral via rest cervical oxytocin; amniotomy; ripening. analgesia; Therapeutic

are previous the Amniotomy; C-section interventions oxytocin; ineffective. if

< should a with of oxytocin contraction contraction considered be a period is when or intensity 3 in frequency 25 < 10-minute mmHg is above Augmentation baseline.

with women do the digital risk infection, not minimize exams on vaginal perform PROM. To of

uterine weeks’ Preterm < labor at concurrent contractions = regular gestation. + cervical 37 change

step: First

exam the A of fuid vault. reveals speculum vaginal amniotic in sterile pooling

pH blue, Nitrazine alkaline is of indicating uid). paper (paper turns test f amniotic

test dries microscope under a on slide). seen fuid ferning pattern (a glass amniotic is after is a Fern

to uid Ultrasound step: amniotic Second f volume. assess

for dye (unequivocal to instillation Ultrasound-guided If check leakage transabdominal indigo of carmine test). unsure:

or risk; is whom labor Minimize not not digital exams infection immediately. planned labor do on are women who perform vaginal not in for

uterine fetal chorioamnionitis. maternal heart evidence temperature, tracing, count, for tenderness Check WBC of and

and GA maturity. on Depends fetal lung

patient presentation; or Term: induced First the status can then labor fetal for 24–72 may and GBS hours. be be check observed

> induction be weeks’ Labor 34–36 may considered. gestation:

management rest gestation: rest. pelvic < with and 32 Expectant weeks’ bed

to infection. Given latency absence of prevent in prolong the infection to the period and Antibiotics:

weeks’ infection GA. Antenatal maturity absence given or to be hours): (e.g., dexamethasone corticosteroids betamethasone intra-amniotic 32 in the promote × fetal prior of Can 48 lung to

distress gentamicin) (ampicillin of antibiotics induce If signs give and fetal or develop, and labor. infection

labor prolapse. cord Preterm delivery, chorioamnionitis, abruption, and placental

20 weeks’ 37 onset labor gestation. as and Defned of between

U.S. Occurs and 1° morbidity all in and of pregnancies the 10% > cause of neonatal is mortality.

delivery, gestation, nutrition, factors and infection, anomalies, previous labor uterine SES. placental maternal abruption, multiple or include preterm Risk PROM, low poor polyhydramnios, factors. risk Most have no patients identifiable

onset pressure, cramps, new have low pain, of discharge vaginal may pelvic bleeding. or back Patients menstrual-like and

contractions over a change 30-minute period) seconds 3 each and uterine weeks’ < contractions 37 30 cervical regular Requires (≥ of ■ at concurrent gestation.

abruption). placental Assess for to contraindications fetal nonreassuring infection, tocolysis (e.g., testing,

speculum a sterile exam rule out to PROM. Perform

fetal volume. GA, ultrasound and or f amniotic and uterine rule an Obtain to verify uid assess out presentation anomalies, fetal

gonorrhea, GBS. chlamydia, Obtain cultures and for urine UA Obtain and a culture.

bed Hydration and rest.

contraindicated, to CCBs, give tocolytic and accelerate lung maturation. therapy fetal PGIs) steroids begin MgSO4, Unless (β-mimetics, for Give prophylaxis is GBS if preterm delivery likely. ampicillin or penicillin

retinopathy RDS, necrotizing hemorrhage, prematurity, enterocolitis, dysplasia, intraventricular PDA, bronchopulmonary death. of

birth Defned any canal, vertex other (i.e., chin occiput closest to as presentation anterior). than to head chest, factors hydrocephalus, include anencephaly, placenta PPROM, polyor gestations, prematurity, delivery, oligohydramnios, Risk and anomalies, uterine multiple breech prior previa.

Figure extremities 2.11-11). presentations maternal the pelvis fetal presentation form lower into (see buttocks and involve Breech of or of 3% all common are most (affect deliveries) the the following: the Subtypes include

breech thighs Frank (50–75%): extended. knees and are fexed the The are

are buttocks. extended Footling legs both or One breech (20%): below the

breech thighs The knees and are (5–10%): exed. f Complete

75% week to Up 38. to change spontaneously vertex Follow: by

may to spontaneously, the vertex. abdomen version be attempted to External maternal not infant the applying fetus If pressure the turn has version: reverted directed by a to The is rate success 50%. roughly abruption version for are cord Risks of an compression, if prepared emergency so needed. be C-section and placental

if imminent; delivery: vaginal contraindicated. Trial Attempt otherwise only is delivery of breech prolapse Complications entrapment. include head and/or cord

fetal risk Recommended lower Elective the given morbidity. C-section: of

Breech is the malpresentation. fetal presentation most common

indications. 2.11-17 Table for See syndrome. used For should acidity and both ↓ prevent sodium elective and delivery, indicated cesarean aspiration citrate be gastric acid to

2.11-11. FIGURE of presentations. Types breech

with from AH. (Reproduced, permission, DeCherney & ed. Obstetric Current & Treatment, Diagnosis Gynecologic 8th Appleton CT: 411.) 1994: Stamford, & Lange,

TABLE 2.11-17. Indications Cesarean Section for

extension Surgical the perineum. opening of vaginal the into

two are median (midline) There and types: mediolateral.

more formation dyspareunia, episiotomy, maternal well midline fstula extension degree), anal death. and, in infection, bleeding, cases, with rare common degree) (fourth include to the (third Complications as rectum or is as or which rectovaginal sphincter

is Routine recommended. episiotomy use of not

Defned as during, vaginal of of for C-section for a occurring mL mL blood the after or 500 > loss delivery of delivery 1000 placenta. or before, > summarizes common causes. 2.11-18 Table

blood commonly to (predisposes fatal), most as include to pituitary insuffciency blood ischemia and the acute (pituitary loss due anterior chronic loss anemia lactate). Sheehan’s to adult (potentially females, necrosis; puerperal of and in Complications infection), failure syndrome 1° cause presenting

AB 2.1 -1 LE T 1 8. Postpartum Hemorrhage Causes Common of

macrosomia, (multiple gestation, Uterine Risk overdistention polyhydramnios). factors myometrium stimulation). prolonged labor, Exhausted (rapid oxytocin or infection. Uterine myomas, MgSO4). (anesthesia, interfering with Conditions contractions Precipitous labor. (forceps, extraction). vacuum vaginal Operative delivery infant. Large repair. episiotomy Inadequate accreta/increta/percreta. Placenta previa. Placenta Uterine leiomyomas. Preterm delivery. curettage. Previous C-section/ enlarged, “boggy” of soft, Diagnosis uterus. Palpation a postpartum cause of hemorrhage most common The (90%). inspection > long. and the of any for genital 2 laceration lower tract Manual visual cm and the uterine visual cotyledons. of missing and inspection cavity placenta Manual for to the Ultrasound be uterus. used inspect also may (usually successful). uterine Treatmenta massage Bimanual infusion. Oxytocin (methylergonovine) Methergine if hypertensive. not Prostaglandin (PGF2a). of defect. repair physical the Surgical Manual removal remaining tissue. of placental not with fundus). suctioning (take uterine the care to perforate Curettage can persists uterine uterine/internal after bleeding causes, lifesaving. when For a conventional iliac ligation artery therapy, or all hysterectomy be

Postpartum endometritis:

days (10 postpartum The W’s 7 fever of postdelivery):

Womb (incision, (atelectasis, pulmonary embolism) episiotomy) Walk pneumonia) (UTI) (endomyometritis) Wind Water (DVT, Wound

mastitis) abscess, engorgement, (breast Weaning

maternal in contraindicated HIV is Breastfeeding active and certain hepatitis, of infection, use medications.

of days temperature including at Characterized for ten the (not postpartum by first least the 24 hours). ≥ a two 38°C first

and vaginal SES, membranes, intrauterine endometritis low include delivery, labor, exams, prolonged PROM, ruptured intrapartum age, C-section, young factors colonization, multiple prolonged emergent for Risk manipulations, corticosteroid bacterial use. postpartum

endometritis, broad-spectrum antibiotics hours For patients and 48 hospitalize hours give afebrile until (e.g., empiric chorioamnionitis). (24 have clindamycin been for for IV and gentamicin) Add complicated cases. ampicillin for

to damage, of thrombogenesis. persistent infection septic not wall thrombophlebitis, pelvic and antibiotics, infection vein fever think to in leads postpartum turn responsive to the pelvic is leading which For that broad-spectrum intimal in invaded by then is microorganisms. clot The embolization. finally, and, Suppuration with fragmentation, septic follows, liquefaction,

from to curve Presents swings a 41°C and fever as and fevers) picket-fence back with high with wide (105.8°F). (“hectic” as normal abdominal pain

and blood CT Diagnose pelvic a for abscess. cultures with looking

anticoagulation and heparin antibiotics days. 7–10 with with Treat × broad-spectrum

shock. pituitary to to that ischemia hemorrhage massive 2° pituitary Defned and leads anterior insuffciency necrosis and as obstetric

Hx/PE:

females. of anterior pituitary insuffciency The cause in 1° adult syndrome presenting most common failure prolactin lactate levels). The to is ↓ to (due

genital Other atrophy, symptoms cold lethargy, menstrual and disorders. include insensitivity, weakness,

with to tumor testing and established rule of pathology. out The or provocative hypothalamus Dx: other and pituitary MRI the is diagnosis hormonal

consists of of hormones. defcient Treatment replacement Tx: the all TSH some after function and cortisol replacement even may patients However, recover alone. gonadotropin

hypertrophy release. result in of prolactin ↑ estrogen pregnancy, and inhibition breast and During progesterone the placenta, of milk delivery prolactin released, and After levels ↓ production. stimulating hormone markedly is of leads milk and oxytocin, and further prolactin ex”). which suckling Periodic cell ref release stimulate ejection infant myoepithelial to contraction (“let-down

protein, contains Colostrum minerals. IgA, fat, secretory (“early breast milk”) and fat, Within postpartum, mature is protein, with week lactose, water one and produced. milk

infant provide the against High passive bacteria. protect enteric immunity and colostrum for levels IgA in

and bonding; maternal incidence allergies, infections, infant mother-child of weight loss. ts Other GI facilitation respiratory early tract upper and ↓ infections; of include benef

HIV certain (e.g., medications HBV include breastfeeding of tetracycline, infection, active to HCV and and Contraindications warfarin). infection, chloramphenicol, use

aureus, by the the periglandular S. into trauma bacteria, caused the usually nipple coupled nipple of of tissue Cellulitis introduction from breastfeeding infant’s the pharynx from with ducts. Affects women. nursing 2–3% of

begin postpartum. Symptoms weeks often 2–4

and drainage. possible unilateral symptoms breast edema, and purulent Breast usually are tenderness, mass, palpable warmth, erythema, include a nipple seen. malaise and may chills, fever, Signifcant be also

from breast swelling. simple Differentiate

culture, ↑ by count, focal suggested milk and a is Infection fever. WBC breast an symptoms,

material pump longer infected prevent who use no accumulation the Continued breastfeeding patients a breast step: to are (or ■ in of First of

breastfeeding) of amoxicillin/ cephalexin, antibiotics (dicloxacillin, The and mastitis azithromycin, treatment clavulanate, PO clindamycin).

incision abscess Next is If treat ■ and present, drainage. step: with continued breastfeeding.

Menarche Female 364 Normal 359 the Abnormalities and Normal Contraception Sexual 361 Cycle 360 Menstrual Assault Cycle Development 359 of Menopause Menstrual 361

development 11. and ages usually menarche 8 the (thelarche) Breast and begins of between precedes

16. the ages of occurs and 10 between Menarche usually

development. stages of graphically Figure 2.12-1 the illustrates female normal

menstrual a progression is of 2.12-2): normal as (see cycle The Figure also follows

13 (days may phase but vary. Typically about lasts Follicular 1–13): days ↑ growth → estrogen ↑ follicles production. → FSH of (proliferative development uterine and the thin lining phase). glands of in of secretions Results the straight

14): (day Ovulation

results spike of ovarian and mature ovum. FSH and rupture of LH follicle in release the a

create involute follicular and the corpus Ruptured luteum. cells

(days can stimulation. without 15–28): of the days) corpus (14 LH phase phase further time survive length Luteal that the luteum is This

in/y AGE 3 PEAK y lb/y RANGE GROWTH AGE lb/y Weight RANGE MENARCHE HEIGHT RATE yWeight SPURT Height 11.5–16.5 10-16.5 17.5 6

Weight 62.5 in (158.5 Average kg) Average cm) (48 lb 106 Height

hair RATING fine. HAIR Initial is and PUBIC straight darkens, spreads. becomes hair and RANGE Pubic coarse, years 8–14 AGE but looks in adult’s limited an area. like Hair Inverted pattern triangular is established. AGE 12.5–16.5 RANGE years

F R 2-1. E IGU 2.1 female Normal development.

(Reproduced, permission, with et Hay al. from Jr WW Treatment: Pediatrics, ed. Diagnosis 19th & Current New 2008: McGraw-Hill, Fig. York: 3-4.)

recommended treatment as for Currently, menopausal is not symptoms. f rst-line HRT

from permission, al. (Reproduced, AS Fauci et with of Principles Internal ed. 17th Medicine, Harrison’s New Fig. York: 2008: McGraw-Hill, 341-8.)

endometrial (secretory The phase). glands produces and the thick allowing with endometrial lining thick progesterone, estrogen secretions to develop corpus luteum

off. the the be luteum sloughs cannot endometrial of implantation, In absence the corpus lining and sustained,

as minimum of development. months a of a Cessation cessation 12 of menses result for follicular of of age onset 51. Average is menopause” failure 40. and cessation defned is as “Premature menstrual before ovarian age

The HAVOC menopause. of features lists mnemonic prominent

bleeding, Other loss dyspareunia, libido. anxiety/irritability, symptoms insomnia, poor concentration, include vaginal changes, and of mood

LH. ↑ f then FSH and Labs show ↑ rst show

bone for density scan follow to osteoporosis. DEXA

cholesterol, (↑ Lipid le total ↓ prof HDL).

■HRT progestin): estrogen (combination symptoms: ■ Vasomotor and

morbidity the ↑ may cardiovascular of been HRT ↑ shown incidence mortality has cancers. and endometrial breast and to and HRT treatment. ts and of benef reason, clinicians For risks review this before the thoroughly should initiating

Posthysterectomy need progestin. not patients do in predisposes a endometrial with uterus to Unopposed patients estrogen cancer.

endometrial known to thromboembolism, vaginal history include hypertriglyceridemia. of or bleeding, cancer, and suspected liver cancer, Contraindications breast or disease, a HRT chronic

commonly, to ashes. and, the f can of given clonidine hot frequency less Non-HRT: Venlafaxine ↓ be

Vaginal atrophy:

Long ring. vaginal term: Estradiol

Estrogen relieve vaginal symptoms. Short term: will cream Once woman a is

she exercise; supplementation calcium with Osteoporosis: pos and sibly Treat should daily postmenopausal, bisphosphonates.

osteoporosis.

not sexually within ■Of a will active are become 85% do who use contraceptive women pregnant year. method, one and

are Absolute methods various follows: to as contraindications

methods NuvaRing, Estrogen-containing “the (OCPs, hormonal patch”):

history DVT of A CAD or

T Copper IUDs: Mirena and

PID months) three (within or active that recurrent is

two squamous intraepithelial smear smears Pap with A Pap or lesions atypical

or artif valve of replacement A joints heart cial history

severe T to intolerance copper, dysmenorrhea disease); and/or Copper menorrhagia. Wilson’s Copper (allergy alone:

disease or or history tumor, acute liver liver breast BRCA. a cancer, of alone: allergy, Mirena Levonorgestrel

contraceptive of 2.12-1 methods Table advantages with the disadvantages. describes relative effectiveness their and along

contraceptive sex unprotected failure. Emergency contraception after pregnancy or (EC) prevent methods various describes of Table methods the EC. 2.12-2

nulliparity absolute More and partner contraindications sexual than are not IUD use. one to

longer-term ↓ The user methods methods of that contraception are effective most error.

methods protect and endometrial, against contraception Combined of ovarian, breast cancer. hormonal

the assault in Sexual unreported is frequently crime United States. the most often to evaluate rape victims collect required evidence. are Physicians and victims of women; however, be victims rape. also are may men rape Most

assailant, including mental assault, alcohol or history, defciency, use a last to or ■Take use, STDs, the of illness time prior full of contraceptive drug condom of coitus, history and location of description the use, history

LE 2.1 AB T 2-1. Methods Contraceptive

implant 100 years. (“the methods) will up > Most three Progestin-only to (1 Lasts 99% using Implanon implant”): pregnant these become effective: in women removal. fertility with Immediate breastfeeding. Safe with bleeding with more periods). heavier, depression, irregular weight Associated period; (no frequent gain, spotting; decidualization for thickening and with years. Inf cervical up progesterone to (Mirena): ve f ammation from Effective progestin Intrauterine body; with endometrial foreign device cramping. Lighter less periods; with fertility Immediate removal. with breastfeeding. Safe months). (up Spotting to six acne. with Associated uterine of puncture (1/1000). Risk a 10 (Copper to Effective body; T): effect foreign from device— spermicidal years. copper for Intrauterine Infammation ParaGard exerts up with fertility Immediate removal. Safe with breastfeeding. (5–10%). and bleeding cramping ↑ (1/1000). puncture uterine Risk of tubal Surgical ligation) Permanently (vasectomy, sterilization effective. Safe with breastfeeding. Irreversible; ↑ pregnancy. Tubal ectopic ligation: Vasectomy: for to due failures semen are samples. waiting Most two not in periods. injection 100 three Depo-Provera women using these (medroxy-progesterone): will pregnant methods) effective: 90–99% or Lighter months (1–10 Very every become IM no works shot months. Each three for with breastfeeding. Safe with gain. weight Associated bleeding and irregular Decreases in mineral density bone (reversible). months). after Delayed fertility last can shot (one 10 discontinuation Evra patch”): regular. Can estrogen Combined Ortho patch periods weekly make progestin more dermal and (“the Not daily. administered thromboembolism for > those smokers years 35 and of Risk (especially age). of and Combined regular. NuvaRing an (“the low-dose Can vaginal make periods progestin ring estrogen more ring”): acne. improve Can then ring. Used for three one continuously without weeks; week the to use skip to continuously periods. Safe ↑ May discharge. vaginal in frst Spotting occurs months. the 1–2

2.1 2-1. LE AB T Contraceptive Methods (continued)

ovarian ↓ cervical progestin): mucus; menses. less Oral Inhibit endometrial estrogen pills painful thicken risk endometrium cancers.a Predictable, suppressing decidualize FSH/LH, and contraceptive ovulation; (combination of lighter, and acne. improve Often Immediate upon cessation. fertility Require compliance. daily bleeding Breakthrough (10–30%). age). and years for thromboembolism (especially of > of those 35 Risk smokers cervical breastfeeding. with Thicken mucus “minipills”: Safe Progestin-only the strict (taking at Requires time each pill day). compliance same against A and 100 75–90% HIV. The effectively only in the condoms: will sheath covers including method Male (up pregnancy that latex protects using become Moderately 10–25 these methods) pregnant to effective: penis women STDs, allergy latex spermicides. Possible or to with Some spermicide against Diaphragm protection STDs. by be provider. Must ftted condom Some Female against STDs. protection Can cult. diff and be clumsy effects. awareness side No Fertility methods who for religious, “natural” by contraception. women Often have cultural, preference personal a used or Requires participation. partner’s No protection. STD/HIV Less No 100 using these effects. Withdrawal pregnant women in 68–74% side effective: will become methods) (26–32 protection. STD/HIV No may Spermicide use Frequent protect against HIV. a May be 2° as used method. 1° method. recommended a as Not however, protect recent lacking endometrial, their and methods against also cancer; given patch, ring) introduction. Other are ovarian combined relatively a breast, hormonal (e.g., data may still

changing urination/defecation, of weapons), douching, acts, the teeth, assault or display since and penetration, of (e.g., clothes). the (e.g., use extragenital use condoms, circumstances penile of brushing of actions time patient’s bathing, assault the assault, the

a ■Conduct note of of physical cervix, genitals, along and a exam, making detailed exam, of complete external pelvic the signs vagina, a trauma, anus. including any survey with

Saline prep sperm. for

if appropriate). Gonorrhea rectal and (including smear/culture chlamydia

LE 2.1 2-2. T AB Progestin Pill”—used Available within Methods hours unprotected (80% Combined estrogen/progestin effective) counter. Emergency over only Contraceptive (75% sex 120 the of “Morning-After effective) Does postimplantation. disrupt not embryo be used bridge contraception. as Can women. Safe for all as Same above. Fewer side than effects nausea/vomiting combined EC. headache, Nausea, dizziness, vomiting, breast tenderness. fatigue, No protection against STDs. above. as Same and of as sex to used IUD—used EC Can T of effective) up contraception. (99% continued within 10 days unprotected years for 7 be Copper insertion. High cost of initial inserted provider. by be Must STDs. against No protection

and HBV, testing HIV, HSV, Serologic syphilis, CMV. for

test. pregnancy Serum

alcohol level; screen. Blood toxicology urine

(ceftriaxone treatment doxycycline). STD plus

risk postexposure possible assessment prophylaxis. HIV and

for EC prevention. pregnancy

for Refer counseling. psychological

follow-up Arrange more with another with provider the for physician if or appropriate. same

include discussion Follow-up for coping a screening for appropriate repeat STDs, screening with methods of for needed. repeat psychiatric if care pregnancy, should referrals and

out. caused be a Pediatric factors abuse variety resulting sexual vaginal is of by and ruled must normal, STDs be but discharge may from

patients the discharge in of vaginal following: Etiologies pediatric include

Infectious vulvovaginitis:

discharge; most yellow-green, purulent often a caused present May malodorous, streptococcus. A group with by

must child from by protective any reported and, caused found, ruled resulting abuse sexual be to also STD May if services). out (STDs be

Foreign objects.

check with glycosuria. be measure infection: for and/or associated May Candidal diabetes; glucose

that A botryoides of the of Sarcoma appearance “bunches have lesions with the malignancy (rhabdomyosarcoma): within grapes” vagina.

age characteristics of Onset 2° eight. the of before sexual 2.12-3): as Subtypes are Table (see follows also

early from GnRH Central production. precocious activation puberty: of hypothalamic Results Most to be obesity. as or commonly related constitutional may (also idiopathic true); known CNS May also tumors. caused by be

puberty: precocious Peripheral Also called pseudo-precocious puberty. nonhypothalamic Results GnRH production. from

of tumors. bleeding) point possibly and (breast excess to Signs development ovarian vaginal estrogen cysts or

(CAH). hair, enlarged ↑ (pubic tumors acne, and/or suggest adrenal androgen odor) or of congenital axillary excess and/or adrenal hyperplasia clitoris, body Signs

the wrist to step: First bone determine and a of Obtain age. radiograph hand

not begun. puberty has age recently started age, just chronological bone year or one If of is has within

by > for present has If 2 puberty is chronological at years, age least or age exceeds bone year been rapidly. progressing one

(leuprolide) stimulation a Next step: test. GnRH agonist Conduct

, to Central is cranial obtain CNS for precocious LH response puberty: If MRI tumors. a look

CNS other signs tumor age years of of incidence puberty, girls of absence the precocious 2% signs. In CNS is in of the 6–8 with

If likely etiology. the constitutional CNS out, precocious ruled puberty tumors are is

the order following: puberty: precocious response LH is , If Peripheral

for and/or cysts/tumors. or Ultrasound look of the adrenals: To ovaries adrenal ovarian

tumors. will Estradiol: cysts ovarian Levels in or be ↑

2.1 T AB LE 2-3. Pubertal Causes Precocious Development of

precocious 2° If a is GnRH seen characteristics sexual conducting by of precocious up and bone work central age puberty. to puberty determining for eight, from stimulation onset peripheral distinguish age by test

oral syndrome adrenal tumors Exogenous lesions Hydrocephalus McCune-Albright involvement tumors, Hypothalamic (polyostotic Ovarian Neurofbromatosis Pineal Constitutional (idiopathic) CNS (hamartomas, CNS estrogen, with tumors Gonadal Tuberous (rare) hyperplasia cysts malformations) dysplasia) tumors f Adrenal topical sclerosis or Congenital trauma/irradiation (OCPs) infections CNS congenital Dysgerminomas (females) brous

deferred. of genitalia for cosmetic may the and hyperplasia; Surgery is treatment adrenal it is required always be ambiguous congenital in not

advanced or of critical Especially bone DHEAS): of setting age Androgen in signs the adrenarche. (DHEA,

17-OH advanced To bone or for adrenarche. progesterone: age screen

frst-line is Leuprolide precocious therapy. Central puberty: to progress. treatment, or physical cease regress changes With

Treat the Peripheral precocious puberty: cause.

will usually cysts cysts: spontaneously. Ovarian necessary, No as is intervention regress

Treat glucocorticoids. with CAH: genitalia. treatment the required is not of ambiguous Surgery for

tumors: Require Adrenal surgical ovarian or resection.

(tamoxifen) testolactone) (ketoconazole be synthesis estrogen or may McCune-Albright effective. syndrome: Antiestrogens blockers or

2° menses by of the absence present, amenorrhea age by ned or is with sexual age 1° characteristics def 16 2° as the sexual development absence 14. of

(no Etiologies are Absence production): follows: characteristics 2° of as sexual estrogen

The most common cause. Constitutional delay: growth

ciency: Turner’s ovarian syndrome. 1° Most commonly insuff a of chemotherapy. for history radiation and Look

variety May following: hypogonadism: a including Central be factors, caused the of by

or exercise. prolactinemia, stress, Undernourishment,

or tumor irradiation. CNS cranial

associated (isolated Kallmann’s gonadotropin def with ciency) syndrome anosmia.

of production genetic characteristics estrogen anatomic but problems): (evidence Presence 2° Etiologies or of include other following: the sexual

of vagina; Absence two-thirds agenesis: Mlerian of abnormalities. uterine the

hematocolpos with along in hymen: Imperforate escape, hymen. bulging with that a the vagina) Presents cannot (blood opening. Requires surgical

but with estrogen) hair. Complete and breast development present pubic androgen testosterone lack (aromatization to insensitivity: Patients amenorrheic of are

First Get a pregnancy test. step:

Obtain in girls). with years a to Next (> bone step: if consistent 12 age radiograph pubertal onset is determine

(the cause. growth patient probable cause short constitutional velocity, is age years) the of most the common delay stature of 1° with < ■If is amenorrhea) growth 12 normal (bone

axis Figure > (see signs consider obtain bone and the the LH/ where FSH is 2.12-3). problem ■If on 12 age of are puberty, years but no is HPA there

levels: to constitutional growth ■↓ (puberty has Points delay ↓ at started). not ↓ prepuberty yet estrogen/progesterone GnRH, LH/FSH,

estrogen/progesterone: hypogonadism. ↓ GnRH, Hypogonadotropic ↓ ■↓ LH/FSH, or Suggests pituitary hypothalamic problem. a

LH/FSH, ↑ hypogonadism. GnRH, ↓ estrogen/progesterone: ■↑ Hypergonadotropic estrogen. Points ovaries which to fail in a the produce condition to

or LH/FSH, a ■↑ problem with Suggests estrogen or PCOS high GnRH, ↑ estrogen receptors. testosterone:

(menstrual ■Normal get blood anatomic hormone pubertal out). Indicates an problem levels: can’t

delay: ↓ LH/FSH, ↓ hormone weight (↓ deficiency) exercise, ↓ excess Anorexia, E/P): ↓ Gonadotropin-releasing GnRH, ↓ LH/FSH, E/P): GnRH, stress loss, GnRH, (GnRH) prepuberty Constitutional (GnRH E/P (↓ ↓ LH/FSH, levels ↓ at growth

infection, syndrome Sheehan’s Hypothalamus trauma, -Tumors,

excess Anorexia, exercise,

Hypothyroidism gland loss, Hyperprolactinemia weight stress Pituitary

Secondary GnRH, septum agenesis ovarian hormone D&C Primary vaginal with or (↑ PCOS syndrome, and/or estrogen) hormone Follicle-stimulating or Luteinizing (FSH) -Menopause-Androgen scarring problem: LH/FSH): ↓ GnRH, ↑ Pancreas hormone delivery, -Vaginal Adrenal—CAH, anatomic: Other alkylating Adrenal LH/FSH, Addison’s Cervical (LH) insensitivity (↑ estrogen, 40(↑ after Thyroid Normal aromatase) E/P): LH/FSH, endometritis, gland levels idiopathic) disease levels Cushing’s (↑ Anovulatory ↓ (gonadotropin-resistant (chemotherapy, glands (↑ radiation, hormone ↑ hydroxylase failure; endocrine stenosis syndrome) ovary ↑ Chemotherapy -Transverse GnRH, cervical androgen) E/P): ↑ Premature agents-PCOS testosterone, to anatomic: Normal

IGU E 2.1 2-3. F R of secondary and amenorrhea. Causes primary

the ovaries. may be Ultrasound to needed evaluate

Obtain evalu- breast development Normal to no a and uterus: karyotype

step a f 2° 1° is workup rst pregnancy The test! the amenorrhea or in of

insensitivity ate androgen syndrome. for

Turner’s syndrome: Obtain Stigmata a of karyotype.

and prolactin uterus: cranial MRI. a breast Measure and development Normal obtain

Constitutional No treatment delay: growth needed. is

alone the lowest HRT at dose. estrogen Hypogonadism: Begin with eighteen estrogen/progesterone is the later, to begin cyclic uterus months therapy present). (if Twelve

Anatomic: surgical intervention. Generally requires

menses in as have of for the Defned passed who menarche. months absence women consecutive six

First step: pregnancy test. a Get

Second and prolactin. Measure step: β-hCG: TSH ■↑ hypothyroidism. TSH: Indicates thy LH prolactin Points (inhibits a ■↑ and of pathology. roid to release the FSH): pituitary rule out Order MRI to the an tumor. of pituitary ■↑↑ prolactin: a Suggests prolactin-secreting adenoma.

progestin Initiate β-hCG: of a (10 challenge progestin). days Normal

challenge or gonadotropin idiopathic (withdrawal to bleed): progestin PCOS pointing noncyclic is secretion, anovulation. anovulation due Indicates that likely to Check PCOS. and high, LH moderately etiology LH is is the levels, if likely indicate Marked can elevation premature LH menopause. of

progestin (no defciency. abnormality bleed): or challenge estrogen uterine Indicates FSH levels. Check ■↑ hypergonadotropic FSH: hypogonadism/ovarian fail ure. Indicates

■↓ estrogen/progesterone Obtain a cyclic test. FSH: an withdrawal bleed anatomic withdrawal points suggests endometrial or to a hypogonadotropic problem. bleed hypogonadism; A

Cushing’s polyuria) suppression of overnight 1-mg hyperglycemia test and to syndrome. syndrome, dexamethasone Addison’s or Conduct CAH, a Signs (polydipsia, hypotension: distinguish

virilization testosterone, present: DHEAS, If 17–hydroxyprogesterone. and Measure is clinical

CAH, Cushing’s pattern: syndrome. PCOS, Mild or

pattern: Look tumor. to for ovarian an Moderate severe or adrenal

and Hypothalamic: with gonadotropins. induce cause Reverse ■ underlying the ovulation

(e.g., bromocriptine, Excision; therapy Tumors: medical prolactinomas for cabergoline).

years): replacement therapy. estrogen progestin with If the treat plus 40 is Premature uterus present, ovarian (age < failure

of in the pathologic with ovulatory ndings. absence cycles f associated Menstrual pain excess an mediated sustained uterine by of prostaglandin and (PGF2α). by vasoconstriction, contractions anoxia, Caused

radiates Presents spasmodic midline, the pain low, thighs. to that pelvic with often inner or back

nausea, may and diarrhea, Cramps in menstruation f with the of frst be 1–3 and headache, associated occur days ushing.

no are pathologic There on fndings exam. pelvic

of diagnosis exclusion. A dysmenorrhea out (see 2° below). Rule workup

heat OCPs, therapy; NSAIDs; topical Mirena IUD. combined

which cause organic Menstrual for exists. an pain PID. and tumors, and causes polyps, adhesions, Common endometriosis include adenomyosis, fbroids,

pathology. for Look uterine mass, tears, prolapse). vaginal cervical a discharge, cervical may masses, (mucosal motion tenderness, a or or vaginal palpable visible have pathology tenderness, Patients adnexal abdominal pelvic normal not However, rule and do exams pathology. out

of Table 2.12-4 distinguishing vs. features See adenomyosis. endometriosis for

ectopic exclude Obtain to pregnancy. β-hCG a First step:

following: Second Order the step:

out with infection CBC or to neoplasm. rule A differential

out to rule UTI. UA

swabs STDs/PID. Gonococcal/chlamydial out to rule

guaiac pathology. GI Stool to out rule

for (see Third pelvic causing pain Table Look step: 2.12-4). pathology

is c. specif Treatment etiology

2-4. LE T AB 2.1 vs. Adenomyosis Endometriosis

endometrial Def outside stroma nition and glands uterus. the Functional uterus. Endometrial in the the of tissue myometrium pain cyclical and with Presents and/or dyspareunia pelvic History/PE (painful intercourse). rectal an and with noncyclical of Presents pain, enlarged the uterus. triad classic menorrhagia, laparotomy. Diagnosis by laparoscopy Requires direct visualization or appearance. or brown dark a (“powder-burned”) have lesions blue-black (“raspberry”) Classic characteristic Ovaries endometriomas have cysts”). (the may “chocolate adenomyosis. is and useful Ultrasound but cannot between leiomyoma distinguish in is MRI but costly. diagnosis aid can ovulation. Inhibit Pharmacologic: Treatment frst OCPs and line; Combination other options include danazol. GnRH analogs (leuprolide) are the Excision, cauterization, of of Conservative adhesions. surgical ablation lesions lysis treatment: and or subsequent percent Twenty treatment. of to become pregnant can patients adhesions. +/– Defnitive lysis surgical TAH/BSO treatment: of Largely symptomatic relief. Pharmacologic: or (frst NSAIDs progestins. OCPs line) plus hysteroscopy. using surgical or treatment: Conservative Endometrial ablation resection results high failure. and of adenomyosis is in treatment Complete deep eradication diffcult treatment. only Defnitive nitive surgical Hysterectomy is treatment: def the years of age). > among most common women (the 30 menstruating cause Complications Infertility carcinoma. Rarely, to endometrial can progress

and most common cause uterine Pregnancy of the bleeding abnormal amenorrhea. is Always check pregnancy test! a

from two menstrual Normal bleeding days. to ranges seven function six until cancer is cessation occurs otherwise. menstrual months more that related of or proven the Vaginal following bleeding

extent Assess of bleeding: the

(> bleeding days); per fow lead lasting to loss (fow cycle) blood may of of mL ↑ prolonged Menorrhagia: 80 8 > anemia. or amount

length time cycles). menses ↑ Oligomenorrhea: (35–90 An between days between of

cycle); anovular. 21-day Frequent menstruation Polymenorrhea: (<

periods. Metrorrhagia: between Bleeding

and Excessive Menometrorrhagia: irregular bleeding.

an for cervical assess uterus, pregnancy, polyps or a Look Pelvic enlarged for cervical to or mass, cancer. exam: myomas,

ectopic out β-hCG rule step: Obtain First a to pregnancy.

anemia. Order rule to CBC a Second out step:

Third step:

cervical to (which cancer smear can with bleeding). out rule present Pap

and hyper-/hypothyroidism out hyperprolactinemia. rule to TFTs

time, Willebrand’s def count, and rule factor disease platelet Obtain von bleeding and to XI out ciency. PT/PTT

to uterus, the an evaluate Order and endometrium. ovaries, ultrasound the Look thickness polycystic masses, endometrium. for uterine of and ovaries,

an mm in obtain postmenopausal endometrial ≥ a 4 the If woman, endometrium biopsy. is obese should of and biopsy also if age, 35 (BMI the > 35), be An diabetic. years is obtained patient endometrial >

bleeding heavy rapidly Heavy or is needed endometrial promote likely has to Since uterine prolonged growth. denuded the estrogen cavity, endometrial bleeding:

estrogen hour. hemorrhage, high-dose For lining IV within endometrial First the and stabilizes bleeding stops step: one

not is a is hours, within If D&C indicated. step: 12–24 controlled bleeding Next

goal loss. The is bleeding: blood ↓ Ovulatory to

NSAIDs loss. ↓ step: First blood to

treat and a Next to is with or stable, OCPs step: Mirena hemodynamically the IUD endometrium control thicken bleeding. the the If patient not 24 diagnosis. hours, an alternative is effective look If this for within

Anovulatory to The goal convert proliferative secretory endometrium bleeding: is endometrium. to

to bleeding. days withdrawal progestins Give × stimulate 10

with factor von rapid For hours). anovulatory six give a patients roughly a disorder, ↑ desmopressin followed VIII may Willebrand’s (lasts factor by who young bleeding also bleeding and in have

medical management fails, If include the following: options

appropriate An diagnostic/therapeutic option. D&C:

biopsies. Can directed as the identify endometrial aid performance as Hysteroscopy: uterine well in help polyps of

anemia, do quality bleeding. have endometrial symptomatic Hysterectomy hormonal Appropriate persistent, unscheduled from treatment, their women and/or or of a in in who not experience or ablation: disruption fail life want

loss! uterine to ↓ of consists abnormal of bleeding treatment blood NSAIDs First-line

highly IUD for treatment Mirena effective options the OCPs menorrhagia. are and

uterine and Complications anemia are hyperplasia +/− of bleeding carcinoma. abnormal endometrial

defciency classic with early-onset of can as genitalia 21-hydroxylase its the Endocrinology that form salt infant most life-threatening ambiguous a wasting a in severe, female (see CAH). discussion and A chapter for newborn present present life. forms Milder in later defciency 11β-hydroxylase common less of cause adrenal hyperplasia. is a

acne, uterine a bleeding, and/or pelvic infertility, mass. with amenorrhea abnormal hirsutism, excessive rarely, Presents palpable and,

male = hair pattern. Hirsutism

frontal clitoromegaly, the muscularity, deepening = of voice. Virilization balding, and

Defeminization of adipose size; tissue. feminine loss = ↓ breast

HAIR-AN Insulin Nigricans. most and PCOS of HyperAndrogenism, form is Acanthosis severe syndrome: Resistance, The

ovarian 7 ng; out neoplasm. or DHEAS adrenal μg/mL): (testosterone > 2 Rule > androgens ■↑ an ovarian Suspect serum ■↑ testosterone: tumor. source syn DHEAS: (adrenal tumor, CAH). Cushing’s Suspect an adrenal ■↑ drome, in ACTH levels stimulation). 17-OH response or basally to ■↑ progesterone (either

differential 2.12-5 of the outlines ■Table diagnosis hyperandrogenism.

Glucocorticoids prednisone). (e.g., resolve therapy but Medical does not terminal new ovarian for adrenal disorders hirsutism. growth prevents hair and techniques remove be Laser used electrolysis, conventional hair unwanted to ablation, must or hair. removal

common the women in reproductive among women, disorders most prevalence of One of 6–10% of a with reproductive endocrine age. U.S. known syndrome. as Stein-Leventhal Also two three of requires following Diagnosis 1. criteria: the

2.

3.

or evidence hyperandrogenism biochemical Clinical of

2-5. T LE AB 2.1 of Differential Hyperandrogenism Diagnosis

PCOS family hirsutism, history DM. of slow-onset or menses, hypertension, obesity, PCOS a Irregular infertility, BP, prof glucose, insulin/lipid Fasting ultrasound ovarian le, cysts. for ciency—nonclassic CAH, CAH short history a of (late-onset) Severe family signs of stature, strong 21-hydroxylase virilization, defeminization. def hirsutism or Jews. Ashkenazi More common among > before levels 17-hydroxyprogesterone CYP21 (17-HP) ng/dL; and after 10 test genotype. ACTH stimulation congenital as (congenital) CAH with ciency—classic virilization. but Same above def 21-hydroxylase > 30 levels 17-HP ng/dL. weight gain, Fatigue, Hypothyroidism amenorrhea. TSH. galactorrhea, Amenorrhea, infertility. Hyperprolactinemia Prolactin. Androgen-secreting mass, > virilization, of neoplasm Pelvic symptoms. hirsutism onset or 30 with rapid-onset obesity. striae, Cushing’s syndrome purple Hypertension, ultrasound truncal Pelvic buffalo hump, or CT. abdominal/pelvic test. plus Elevated suppression dexamethasone BP

BP. High

(obesity). > BMI 30

acanthosis hirsutism, resistance (menstrual alopecia, or hyperandrogenism nigricans). obesity, disturbances, insulin cycle Stigmata of acne, androgenic

Women are PCOS following: for with also risk ↑ at the

resistance, atherogenic syndrome—insulin dyslipidemia, hypertension obesity, Metabolic and

DHEA. +/− ↑ Biochemical hyperandrogenemia: (total DHEAS, free); testosterone

other of causes hyperandrogenism: Exclude

TSH, prolactin.

CAH. to progesterone nonclassical 17-OH rule out

Cushing’s of facies, or moon syndrome screening (e.g., striae) size). head buffalo the of in acromegaly Consider abdominal (e.g., signs clinical ↑ hump, setting

metabolic abnormalities: Evaluate for

test. oral Two-hour glucose tolerance

lipoprotein cholesterol, LDL, Fasting lipid levels HDL, (total triglycerides). and

Optional tests:

> “pearl small, 8 Figure 2.12-4). sign for (see subcapsular Look Ultrasound: forming follicles a necklace” women PCOS. of Seen in with two-thirds roughly

LH/FSH ratio 2:1). ↑ Gonadotropins: (>

Fasting insulin levels.

or urine syndrome. free Cushing’s for CAH 24-hour cortisol: Adult-onset

2.1 R IGU E F 2-4. with cysts. multiple Polycystic prominent ovary

AH. (Reproduced, permission, with from DeCherney Treatment, Gynecologic & & Current Obstetric Diagnosis 8th ed. 1994: Stamford, Appleton & Lange, CT: 747.) endometrial among risk of women the ↓ PCOS. with hyperplasia/carcinoma

conceive: who other with and (or agents). Women Treat metformin not OCPs, to of insulin-sensitizing combination progestin, are attempting a

ovulatory conceive: Women attempting is who stimulation. metformin for Clomiphene treatment are frst-line to +/−

treatment: c Symptom-specif

may line; OCPs Hirsutism: used. nasteride) antiandrogens f frst (spironolactone, Combination also are be and metformin

lipid-controlling statins). loss, factors (e.g., plus medication weight and levels: Diet, Cardiovascular and exercise risk lipid potentially

to DM; risk cancer endometrial 2 risk due ↑ risk long-term estrogen breast ↑ early-onset miscarriages; type unopposed of of of ↑ secretion. and

after regular, of activity. 12 Defned normal, inability conceive months to unprotected sexual as pregnancy. setting by infertility prior least characterized prior the 2° no at occurs in one 1° is of infertility pregnancies; 2.11-6. Etiologies Table shown in are 2.12-5 and Figure

Bartholin’s of Cyst and Abscess Duct

leads formation. and to the of gland pain, swelling, Obstruction abscess

U.S. 5 in reproductive couples million of the Infertility14% aged women Female tract ( Uterine FSH, Tubal 30% 25% disorders or hypogonadism Primary transport Male 2% 7% ovulatory 7% dysfunction 46% defect causes ovary 9% Polycystic 12% ( Disordered 10–20% syndrome 17% 38% sperm Other Unexplained LH) ovarian Endometriosis 51% pituitary Secondary Amenorrhea/ causes Hypothalamic/ FSH) Unknown 58% outflow hypogonadism 30–40% 40–50% causes Premature failure

FIGURE 2.12-5. of Causes infertility.

AS permission, al. et Fauci (Reproduced, from with Medicine, 17th Principles ed. of Internal Harrison’s New York: 2008: Fig. McGraw-Hill, 341-9.)

TABLE 2.12-6. Infertility Workup

Early of cryotherapy, count) defect) with estradiol smears, antibodies Pap (to washed (luteal Ovarian endometrial bleeding, syndrome) or factors Age or Basal follicle exam prolactin, sperm ciency abnormalities IUI f biopsy the Induction Ovulatory vitro Hysterosalpingogram, Midluteal or of Abnormal endometriomas and with Klinefelter’s IVF etiology rule (ovarian Varicocele insemination (incidence Cervical exposure Physical Laparoscopic age) Intrauterine def Semen smear clomiphene, Menstrual IVF factors gonadotropins, of (antral disease utero Male GnRH Medications Intracytoplasmic hyper-/ History phase Signs hypogonadism predictor Donor pulsatile endometriosis, with (IUI) Symptoms (IVF) of injury Antisperm on of factors Pap (corticosteroids, TSH, Galactorrhea liver pelvic +/– pelvic (e.g., follicular or IVF IUI ablation Karyotype ↑ Prolactin postcoital androgens FSH levothyroxine, sonography Treatment hypothyroidism cimetidine, dopamine) insemination conization, Treatment hormonal TSH temperature injection resection In or in analysis fertilization infection tubal of reserve) body ovulation Endometrial causes sperm Thyroid Testicular Ovulation PID, cycle adhesions, level out Tubal/ surgery DES biopsy appendicitis, progesterone broids depends spironolactone)

periodic dyspareunia. with of on either the side introitus Presents swelling and painful

fuctuant seen cm of labium diameter A swelling inferior 1–4 is in either the portion in minus.

of is infection. evidence Tenderness active

not do cysts Asymptomatic therapy. require warm may helpful. soaks be Frequent

an abscess drainage. or incision and with treat aspiration develops, If and for Chlamydia pathogens. other Culture

unless Antibiotics is are unnecessary present. cellulitis

irritation, conditions such spectrum of vulvovaginal symptoms A cause discharge. burning, that and itching, abnormal as (see causes are vaginosis, and candidiasis, vulvovaginal 2.12-7). trichomoniasis bacterial The most Table common

with burning, pruritus, swelling, change discharge, malodor, dyspareunia, dysuria. in Presents irritation, and a

Normal are as secretions follows:

mucoid estrogen surge: secretions. Midcycle Clear, elastic,

wall. and adhere the Luteal secretions; vaginal white to phase/pregnancy: Thick

TABLE 2.12-7. of Causes 15–50% (most Vaginitis common). 5–50%. 15–30%. shift Refects a f in ora. vaginal (an STD). Protozoal f agellates albicans. Candida Usually 1 partner, factors > sexual Risk female sexual Pregnancy, frequent partner, douching. STD. An multiple with partners. sex Unprotected ↑ intercourse. use, intercourse, at HIV, rst f corticosteroids, OCP of young antibiotic frequency IUD broad-spectrum use, age use, pregnancy, DM, ↑ History discharge. Odor, odor, dysuria. ↑ discharge, pruritus, Pruritus, burning, discharge. dysuria, ↑ Mild Exam irritation. vulvar petechiae” (rare). in “Strawberry upper vagina/cervix the Erythematous, vulva/ vagina. excoriated odor. Discharge f shy/stale Homogenous, grayish-white, Profuse, yellow-green, frothy. malodorous, white, curdy without Thick, texture odor. (epithelial ↓ vaginal coated Wet cells ora cells” f shift bacteria; see “Clue mounta in 2.12-6); (↑ Figure lactobacilli). with cocci, larger organisms slightly (fagellated WBCs). trichomonads than that are Motile whiff smell). prep KOH test (fshy — (see 2.12–6). — Figure Hyphae PO or or metronidazole clindamycin. vaginal Treatment Single-dose PO metronidazole or tinidazole. other for STDs. partners; test Treat PO f or uconazole. azole Topical infection, delivery, Complications Chorioamnionitis/endometritis, PID. miscarriage, preterm bacterial as vaginosis. Same for avoided pregnancy. should azoles be Oral in saline no are many a smear, WBCs there Chlamydia. If and organism on suspect Incidence Etiology

2.12-6. AB FIGURE vaginitis. of Causes

(A) Candidal vaginitis. KOH organisms on evident Candida are wet albicans mount. (B) Gardnerella vaginalis. Note margins. and cells cell epithelial indistinct (“clue the cells”) granular Wolff with reproduced, et permission, A from al. (Image K Color Clinical 5th of & Synopsis Fitzpatrick’s Atlas Dermatology, ed. 2005: York: McGraw-Hill, 717. New B from al. permission, Kasper DL with Image et reproduced, 16th ed. Internal of Medicine, Harrison’s Principles York: New 2005: 767.) McGraw-Hill,

vaginal examination of and walls, the thorough vulva, a Conduct cervix.

and organism saline WBCs smear, many Chlamydia. on suspect no there are If

be (with from vaginal and speculum hydroxide exam microscopy. (KOH) the pH, Samples (“whiff”) 10% mount test, should amine obtained wet for saline),

gonorrhoeae trachomatis and on Neisseria leukocytes for in symptoms tests rule numerous purulent out wet be prep, DNA friability, patients a should To of obtained or Chlamydia discharge, cervicitis, PID. with cervical or any cultures

(see is etiology Treatment 2.12-7). Table specifc

the cervix. uterine Infammation of genital vulva tract Because female contiguous cervicitis. the vulvovaginitis the from overlap some fallopian to is there the tubes, between is and are Etiologies follows: as

Chlamydia, HPV. (most HSV, Trichomonas, Infectious common): gonococcus,

exposure, radiation Noninfectious: Trauma, malignancy.

mucopurulent Hx/PE: PID. absence motion Yellow-green of of tenderness; other cervical discharge; signs

discussion chapter. Dx/Tx: STDs in the See of the Disease Infectious

are bacterial clinical required): of vaginosis four (three diagnosis Criteria of for the

Vaginal 4.5 pH >

wet on cells mount Clue epithelial comprise cells 20% of >

of is aerobes/anaerobes. that and Chlamydia infection tract with gonorrhoeae endogenous cases), of (one-third of upper trachomatis Neisseria polymicrobial (one-third A genital associated the cases), 1–3%. The lifetime is risk ↑ risk. IUDs not PID Risk do

that The patient as ned tenderness severe cervical chandelier” on makes sign exam. the for chandelier the is def “jump motion

chronic ectopic subclinical due pelvic Mild major to scarring. infertility, cause a pain of PID pregnancy, and and is factor pelvic tubal

STDs and/or factors prior sex include multiple douching, and non-Caucasian smoking, ethnicity, partners, PID.

menstrual with and fever and cervical Presents disturbances, a lower pain, chills, abdominal discharge. purulent

also are seen.

of plus of pelvic the lower the following: or Diagnosed one pain abdominal presence by acute

has A predictive 10,000 > for WBC count value negative and PID. poor positive

abscess. out β-hCG possibility rule a to evaluate to Order for the tubo-ovarian pregnancy and and of ultrasound

noninvasive of diagnosing is means a PID. Ultrasound for: Look

of the or dilation fallopian tubes Thickening

the Fluid in cul-de-sac

while Antibiotic delayed awaiting be not culture treatment should results. sexual appropriately. All treated should be examined partners and

Outpatient regimens:

14 days. oxacin metronidazole × oxacin A: +/– Of or Regimen days levof 14 ×

metronidazole plus or B: cefoxitin IM dose × × +/– probenecid doxycycline days Regimen × days. 14 plus 1 Ceftriaxone 14

regimens: antibiotic Inpatient

plus × doxycycline Cefoxitin 14 days. cefotetan or

Clindamycin × plus days. gentamicin 14

Surgery:

of treatment; the the is or through after is midline Drainage mass a cul-de-sac abscess drainable in abscess vagina. persists in mass is the > appropriate cm; antibiotic tubo-ovarian/pelvic 4–6 and if the the the

vaginal to appropriate. is dissecting the is the fxed rectovaginal drainage the is abscess septum colpotomy and If membrane,

exploratory deteriorates, the patient’s If laparotomy. condition perform

to Surgery surgery in fertility. adhesions severe may range women from maintain lysis of TAH/BSO to with who for conservative desire cases

chronic 25% pregnancy, or with episodes pain, acute of develop infertility. disease women pelvic dyspareunia, infection, Some of ectopic repeated

liver RUQ indicate (Fitz-Hugh–Curtis an (abnormal pain). associated shoulder pain perihepatitis function, may syndrome)

approach 10% infertility the The risk the and salpingitis after ↑ repeated 50% frst after second with of esti and is episode. 25% episode, episode, third to episodes a mated after of

of aureus women by period S. f a of tampons. often who preformed ve have within toxin Caused used days in (TSST-1); menstrual occurs the onset The menstruating 6–7:100,000 women in now annually. is incidence are as Nonmenstrual menstrual cases as common nearly cases.

vomiting, higher. onset watery or abrupt of with fever diarrhea, with Presents 38.9°C and fever, (102°F)

erythematous rash macular is diffuse seen. A also

conjunctivitis common. Nonpurulent is

within 1–2 weeks illness. generally palms the especially of Desquamation, soles, occurs and of recovery during

from to preformed result the symptoms due properties the are invasive not are because of organism. and Blood toxin cultures

Rapid rehydration.

women vancomycin penicillin oxacillin); allergy. with (nafcillin, for Antistaphylococcal drugs

fever. illness and of the can reduce ↓ Corticosteroids severity

failure. Manage or renal cardiac

associated 3–6%. The TSS with mortality is rate

intractable hypotension, are Three of major causes and ARDS, DIC. death 2° hemorrhage to

toxin. rare is to S. reaction TSS potentially but fatal a aureus is the is to by the because bacterium toxin produced reaction the bacteria, not clinical itself. Diagnosis to rapid and antibiotic in f steps The rst are rehydration treatment treatment.

Gynecologic cancers ovarian, include uterine, cervical, vulvar and neoplasms. endometrial, the cancer carries mortality. Ovarian highest

the of common most tract. The female benign neoplasm genital tumor is connective frm, muscle tissue. smooth and discrete, and of multiple round, and The often is composed sensitive, pregnancy during estrogen Tumors ↓ size often and ↑ they so and in after are menopause. progesterone is Malignant (0.1–0.5%). leiomyosarcoma rare transformation to women Caucasian is 25% and Prevalence women. 50% among among African-American

benign HISTORY/PE are myomas Uterine

The of asymptomatic. are cases majority

present the with menorrhagia. may Symptomatic following: patients

■Bleeding: periods; Longer, heavier anemia.

with menopause, to continues out grow malignancy a must uterine a after ruled biopsy. mass be If

have 5–10% endometrial percent with of vaginal vaginal with Eighty have of abnormal cancer. bleeding carcinoma but women only bleeding, endometrial women

and urinary Pelvic pressure retention. rectal frequency and Pressure: pressure; constipation or bloating;

dysmenorrhea, dyspareunia. Pain: 2°

or enlarged may Pelvic nontender, A cobblestone seen. (“lumpybumpy”), be symptoms: frm, irregular uterus

To for look CBC: anemia.

for To Ultrasound: masses. myomas; look uterine exclude ovarian can also

Can myomas. submucous and delineate intramural MRI:

Pharmacologic:

NSAIDs.

contraception. hormonal Combined

stop to danazol slow bleeding. acetate Medroxyprogesterone or or

(leuprolide of to nafarelin) ↓ and further growth, surrounding ↓ size suppress the vascularity. analogs myomas, GnRH or Also surgery. prior used to

pedunculated Surgery: a Emergent myoma. torsion indicated surgery for of is

of years: with resection. Myomectomy childbearing Women or hysteroscopy leiomyoma

Total Women abdominal childbearing: have or vaginal completed who hysterectomy. or subtotal

artery embolization invasive treatment). will need (~ further 25% Uterine

the myoma to be uterine that and cavity to role that IUD. a of similar Infertility may plays distorts an due a

the in are most I atypical adenocarcinomas the States common from endometrial United female hyperplasia reproductive Type derive and cancer cases/year). (~35,000 endometrioid II serous (see clear cell Type or Table cancers histology derive from 2.12-8).

metabolic pain Type fnding); (early Vaginal fnding); (late bleeding syndrome. I:

vaginal II: bleeding. Type No

biopsy. Endometrial/endocervical

leading ultrasound a neoplastic shows and change. endometrium to Vaginal hypertrophy thickened

ENDOMETRIOID TYPE SEROUS I: TYPE II:

2.12-8. TABLE Cancer Types Endometrial of

75% of endometrial Epidemiology cancers. cancers. of 25% endometrial estrogen exogenous Etiology use, (e.g., stimulation therapy). estrogen-only tamoxifen Unopposed 90% is cases. mutation estrogen; in Unrelated the of present p53 to Hyperplasia lesion Precursor and hyperplasia. atypical None. Mean 55 years. diagnosis age at years. 67 Favorable. Prognosis Poor.

women. Type TAH/BSO postmenopausal of age; women progestins radiation childbearing High-dose for +/– I: for

with Type for cancer. TAH/BSO advanced-stage adjuvant II: chemotherapy

the (similar uterine segment). columnar lower The third to made cells of of is up the cervix upper vagina). the squamous cells is to the of of two-thirds made The lower cervix (similar up columnar metaplasia to squamous results cells. an vaginal pH exposure to acidic The cells in of squamocolumnar the (transformation intraepithelial resulting abnormal basal the proliferation in (CIN), zone) ectocervix or is cell and in be to exposed located neoplasia normal overgrowth The an junction layer. cervical carcinogens, can of

DNA in carcinomas. cervical HPV all 99.7% is found of in HPV prevalent prevalent in 16 the 18 cell squamous adenocarcinoma. HPV carcinoma; most is most type is

or risk with tobacco use, and of history cervical HIV high infection STDs, Additional factors include parity, immunosuppression, cancer for OCPs. a

may HPV of 18 the prevent cancer. 11, vaccine development types 16, cervical also and against 6, The and may protect Gardasil

common postcoital spotting, and are signs. the cervical most ulceration Metrorrhagia,

bloody or may nonpruritic invasion. after A purulent, discharge appear malodorous,

or a yearly basis no ■Starting three after cytology years sexually years. active, at once on becoming have cervical smear than with 21 women more should a Pap age cytology liquid-based cervical two every conventional or Pap classifcation results. 2.12-9 of Table the outlines smear

cancer. Hormonal protective endometrial are contraceptives against

endometrial Screening women not is for cancer asymptomatic recommended. of

not cancer women and Fifty been years. three not percent years 10% had in smear another of Pap with had a the preceding their f screened diagnosis, ve in cervical had

AB LE T 2.1 2-9. Pap inf 3 dysplasia II Benign 2 cancer dysplasia II Systems 3 Severe Benign for CIN CIN situ Benign squamous Classifcation Normal HSIL ammation LSIL HSIL in inf cancer II Invasive 1 dysplasia Moderate Mild 4 HSIL (ASC) cells with atypical CIN 3 ammation cancer Normal, 5 Carcinoma Benign Invasive Invasive Smears CIN with I

every tests may ≥ normal consecutive Women interval their screening who ↑ have years three three to of years. once age had 30

high-risk testing for years strands of may well. ≥ as HPV age, be used screening women DNA 30 for For

for had Screening should age more smears. years discontinued 70 women be of normal or ≥ have three Pap who exposure (including have not they continue positivity) as long status DES should do condition. as and/or immunocompromised a with life-limiting Women HIV

established who cervical vaccine to according cancer had Women continue screening guidelines. the HPV should have

of cervical of 21 subtypes guidelines follow-up women cancer cervical for cells. of distinguish 21 all ≤ from atypical glandular > except age lesions the Recent diagnosis and for those years

subtypes and lesions follows: diagnosis cervical as thus should specifc The proceed of of follow-up

no risk glandular cancer endocervical years curettage to < endometrial (AGC): age HPV (ECC), testing. and factors: 35 cells of Proceed DNA Atypical colposcopy, with

an years ≥ of age, factors, abnormal endometrial bleeding: 35 endometrial biopsy. or cancer Add

smear 12 undetermined months. Repeat cance of signif Atypical at 21 of Pap cells age: ≤ (ASC-US): years squamous repeat or If ASC-US 12 reveals LSIL, or Pap smear at is months.

testing, colposcopy, years HPV and 21 Immediate smear > repeat at age: months. Pap 6 DNA of

age: as (LSIL): ≤ squamous Same 21 intraepithelial years Low-grade lesions of ASC-US.

colposcopy. years of > Immediate 21 age:

squamous groups. (ASC-H): High-grade of (HSIL) or atypical lesions all Immediate is suspicious dysplasia for colposcopy cells squamous high-grade intraepithelial age indicated

colposcopy: fndings is ■Treatment on based of

satisfactory, proceed treatment f ndings. colposcopy on to is based If

is biopsy treatment cervical to colposcopy and perform and ECC f based unsatisfactory, If on proceed ndings.

for noninvasive results biopsy 0 2.12-7): as Noninvasive based (see is lesions disease: (stage Figure Treatment follows on disease)

60% I ■Untreated in I: persist CIN 30%. in 10%, CIN of regress in and patients, progress will close treatment mainstay the I is for CIN Thus, observation. of

age, HPV months 12 years 6 Pap of screening > For indicated. testing DNA smear and women months is at 12 at and/or 21 HPV is not age, 21 testing ≤ recommended. of years women For

a can smears After patients test, two managed follow-up. be routine Pap or annual DNA with

Persistent laser laser can [LEEP]; excisional or conization). and procedure excision (cryotherapy I ablation) therapy electrosurgical (loop with CIN treated cold-knife or ablative be

E 2-7. R IGU F 2.1 CD intraepithelial Cervical neoplasia.

(A) the a neoplasia Colpophotograph intraepithelial illustrating transformation in cervical low-grade (CIN) zone. CIN (B)–(D).Histopathology I, II, and of III. (Reproduced, al. permission, from HM et with Kantarjian Oncology, of Manual ed. Medical MD 1st Anderson Fig. York: McGraw-Hill: New 24-4.)

and CIN III: II

35%. of will in persist 22%, in CIN II progress Untreated 43% regress and patients, in patients, CIN and regress 32% in Untreated 14%, progress of in in III will persist 56%.

therapy II treated and CIN ablation) laser laser or should with III or be cold-knife (LEEP; conization). (cryotherapy excisional and ablative

a or recurrent Hysterectomy is for II CIN option treatment III.

as therapy excisional Postablative follow-up is or follows:

at HPV 12 months CIN and/or smear III with Pap or margins: I, testing. II,

CIN or at repeat III consider smear months; margins: Pap 6 II with ECC.

smear and testing months. obtain If 6 a margins at 12 DNA unknown, HPV Pap months are at

Invasive see disease: staging, Figure biopsy (for carcinoma follows on based invasive as for Treatment ■ 2.12-8): results is

IA1): hysterectomy. (stage close simple carcinoma Microinvasive or biopsy and cone with follow-up Treat

plus alone. with chemotherapy radiation IB1, be and IIA: hysterectomy either Stages radiation with IA2, treated with chemotherapy and radical or May concomitant

and chemotherapy. plus IIB, Stages III, IV: cisplatin-based therapy IB2, concurrent radiation Treat with

in 68% African-American cervix is and carcinoma fve-year women. the overall for ■The rate in 55% women Caucasian relative of survival

2.12-8. FIGURE cancer. Staging cervical of

location, of frequency and of stages the of ve-year tumor, by of display Anatomic survival. cancer, presentation, extent f defned cervix from Fauci AS permission, et al. (Reproduced, with ed. of Internal Principles Medicine, Harrison’s 17th 2008: New McGraw-Hill, Fig. York: 93-1.)

of 99–100%. rates stage are proportionate the to ■Stage cancer: inversely Survival 0:

Stage IA: 95%. >

Stage IB-IIA: 80–90%.

65%. Stage IIB:

Stage III: 40%.

IV: 20%. Stage <

Almost with the ureteral cervix uremia carcinoma two-thirds when bilateral. die patients is untreated of of obstruction of

of Responsible malignancies. 1–4% for gynecologic are Bartholin’s cell melanoma, metastatic age, squamous occurring sarcoma, carcinoma, > adenocarcinoma, 50 years lesions of and basal in 90–95% tumors, women Some gland followed by disease. cardiovascular and lichen exams, hypertension, 18, sclerosus, HPV diabetes, 16, immunosuppression. obesity, factors medical include infrequent disease, and (types 31), Risk

pruritus, of ulceration Presents mass. the or with pain,

or may raised, appear white, Early: pigmented, ulcerative. Lesions nodular, thickened,

large, area with in vulva. the ulcerated Presents a caulifower-like or hard Late:

punch The vulvar any for biopsy lesions. suspicious is step frst

neoplasia intraepithelial and premenopausal (VIN) precancerous is Vulvar women. more considered in occurs commonly

moderate and with Associated dysplasia. II: I VIN mild and

VIN III: in Carcinoma situ.

causes. other predisposing Precancerous Reduce irritative lesions: or Topical clobetasol) and (e.g., effective crotamiton pruritus. betamethasone, corticosteroids for particularly are

vulvectomy, High-grade vulvectomy. and chemotherapy, Topical simple VIN: excision, skinning wide local ablation, laser

+/– inguinal or excision or node wide of tumor (2) and preoperative local radiation, both. (1) Invasive: radical with the lymphadenectomy 1° Treated lymph vulvectomy regional with dissection chemotherapy,

of malignancies. gynecologic all for Accounts 1–2% histologic usually affect whereas cell adenocarcinoma, occurs and endodermal postmenopausal younger woman, other from cell clear in types carcinoma Squamous DES) sinus women. adenocarcinoma tumor, (rhabdosarcoma, usually pessary irritation include dysplasia, female low exposure. hysterectomy multiple chronic of immunosuppression, long-term partners, sexual (e.g., organs), for and or factors cancer, status, prolapse DES cervical use socioeconomic radiation Risk for

ovarian of endometrial tract cervical. > female > genital Frequency cancers: > of Number cervical. endometrial deaths: > ovarian

or suggestive Any or adnexal a ovarian is in postmenopausal neoplasm. an mass of patient palpable premenarchal ovarian

an or postcoital bleeding. discharge, bleeding, vaginal abnormal by Characterized abnormal

the in 75% vagina in patients. of of Presents third the upper

colposcopy, biopsy. and Cytology,

when excision few involved areas are small. they Local and of

require Extensive the vaginal involvement vaginectomy. of partial complete may mucosa or

disease radiation radical surgery. Invasive requires or therapy

leading from tumors are ovarian malignant death Most tumors benign, of but the cause cancer. are reproductive tract following: the include factors Risk

fertility, delayed Age, parity, ↓ or childbearing. low

history. family A risk. one have relative 5% with a lifetime Patients frst-degree affected the With affected is 7%. frst-degree two relatives, risk more or

cancer. mutation of carries a lifetime The ovarian risk 45% BRCA1 with associated risk. a mutation The lifetime 25% BRCA2 is

associated and syndrome, or colorectal cancer. nonpolyposis breast an cancer ovarian, with ↑ Lynch risk II is endometrial, (HNPCC), hereditary of colon,

29%. taken by OCPs years or fve risk more ↓ for

ovarian Both benign generally and asymptomatic. neoplasms are malignant

or symptoms GI may pressure/pain be Mild, pelvic nonspecifc seen.

disease exam. detected on not is Early pelvic typically routine

malignant present by abdominal ascites. mass, 75% disease, and abdominal and a of bloating, Some advanced pain as palpable with woman evidenced

and characteristics masses. malignant pelvic benign differentiates of Table the 2.12-10

recurrence. Table for associated cancer cell is as ↑ Tumor is (90% of only progression marker (see markers but and 2.12-11): a cancers) epithelial ovarian CA-125 with used

to benign endometriosis. Premenopausal point ↑ may CA-125 as women: such disease

units) tumor an is ↑ women: the indicates ↑ CA-125 malignant. likelihood Postmenopausal (> that 35 ovarian

women. high-risk Transvaginal to Used ultrasound: screen

2.1 0. AB T LE 2-1 vs. Pelvic Malignant Masses Benign

follows: of Treatment as masses is ovarian

cm require 2 women: laparotomy. Masses Premenarchal exploratory >

women: Premenopausal

for 8–10 simple suffcient cm. for is 4–6 masses unilateral, mobile, cystic asymptomatic, Observation < weeks spontaneously. resolve Most

for is and > Surgical are as evaluation that repeat those unchanged well pelvic masses ultrasound. 8–10 for cm on as exam warranted

Postmenopausal women:

CA-125 5 simple ultrasound. cm be with in normal Asymptomatic, diameter unilateral closely should with a < followed cysts

exploratory laparotomy. surgical warrant masses evaluation by Palpable

ovarian of as cancer follows: Treatment is

Surgery:

staging omentectomy by Surgical lymphadenectomy. and followed with pelvic para-aortic and TAH/BSO

TABLE 2.12-11. Ovarian Tumor Markers

Choriocarcinoma Dysgerminoma unilateral AFP Inhibin neoplasms hCG sinus removal tumor oophorectomy. or ■Benign AFP, Embryonal Granulosa cell Endodermal warrant CA-125 hCG Epithelial carcinoma LDH

low-grade with for is except cancer. routine ovarian or women early-stage chemotherapy Postoperative

dysgerminomas. Radiation for effective is therapy

CA-125 mutation and Women BRCA1 annually should ultrasound with screened be testing. the gene with 35 is by recommended oophorectomy or age Prophylactic completed. is whenever childbearing

risk. use OCP ↓

associated age, prolapse ↑ disorders, obesity include intra-abdominal advancing of pelvic forceps), with (particularly tissue use and constipation. prior predisposition, with surgery, organ chronic Risk genetic factors pelvic with for connective straining birth or pressure vaginal

the with in a sensation vagina. Presents protrusion of bulge or the

Urinary incontinence, also emptying, seen. are and a incomplete fecal or of bladder dyspareunia sense

position. be can lithotomy in Valsalva degree perform evaluated the maneuver having by The prolapse woman while of the the

in straining Supportive include and and limitation and high-fber measures patients of diet weight a reduction obese lifting.

women or are not temporarily prolapse undergo who reduce Pessaries may chronically to in do helpful and surgery wish ill. who are

The procedure surgical most vaginal hysterectomy vaginal is vault abdominal or suspension. common with

due to Defned bladder the urine either as or sphincteric of loss involuntary dysfunction.

their also types along the the and mnemonic features Table treatment of (see incontinence distinguishing outlines 2.12-12 with DIAPPERS).

of cases Exclude fstula incontinence. in total or overf incontinence incontinence. in abnormalities rectal for sphincter ow bladder of urge in tone) neurologic (spasticity, distended faccidity, cases Look

UA to First and UTI. a culture exclude urine Obtain step:

diary; possible ■Voiding urodynamic step: testing. Next

c specif Causes pathology— incontinence urinary of urogenital without

urinary Excessive hypercalcemia, (hyperglycemia, output CHF)

TABLE 2.12-12. of Types Incontinence

all in Uncontrolled Total at all positions. loss and times cancer nerve of ltration). sphincteric inf eff ciency damage, surgery, (previous Loss the connection and between skin urinary tract (f stula). the Abnormal Surgery. Stress After sneezing, lifting). pressure intra-abdominal ↑ (coughing, in multiparous insuff after or musculature; f to Urethral common ciency pelvic oor laxity sphincteric pelvic women surgery. due of exercises and Kegel pessary. Vaginal vault suspension surgery. to activity. or that void Strong, is to unexpected unrelated position urge to bladder. conditions or inf Detrusor sphincter dysfunction the neurogenic disorders ammatory of or hyperrefexia due training TCAs; or Anticholinergic medications (biofeedback). behavioral retention. urinary Chronic dribble to resistance, a with that small urine bladder out. pressure intravesical just allowing distended exceeds ↑ outlet amount of Chronically the of Placement catheter urethral settings. acute in diseases. Treat underlying voiding. Timed (cystitis, irritation local include contractions, causes. CNS and Etiologies stone, a tumor), inhibited stricture), physical factors Etiologies agents and (tumor, include b (lesions), medications. neurologic

renal Serum dysfunction. creatinine exclude to

of demonstrate bladder neck. fstula to sites descensus the Cystogram and

Table outlines to according options subtype. treatment 2.12-12

conditions. all The most common of breast benign growth stromal exaggerated response to and factors. tissue hormones Involves fbrosis, Findings and microscopic), papillomatosis, hyperplasia. (gross ductal and adenosis, include epithelial cysts affects of postmenopausal found rarely years 30–50 women woman. age; in Primarily caffeine use. and Associated with trauma

with mastalgia prominent and Presents cyclic swelling, just most symptoms before bilateral with menstruation.

in the uctuation masses size common. f the is Rapid of

to the (“oatmeal symptoms breast with bumpy irregular, include raisins”). tissue an consistency Other

a The fat mastitis/ brocystic f necrosis, differential of breast mass diagnosis f breast disease, broadenoma, abscess, includes cancer. and

a cause common bloody discharge. nipple Intraductal papilloma of is

See for a 2.12-9 of breast algorithm Figure mass an workup.

is of use. Mammography limited mass. help a differentiate Ultrasound cystic solid a from can

cyst confrm as pain (FNA) of well aspiration as discrete is the the of is nature suggestive a Fine-needle alleviate mass. of to a that to indicated mass cystic

fuid the is if excisional bloody no or on biopsy Perform an is obtained if fuid aspiration.

epithelial an atypia or ↑ is breast cellular cancer risk is of if ductal present. There hyperplasia

(e.g., caffeine modifcations Dietary restriction).

effects hirsutism, for view rarely be Danazol may (acne, severe given is in pain of side but used its edema).

f of use which hormonal OCPs, Consider uctuations. ↓

stromal with breast slow-growing components. tumor and A epithelial benign, in The of lesion most years common women < breast age. 30 is a phyllodes broadenoma. large f Cystosarcoma

Bloody Mammography family open rigid FNA mass change mass: history 35 Treatment -No mass Excisional -Family indicated Negative: mass: follow-up Core fluid, Repeat biopsy -Age Treat Benign fluctuant routine monthly 35 Follow-up -Skin Nonsuspicious w/cycle DCIS/cancer: as adenopathy excisional Residual Malignant inconclusive or Excisional or fluid -Axillary biopsy Suspicious -Size or < Clear -Movable, biopsy changes -Age disappears CystSolid Cytology × > surgical history biopsy or FNA thickening 3 -Firm, Reassure,

2.12-9. FIGURE of breast mass. Workup a

diameter. cm mass ovoid, or 1–3 Presents round mobile, non-tender as a in discrete, relatively rubbery,

of develop multiple Usually up 20% broadenomas. to solitary, f although patients

not Tumors do during change menstrual the cycle.

Does on is menopause patient unless not after the occur HRT.

masses. from Breast can solid cystic differentiate ultrasound

FNA. or Needle biopsy

uncertain. the diagnosis pathologic Excision with if exam remains

curative, Excision recurrence is is common. but

most (after The second women cancer eight one common and in in most women) the of (affects cause common cancer). cancer lung death in occur upper percent the outer quadrant. Sixty have Risk the women no (most factors): risk factors include following

age. Female older gender,

A personal history breast cancer. of

in f cancer rst-degree relative. a Breast

with and early BRCA1 (associated BRCA2 mutations onset).

ber high-fat low-f A diet. and

cellular atypia. fbrocystic change of history with A

late menarche, early ■↑ menopause, age f 35). after full-term exposure estrogen pregnancy to (nulliparity, rst

found percent breast by of are the Ninety patient. cancers Clinical following: the include manifestations

a mass abnormalities no nontender, as ndings: margins present frm-to-hard mammographic ill-defned mass. with May Early single, or with palpable as f

edema, Skin axillary f wall. ndings: Later or retraction, the skin or pain, lymphadenopathy, enlargement, chest nipple of the redness, fxation breast to mass

f Late ndings:

the lung, lymphadenopathy; bone, to and edema arm; of liver. Ulceration; the supraclavicular metastases

disease with (Paget’s nipple). erosion unilateral nipple of discharge without Prolonged of the scaling the or

disease: Metastatic

loss. pain, jaundice, or Back bone weight

hard or 1 A frm axillary node cm. >

that or nodes (stage IV). the ipsilateral (stage or III); matted fxed nodes infraclavicular are skin to Axillary supraclavicular

estrogen exposure cancer. of menopause, risk breast ↑ menarche, the nulliparity) late ↑ to (early

breast degree a lesion, high cancer. In clinical woman of new suspicion a breast maintain postmenopausal a for with

suspicious 30 years workup > of mass is rst women a of f a the postmenopausal in in The age those mammogram. step and in get age, women years < For of premenopausal an ultrasound. 30

cancer stages: Breast

Tumor Stage I: size < cm. 2

2–5 size II: Stage Tumor cm.

involvement. Axillary Stage node III:

Stage Distant metastasis. IV:

measures differ premenopausal women. and for postmenopausal Diagnostic

frst step mammography. is Postmenopausal The women: microcalcifcations for density with borders. Look irregular ↑ and palpable two (see become roughly detect can lesions clinically they Mammography years 2.12-10A). Figure before

2.12-10B). years distinguish a Figure of step 30 (see frst women from benign mass for cyst women: age Premenopausal a is The solid ultrasound, can < which

the measures include following: Additional

recurrent Tumor and markers CA 15-3 CEA or Include CA for cancer: breast 27-29.

Determine (PR), Receptor and of status. receptor receptor (ER), tumor: progesterone status HER2/neu estrogen

disease: Metastatic

ESR, phosphatase bone calcium. ↑ metastases), ↑ and alkaline Labs: (liver ↑

CXR; of CT the and bone abdomen, scan. chest, brain; Imaging: pelvis,

Pharmacologic:

receive tamoxifen. should All hormone patients receptor–

receive chemotherapy. ER-patients should

on cell, antibody the that cancers. to is highly Trastuzumab, HER2/neu-expressive effective in receptors cancer a monoclonal HER2/neu binds

following: include options the Surgical

Partial dissection plus followed radiation (lumpectomy) therapy. axillary by mastectomy

axillary plus mastectomy (total radical mastectomy Modifed dissection).

chest skin. of therapy involvement tumors, to the tumor nipple include overlying breast-conserving wall, the fxation location, to Contraindications size, multifocal or large subareolar or

disease symptom should mastectomy be therapy; IV control. be radiotherapy with and local for required may Stage treated hormonal

is TNM prognosis. the indicator reliable staging most of (I–IV)

course. a is ERand PRstatus with associated favorable

has localized cure the breast to a rate. Cancer 75–90% 40–50%. With to fve-year axilla, is the spread survival the

associated a Aneuploidy poor with is prognosis.

of common. of 50% cancer; effusion breast occurs Pleural with edema in metastatic the arm patients is

E IGU B F R 2-1 2.1 0. ultrasound. on Palpable mammography mass breast and

Craniocaudal (A) of mass palpable (arrows). mammography a with cancer. (arrows) Ultrasound borders with image demonstrating a consistent irregular solid (B) mass (Reproduced, al. with permission, FC Brunicardi from et ed. Schwartz’s Surgery, Principles of 8th Fig. McGraw-Hill, York: New 2005: 16-26.)

children. as as includes well known sexual, trauma; of neglect nonaccidental as physical, maltreatment and psychological Also is abuse in the delay if medical care. physical findings with history discordant Suspect if appropriate obtaining there is a or specific are pathognomonic in fracture Certain for as children such injuries retinal abuse. types hemorrhages and

or Abuse to seizures, (FTT). in or somnolence, excessive feeding failure intolerance, apnea, thrive or may present as infants irritability neglect

or in children as present poor Neglect behavioral older may abnormalities. hygiene

Exam findings the may following: include

(stockingglove in atypical or belt places patterns face Injuries the thighs) burns, or cigarette (e.g., burns, marks).

humerus jerking age) in femur epiphyseal/metaphyseal abuse “bucket child’s years 3 shaking limbs. suggest (strongly or Spiral suggest fractures the or of and which of children of the < fractures,”

Posterior rib fractures.

discharge. bleeding, or trauma, Genital

abuse—e.g., Rule conditions mimic treatment imperfecta disorders and bleeding (cigarette bullous out osteogenesis burns), “coining” certain Mongolian or impetigo (an cultures). (bruises), (fractures), in that spots alternative

scan bone healing. skeletal and survey stages show in of can various fractures A

suspected. Test if and is abuse sexual chlamydia, syphilis, HIV gonorrhea, for

for hematomas. syndrome exam noncontrast and hemorrhages retinal CT a subdural shaken ophthalmologic an out baby by for Rule performing (SBS) signs do often Infants external abuse. exhibit not with of SBS

changes extracranial and shaking) of associated white intraand (diffuse matter violent injury bleeds. the to visualize Consider axonal MRI with an extent be young does requires sedated and/or usually to the MRI not. intubated, while patient often CT

or Document bruises, shape, burns. color, injuries, and all location, lesions, of nature the including size,

possible evaluation removal for Notify services from the and of (CPS) the child child home. protective

necessary Hospitalize child. the to stabilize or if protect injuries to

child’s Consider don’t if caretaker’s abuse the the injuries and match. story

mandatory; so. sued child doing suspicion is you any for of Reporting abuse be cannot

(rubella), maternal maternal factors thalidomide, Intrauterine risk heart phenytoin), PKU). illness infections drug use (alcohol, disease lithium, and congenital for (DM, maternal include presence is by classified or of the cyanosis: absence Disease

Transposition of vessels = switched arteries two the great

(four) Fallot of Tetralogy

most the common heart VSD is defect. congenital

oxygenated shunts the pulmonary circulation. (“pink Have which the lungs conditions into babies”): in back shunted Acyanotic left-to-right from is blood

deoxygenated conditions systemic into which shunts in is the right-to-left circulation. Have blood shunted (“blue babies”): Cyanotic

in opening between ﬂow which the A an ventricular ventricles. septum condition in allows to blood the VSD most is congenital heart common defect. agents, of TORCH syndrome CMV, Apert’s fetal toes), trisomies other HSV), syndrome, patients syndrome, with alcohol Down (cranial and cri (toxoplasmosis, is and syndrome, 13 syndrome du deformities, among more the and common fusion It rubella, 18. chat fingers

border. but reveals exam the at harsh holosystolic are a left best asymptomatic lower birth, usually heard Small sternal defects at murmur

present dyspnea, CHF. respiratory FTT, defects with frequent and Large infections, can present, but and with valve. be ↑ can thrill, blowing is the narrow more a and P1, an across ↑ mid-diastolic the S2 mitral If accompanied ecting a holosystolic a crackles, by ﬂow reﬂ systolic murmur softer apical rumble

Echocardiogram is diagnostic. VSDs. with demonstrate larger RVH LVH and show CXR small LVH both can defects with and and ECG may ↑ pulmonary show markings. CXR vascular

echocardiography. close spontaneously; should Most small VSDs patients monitored be via

over not have symptomatic patients Surgical is fail ↓ hypertension, < indicated signs time. of with year medical VSDs management, with repair children large age and children in who in 1 that size pulmonary older of

as inotropes, and needed. treat existing respiratory Treat ACEIs; with diuretics, CHF infections

an left-to-right in shunting. ow leading opening ﬂ condition A between blood atrial septum allows to atria, in the to the which syndrome, with block), Down fetal (absent alcohol radii, syndrome ASD, heart Holt-Oram first-degree Associated and syndrome.

primum of exertion. a findings with defects with in murmur fatigue childhood Ostium or present early late or tend secundum to present (most childhood defects in Ostium adulthood. common) early the depend Symptom defect. on size severity of and onset the

fatigability, can Symptoms easy but and asymptomatic. observed, respiratory be of are FTT infections, patients frequently frequent

ASD a S2. split f has widely xed,

heave; a reveals border ■Exam a left ejection valve). ↑ and (from right sternal murmur S2; fxed, upper ﬂ the wide pulmonary ow at a and systolic split ventricular across the the left also sternal There lower at be border. may mid-diastolic a rumble

Echocardiogram ﬂow motion, ventricle. dilated wall paradoxical atria (diagnostic), a ﬂow between the Doppler blood ventricular with right and reveals color

most axis ECG commonly of type are although depending RVH, defect. on the patterns shows and other possible right deviation common. prolongation is PR

cardiomegaly vascular reveals and ↑ markings. CXR pulmonary

do lesions require defects and close spontaneously may not treatment. Most that are small

CHF infants to ratio of Surgical in a than with 2:1 with in systemic ﬂow. closure indicated patients pulmonary is and more blood complications such correction ventricular dysfunction, right prevents and Early as arrhythmias, Eisenmenger’s syndrome.

of the to Failure left-to-right leading few days close the to the of pulmonary ductus aorta to the shunt from a in artery. first arteriosus life, prematurity, maternal first-trimester gender. factors Risk rubella include and female infection,

tract present CHF. large FTT, defects extremity respiratory with and recurrent infections, may Typically clubbing, asymptomatic; lower lower with patients

the “machinery intercostal murmur” border; at Exam pressure; wide reveals pulses. bounding pulse space continuous a left S2; a sternal at a peripheral second loud the and

the ﬂow diagnostic. Doppler pulmonary artery demonstrating aorta A is into from blood color the ﬂow

shows larger and PDAs, left enlargement. atrial With left echocardiography ventricular

CXR may may show lesions. ECG and if cardiomegaly large LVH, show

(e.g., tetralogy of (e.g., heart) is needed PDA contraindicated for the transposition great unless of the or indomethacin survival Give left Fallot, if hypoplastic is intraventricular hemorrhage). vessels, indomethacin

fails closure child age, surgical > 6–8 required. indomethacin if or months is If the of is

shunt and syndrome, left-to-right shunt Eisenmenger’s reversal. pulmonary to hypertension In leads

state rst a f 1. look of presenting few infants In shocklike in for: weeks life, within the

2.

3. metabolism error Inborn of

congenital disease, left-sided (as 4. is usually heart ductus lesions Ductal-dependent closing) the

INdomethacin give door: Come the IN PDA. CLOSE to CLOSE a and

maternally associated is drug ventricle)? (tricuspid into displacement valve with Ebstein’s the anomaly right What ingested Lithium.

in of a Coarctation is hypertension children. cause 2°

the of Aorta Coarctation

portion to a to to distal proximal and leading coarctation. of of ﬂow ↑ ﬂow the aorta, the Constriction ↓ subclavian of the just below 98% in artery Occurs patients. left The is condition and Turner’s with gender. male berry associated syndrome, aneurysms, bicuspid valve. a two-thirds of than have More aortic patients

presents childhood Often in hypertension. asymptomatic with

be headache claudication, present. extremity syncope, may and Lower epistaxis,

the the BP a physical the higher upper and arm that finding difference is between indicate systolic is right coarctation. in exam in point of can The extremities; the classic BP left

radiofemoral femoral Additional systolic short apical findings pulses, the in forceful a delay, murmur include and weak axilla, left impulse. a

patent PDA infancy, coarctation requires for survival. In critical a in the present Such shocklike when first infants the in PDA may of life state few closes. a weeks in to be the lower arm with (postductal the and seen saturation lower (preductal may right areas) as area). Differential extremities arm cyanosis oxygen left compared

Doppler diagnostic. Echocardiography color and are ﬂow

children congestion. CXR demonstrate cardiomegaly in pulmonary young may and

may CXR ECG; the to and of on due In following postdilatation on LVH preand compensatory seen: arteries. due with collateral the the children, to indentation; coarctation changes segment aortic notching” intercostal “3” older wall circulation “rib the through be sign

E1 with prostaglandin the should ductus If (PGE1). arteriosus infancy, open be presents severe kept coarctation in

balloon (controversial). correction angioplasty or Surgical

restenosis, dissection. aortic for aneurysm and Monitor development,

Great Transposition of Vessels the

newborn. lesion most cyanotic congenital The common in heart the condition, the ventricle to left systemic to right the is and aorta In and the ventricle, creating artery parallel the pulmonary pulmonary circulations. this connected is life. or Without incompatible defect a a PDA, septal it with include syndrome diabetic (see CATCH mothers factors and, mnemonic Risk 22). rarely, DiGeorge the

and illness typically ■Critical immediately birth. after occur cyanosis (e.g., differential may present. also left ventricular outﬂow be seen coarctation, Reverse aortic cyanosis obstruction if is tract stenosis)

cyanosis. ■Exam extreme tachypnea, progressive reveals hypoxemia, and present. loud S2 signs is have often patients a Some of single and CHF, no is There if may be present. a VSD not murmur

Echocardiography.

main pulmonary CXR of ↑ heart (“egg-shaped show segment and absence base, a markings. the pulmonary narrow silhouette”), artery may vascular

open PGE1 or to Start PDA. IV maintain the

create life few balloon to enlarge atrial first or with septostomy maintained the or prostaglandin, the ASD. of not within PDA days if be an is If cannot perform feasible surgery

correction (arterial Surgical switch). or atrial

Fallot of Tetralogy

stenosis, and pulmonary of RVH, Consists VSD. aorta, overriding The heart common children. most congenital cyanotic in disease results from VSD. Early right-to-left shunting cyanosis the across and weeks pressures shunt the direction As cyanosis the right-sided birth, reverses may in ↓. ↓ after remain the pulmonary may is may degree cyanosis severe, over pressures and If of the time. stenosis high right-sided worsen syndrome. factors PKU DiGeorge and Risk maternal include

dyspnea in and early childhood Presents with or infancy fatigability. years life; first degree extent two often reﬂects of the present of is of pulmonary develops the at over but Cyanosis stenosis. birth cyanosis the not often

feeding age, are tachypnea. CHF diaphoresis as may and manifest when or asymptomatic until often 4–6 with develop of Infants months may

Children relief during episodes for hypoxemic squat resistance) spells”). (“tet (↑ systemic often vascular

lead Hypoxemia status changes. or to FTT mental may

murmur left reveals at S2. sternal ventricular a the and systolic single heave, a (right outﬂow right a Exam ventricular ejection border obstruction), upper

and catheterization. Echocardiography

with ↓ shows pulmonary a heart vascular CXR “boot-shaped” markings. may in ↑ VSD that pulmonary vascular Remember a markings. result

and deviation RVH. ECG shows right-axis

along keep require PDA atresia the immediate with severe consultation. Lesions urgent open to with surgical or PGE1 stenosis pulmonary

phenylephrine, O2, knee-chest spells” with ﬂuids, and morphine. Treat “tet hypercyanotic propranolol, position,

achieved through can septostomy) (e.g., Temporary palliation creation (Blalock-Taussig before correction be an artificial shunt). atrial shunt the balloon definitive of surgical

transposition infancy may reverse present cyanosis. of while cyanosis, with differential great present differential the with Coarctation may in arteries

is vessels great Transposition the heart newborns. most of the common disease of cyanotic Tetralogy disease cyanotic heart childhood. of most the Fallot is of common

PGE1 are with vessels treated of and transposition great and the Fallot initially Both treated with are of tetralogy def nitively surgical correction.

2.13-1 major developmental Table milestones. highlights tested bold. milestones appear Commonly in

T LE 3-1. 2.1 AB head/chest months Lifts Developmental when 2 prone. Milestones past Tracks midline. to Alerts coos. sound; smile. parent; Recognizes social Rolls 4–5 back, to months). back front (5 front months to rattle. Grasps to sounds; Orients voice; consonant begins to make razzes. Enjoys looking around; laughs. Sits unassisted. 6 months grasp. raking objects; Transfers Babbles. Stranger anxiety. pulls 9–10 months Crawls; stand. to grasp. Uses three-finger pincer (immature) “mama/dada” (nonspecif Says c). Waves plays pat-a-cake. bye-bye; (11 12 walks alone. months months); Cruises pincer (mature) two-finger Uses grasp. Says c). “mama/dada” (specif actions; anxiety. separation Imitates months 15 backward. Walks Uses cup. 4–6 Uses words. Temper tantrums. 18 kicks months ball. a Runs; 2–4 cubes. of tower Builds objects. common Names training. start May toilet with jumps. years Walks steps up/down 2 help; tower six Builds cubes. of phrases. Uses two-word two-step clothes. removes commands; Follows tricycle; Rides with (3–4 feet 3 stairs years). alternating years climbs a uses utensils. Copies circle; three-word Uses sentences. with washes/dries hands. help; teeth Brushes Hops. a Copies square. and some numbers. colors Knows plays Cooperative board games. play; walks distances. for Skips; long backward Ties and letters. left knows right; prints shoelaces; f Uses sentences. ve-word Domestic dress-up. playing; plays role adjusted age, age 5 gestational for be chronological < of infants years must a age. 2 years 4 premature years For the (two an seven at early) gestation chronological example, the four-month infant level age expected months’ months For would perform six to be at of born months. at

check, specific and head well-child and age: on plotted height, weight, charts are gender At each for growth circumference

the routinely Measured first Head years. in circumference: two TORCH point ↓ to head or (e.g., can indicate hydrocephalus infections). circumference head ↑ microcephaly tumor; can circumference

adulthood. Measured weight: Height until and routinely numbers. important is pattern the The raw than of more growth of few should return to but first BW their birth lose 14 Infants the (BW) days by weight 5–10% may days. over triple by their two double be quadruple can Infants one years. year, months, to and BW by expected 4–5 by

the off (i.e., two chart). thrive: to age than weight the a or curve” major growth for on less Persistent percentile Failure “falling growth lines 5th crossing percentile follows: as Classified

to fibro-sis, pyloric heart celiac congenital GERD. Due Organic: stenosis, HIV), medical condition cystic an underlying disease, chronic (e.g., as sprue, such infection and

Nonorganic: abuse. Primarily as due such depression, or neglect, maternal factors to psychosocial

critical and dietary of are (especially preparation diagnosis. A interactions formula history feeding) to maternal-infant and observation close of careful

malnourishment. evidence Children is of severe hospitalized neglect there be should if or treatment. of supplemental mainstays breastfeeding counts Calorie is (if and nutrition are inadequate)

physical boys staging: to Tanner Performed development and girls. in assess 5 is preadolescent; Stage is 1 adult. stage are hair and breast assigned both testicular in development for in and boys penile is stages pubic for girls; growth growth Increasing stages. used

puberty Girls: years. is average The 10.5 of age development) Generally hair (breast → spurt development) is (first thelarche pubarche → progression of bud (pubic order → growth menarche the bleeding). menstrual girls in menarche average age The 12.5 States of United is years.

age The years. of is puberty 11.5 Boys: average hair, (axillary spurt. growth → (testicular vocal Generally → adrenarche facial enlargement) progression → of changes) order pubarche hair, gonadarche the is

normal are sexual development of Variants as follows:

breast by 14, No in 13. hair or enlargement puberty: Delayed or development pubic in age no age by boys testicular girls

Constitutional most cause growth puberty. the variant, normal delayed of common A and delay: consistent. others the curve but lags growth The same age behind of is There is often height achieve family history, ultimately target and a children potential.

syndrome), malnutrition Klinefelter’s gonadal Kallmann’s anorexia Turner’s IBD), syndrome, delay: disease endocrine to nervosa), insensitivity (e.g., systemic Prader-Willi hypopituitarism, androgen abnormalities syndrome) (e.g., syndrome, Rarely, Pathological or syndrome, dysgenesis (e.g., due hypothyroidism, puberty (e.g.,

puberty: in age. Precocious sign of of 8 years sexual or 2° boys Any years 9 < girls maturation < may the chapter). idiopathic; Often be central (see or peripheral Gynecology

16 social language babbling months, Signs months, of no or by and/or single 12 contact, gesturing by any make failure of months, by or loss to skills. phrases no 24 no include two-word autism words eye

and curve. nally FTT weight of rst curve, f fall the f height Infants with head off the the circumference will then curve,

2.13-3 associated diseases outline genetic and and Tables their 2.13-2 abnormalities. common

2.13-2. TABLE Diseases Genetic

chromosomal common) translocation of robertsonian syndrome or (most common risk most (higher retardation. Trisomy recurrence) The mental 21 disorder cause Down of and maternal Associated age. with advanced a facial mental Presents and crease. profle, retardation, simian prominent a fat with folds, epicanthal valve includes heart Hirschsprung’s defects). is atrioventricular Associated an VSD mitral common cushion with and malformation endocardial and due which with to congenital disease disease, and canal, (the abnormalities duodenal ASD atresia, most tricuspid Alzheimer’s. acute ↑ leukemia of and Associated early-onset hypothyroidism, with (ALL), an risk lymphocytic low-set and ears, mental Presents feet, micrognathia, with Edwards’ severe hands, 18 retardation, rocker-bottom Trisomy prominent a syndrome clenched occiput. with Associated disease. congenital heart May kidneys. horseshoe have of one Death birth. usually year within occurs 13 scalp mental structures with lip/palate, retardation, microcephaly, Patau’s (holoprosencephaly), lesions, and Presents Trisomy abnormal polydactyly. syndrome cleft “punched-out” microphthalmia, forebrain severe with heart congenital disease. Associated one Death within usually birth. occurs year of of 45,XXY (male) X inactivated Klinefelter’s syndrome Presence (Barr an chromosome body). in causes the One of of males. common hypogonadism most a extremities, gynecomastia. atrophy, eunuchoid and Presents shape, tall body with stature, testicular long (prevents with gynecomastia; improves Treat testosterone sexual 2° characteristics). amenorrhea; The syndrome of most due common to (female) gonadal 1° cause dysgenesis. Turner’s 45,XO body. No Barr of and/or stature, coarctation aorta, aortic widely Features webbed shield valve. short the include spaced neck, nipples, chest, bicuspid the feet lymphedema in the May hands present neonatal and of with period. horseshoe kidney. have May frequency among Double inmates Y with 47,XYY institutions. Observed ↑ of penal males antisocial in of and very acne behavior males). (seen normal; Phenotypically XYY tall are patients severe with 1–2%

2.13-2. TABLE (continued) Diseases Genetic

breast the a or phenylalanine had a valid cofactor at protein ↓ tetrahydrobiopterin for screening has hydroxylase meal birth; formula or normal only (i.e., baby ↓ Phenylketonuria Screened (PKU) after feed). is excess builds up Tyrosine ketones. and phenyl becomes essential phenylalanine with eczema, urine retardation, Presents skin, odor. a mousy and musty mental fair or infants. blue-eyed Blond-haired, of heart an with risk Associated disease. ↑ tyrosine ↓ Treat with diet. in ↑ and phenylalanine before wants her pregnant A conception. to PKU become restrict above mother with who must diet as X mental X-linked methylation the affecting The An gene syndrome of defect common most of and the FMR1 genetic retardation. Fragile cause expression second and ears; everted long with macro-orchidism; jaw; with Presents a large autism. large, a face may show that A disorder repeat triplet anticipation. genetic

gland CFTR dysfunction. disorder on mutations chromosome An by exocrine the autosomal-recessive caused and widespread in characterized by (chloride channel) gene 7 United States is the frequently Caucasians. CF is found most the genetic in most in common and disease severe

chronic present sinopulmonary percent disease. of Fifty with FTT patients or

by percussion, recurrent cyanosis, Pseudomonas rhonchi, clubbing, pulmonary Characterized aureus) to infections with hemoptysis, dyspnea, hyperresonance nasal digital chronic (especially and rales, S. sinusitis, bronchiectasis, cough, with subsequent and polyposis.

ileus. with meconium infants present percent Fifteen of stools greasy varices. prominent biliary usually other Patients rectal hypoproteinemia, symptoms jaundice, pancreatitis, esophageal cirrhosis, prolapse, include ﬂatulence; and GI have and

predominate thereafter. are symptoms more GI in while infancy, pulmonary prominent manifestations

DM, the infertility hyponatremia. “salty vas of include a Additional and male (agenesis taste,” unexplained 2 symptoms deferens), type

E, D, for deficiency fat-soluble risk are A, and at vitamin (vitamins Patients

to manifestations K) of and these present malabsorption deficiencies. 2° may with

test test. those Sweat mEq/L years of mEq/L 60 and > age adults; < DNA > 20 80 chloride probe for in

occur, Most be state. carrier now occasional do test for mandatory false sweat must but so from newborn brought positives states to perform children a screening, disease distinguish in a

the is The the CF, diagnosis sweat rmatory for been of standard genetic chloride conf gold analysis routinely considered has now done. test but traditionally

3-3. T 2.1 LE AB Lysosomal Storage Diseases

brain, trihexoside the def that Fabry’s ciency by A a of accumulation disease heart, in α-galactosidase and Caused leads ceramide to kidneys. of Findings of risk ↑ failure and MI. stroke an renal and include X-linked recessive. of leading of galactoside disease in defciency), accumulation galactocerebroside the brain. to to Krabbe’s and Absence galactosylceramidase galactosylceramide the (due and early spasticity, atrophy, optic death. by Characterized recessive. Autosomal characteristic and cells defciency a leads brain, (Gaucher’s paper,” spleen, in the glucocerebroside that Gaucher’s the accumulation of glucocerebrosidase disease enlarged with to of marrow by Caused “crinkled cytoplasm). bone liver, anemia, thrombocytopenia. present with May hepatosplenomegaly, and span affect does common is and with life form, brain. 1, a more not the compatible Type the normal Autosomal recessive. and the defciency and Niemann-Pick in of to disease tissues. sphingomyelin buildup cells A of sphingomyelinase that parenchymal reticuloendothelial leads cholesterol the by Patients age of type with A die three. Autosomal recessive. his with nose No his PICKs (Niemann-PICK) man sphinger. ganglioside that An to GM2 accumulation. hexosaminidase disease of Tay-Sachs leads absence appear when may development begins and weakness age, normal regresses. slows 3–6 of Infants months until and response. Exaggerated startle Death occurs age three. by the of spot cherry-red A macula. is on the visible in (1 carrier 300 Jews 1 in The is descent others). of European rate for 30 lacks Tay-SaX heXosaminidase. the that A brain, leads nerves. the of sulfatide leukodystrophy peripheral Metachromatic in of to and A liver, defciency kidney, accumulation arylsulfatase Autosomal recessive. Hurler’s to of mental corneal clouding that def α-L-iduronidase syndrome and leads A ciency retardation. recessive. Autosomal Hunter’s A defciency of sulfatase. iduronate syndrome mild with corneal retardation. of mild mental no Hurler’s A form clouding and recessive. X-linked the for to need clouding) (no to see X. aim Hunters corneal

physical DNase. are managed and therapy, manifestations chest bronchodilators, Pulmonary corticosteroids, antibiotics, with

D, K E, A, Administer for fat-soluble pancreatic vitamins and and malabsorption. enzymes

diet high-calorie high-protein maintenance. counseling and Nutritional support with essential and a health for are

who lung surgery) transplants. be for tolerate who may (but can or ■Patients disease have severe pancreas candidates 20 newer around with expectancy once age but is increasing was past to years, 30. treatments Life it

A (see “telescopes” to proximal valve the portion or segment, the 2.131). in invaginates of into adjacent usually condition an bowel Figure ileocecal one which the bowel seen and > of three most between usually females); common The years first years of of three cause months life obstruction in age. (males two is unknown. The often cause Risk and polyps, lymphoma celiac parasites, factors conditions intestinal 6 lead disease, or age), years Henoch-Schönlein Meckel’s diverticulum, points, rotavirus including potential purpura, adenovirus infection, of (> include with CF.

vomiting. and Presents in abdominal by abrupt-onset, healthy pain knees apparently children, with often ﬂexed accompanied colicky episodes may intussusception child is The between appear in if well released.

three classic per vomiting, is pain, The blood only one and rectum triad (affects patients). in abdominal

mucus stool), signs (red bloody and include “currant Late stools fever. lethargy, jelly” in shock to as is the progress The condition affected ﬂow blood may to segment compromised.

abdominal palpable abdominal for “sausage-shaped” mass. look stool exam, tenderness, RUQ On a guaiac, a and

2.13-1. FIGURE Intussusception.

A adjacent obstruction. segment, telescopes bowel an of segment into causing permission, LW. Way with from (Reproduced, 10th Surgical Current ed. Treatment, Diagnosis & CT: 1994: Appleton & Lange, 1222.) Stamford, both intussusception. cases enema in diagnostic and is therapeutic of most

The to of emesis persistent classic metabolic in alkalosis pyloric is metabolic (due derangement hypokalemic stenosis hypochloremic, HCl).

Meckel’s rule of 2’s—

in Most males common 2 in times 2 under as children common

2% of gastric) in 2 2 valve tissue population of (pancreatic Contains ileocecal of types Occurs the 2 the within feet and long inches Found

and volume check or (for any Correct leukocytosis). CBC abnormalities electrolyte

disease, normal small plain tissue later perforation, may they a or the mass. early show soft films obstruction, in are but often bowel Abdominal “target a may show sign.” Ultrasound

performed air-contrast in suspicion, barium high clinical of 95% without is In and curative setting > as should of 80%. be the enema diagnostic an it in > cases delay, reduction is unstable child surgical is unsuccessful, reduction If enema and resection has gangrenous or if peritoneal perform bowel. signs the or of

sphincter, leading Hypertrophy gastric outlet the obstruction. to pyloric of firstborn common with stenosis. tracheoesophageal with pyloric associated males; history a More and in fistula maternal of

weeks begins Nonbilious all around projectile to age emesis three of and after most typically progresses to feedings. emesis

well malnutrition from and but dehydration. initially eventually suffer feed Babies

gastric nontender mass may mobile, a Exam reveal epigastric peristaltic waves. visible and olive-shaped, palpable

of choice and a Abdominal pylorus. modality imaging ultrasound hypertrophic reveals is the

narrow pyloric a beak. a (“string Barium sign”) or reveal channel studies pyloric

dehydration acid-base/electrolyte abnormalities. existing and Correct

Surgical pyloromyotomy. with correction

of the omphalomesenteric vitelline) to by failure (or duct Caused obliterate. of common affecting children. congenital abnormality the intestine, small The to most 2% up of of frequently Most occurs years children age. 2 in <

discovered incidentally. asymptomatic, Typically and often

sudden, with bleeding. painless presents Classically rectal

pain typically complications Abdominal diverticulitis, volvulus, such intussusception. as and signifies

or pertechnetate) is scintigraphy (technetium-99m value in be plain useful limited perforation. diagnosing Meckel films scan but have A obstruction diagnostic; can

ileum). of active together adjacent of with bleeding, diverticulum is presence in In the frequently excision develop the adjacent the ileal segment (ulcers treatment

asymptomatic is but excision. the often If intraoperatively, condition treatment controversial but discovered involves is

distal the peristalsis in colon, lack to of motility. cells ↓ and ganglion Congenital uncoordinated leading endocrine 2. multiple Associated and syndrome, Down gender, male Waardenburg’s neoplasia with (MEN) type syndrome,

hours less lesions severe 48 may of failure with later Neonates FTT; with and with life in pass children accompanied to present constipation. within birth, chronic bilious present meconium by vomiting

explosive exam. stool abdominal discharge rectal distention exam Physical and of reveal may following

narrowed enema Barium distal study the choice reveals dilation. colon is proximal a with of and imaging the reveal loops distended Plain films in rectum. air a paucity bowel of with

of sphincter detects the Anorectal of a relax internal failure rectal distention the lumen. after manometry to children. or is in atypical used typically It older presentations

the of (Auerbach’s) (Meissner’s) acetylcholinesterase absence confirms trunks the submucosal and hypertrophied biopsy myenteric with plexus with diagnosis stain. plexus and Full-thickness along nerve reveals enhanced rectal

creation a procedure used Traditionally a several remaining time a rectum. connecting at repair followed the colostomy is diverting weeks diagnosis, by the “pull-through” definitive the of colon involving later two-stage surgical to of the

Volvulus with Malrotation

positioning of bands). right in Congenital bands hypochondrium) midgut and fibrous results abnormal the of malrotation small (Ladd’s the formation intestine of (cecum in the of constriction and ﬂ Bands predispose obstruction ow. blood to

period in of in bilious Often mucus with newborn presents distention, or stool. emesis, and blood the passage abdominal the crampy pain,

to any at Postsurgical lead in and volvulus can life. point obstruction adhesions

The disease Hirschsprung’s nitive def diagnosis biopsy. rectal of full-thickness requires a

neonates. in lms necrotizing for enterocolitis Pneumatosis intestinalis on plain pathognomonic is f

AXR may the absence be normal. intestinal gas but reveal of also may

upper is the the Treitz. choice GI location of ligament If an study of an shows of stable, is the patient and abnormal experience Ultrasound ultrasonographer. used, the the by determined sensitivity but be is may of

tube NG intestine. insertion decompress the to

IV ﬂ hydration. uid

(emergent repair when is present). volvulus Surgical

condition undergoes of a necrosis. bowel A the portion which in full-term emergency neonates; can The most in as infants most occurs commonly in GI common premature but occur well. in infants

are stools. feeding and delayed distention, emptying, gastric abdominal intolerance, nonspecific include bloody and Symptoms

and intestinal to peritonitis, perforation, progress erythema, Symptoms abdominal rapidly shock. may index of Maintain high suspicion. a

left are Lab may nonspecific hyponatremia, shift, and metabolic with and leukocytosis D-dimer). aPTT, and findings prolonged acidosis, with PT, coagulopathy (DIC or a thrombocytopenia, show leukopenia

bubbles venous portal by Plain air bacteria free gas loops, wall), or abdominal radiographs may intestinalis pneumatosis (intramural produced bowel gas, representing air. show abdominal within dilated the bowel hours. six plain Serial should films taken every abdominal be

of loculation and may areas walled-off also air, helpful abscesses, discerning free necrosis. be Ultrasound or in bowel

including IV and dehydration abnormalities, of electrolyte orogastric decompression, supportive an TPN, Initiate tube correction antibiotics. measures, for NPO, and gastric

radiographic worsening for are on plain films. surgery abdominal or perforation serial Indications later. ileostomy fistula performed, with is typically reanastomosis mucous An a with

Complications intestinal syndrome. short-bowel include strictures and of formation

or immunodeficiencies and or FTT. or thrush), rare organisms, opportunistic incomplete unusual present chronic treatment response, Congenital chronic with often are (e.g., recurrent infections also one Categorization that is the (see is component on immune system abnormal Table based 2.13-4).

2.1 LE T AB 3-4. Immunodeficiencies Pediatric

A B-cell Common agamma-globulinemia ciency cell def variable ciency def in (Bruton’s) B X-linked immunodef IgA only. ciency boys Band usually level defect. 20s combined in T-cell and a drops Immunoglobulin the 30s; Mild; ciency. the most immunodef common wanes). pneumoniae, after encapsulated maternal threatening; six Haemophilus months (passive through Streptococcus immunity infections antibodies Life Pseudomonas, and of disease. risk ↑ infections; pyogenic upper lower autoimmune lymphoma and ↑ respiratory and patients recurrent develop infections. asymptomatic; or GI may respiratory Usually common Anaphylactic due is anti-IgA presentation. reaction antibodies a to transfusion immunoglobulin Quantitative levels. rm tissue other clue. are may low, be subsets cells diagnosis (absent cells; lymphoid high); B T-cell absent and tonsils Band often with a conf T If IVIG. with and prophylactic antibiotics Treat with subsets; confrm immunoglobulin IVIG. levels; Quantitative T-cell with treat Band Quantitative IgA infections. levels; treat lead production immunoglobulins anti-IgA not Do to the (can of give antibodies). Thymic syndrome) See T mnemonic. aplasia cell (DiGeorge (2° rst Presents with the to tetany of hypocalcemia) days in f life. risk Variable of infection. Pneumocystis infections with ↑↑↑ and (formerly P. fungi jiroveci carinii). pneumonia hypersensitivity lymphocyte Absolute stimulation count; mitogen skin response; delayed testing. Treat transplantation IVIG PCP with antibody prophylaxis. marrow bone ciency; for and def is an Thymus transplantation alternative. Oculocutaneous combined immunodef Combined telangiectasias ataxia. Ataxia-telangiectasia Severe progressive (SCID) cerebellar and ciency defect. by a DNA Caused repair B lack Severe cells. T and of incidence lymphoma, ↑ and carcinoma. leukemia, gastric non-Hodgkin’s of frequent Severe, organisms. infections; candidiasis; chronic and bacterial opportunistic specifc No require on ciency. the severity treatment; may depending Ig def IVIG of the or transplant Treat transplant ciency. def cell stem marrow IVIG antibody with and for bone Needs prophylaxis. PCP

T 2.1 AB 3-4. LE Pediatric (continued) Immunodeficiencies

Combined (continued) syndrome dysfunction. Wiskott-Aldrich severe disorder less Band T-cell X-linked An with ↑ have and eczema, ↓ IgM, Patients IgE/IgA, thrombocytopenia. presentation classic The bleeding, and eczema, involves media. recurrent otitis S. by PMNs def S. macrophages. and (1/3) Chédiak-Higashi and pneumoniae, syndrome autosomal-recessive Chronic cient ↑↑ Phagocytic uenzae superoxide An aureus, risk with or disease adhesion b. Leukocyte ciency disorders, def infection from (CGD) lymphoma/leukemia, (2/3) production X-linked of inﬂ and type atopic granulomatous disease H. lymphadenopathy, be may Anemia, hypergamma-globulinemia present. and of leukocytes. the A in defect chemotaxis Chronic GI, urinary osteomyelitis skin, to hepatitis. that An infections; autosomal-recessive leads pulmonary, tract and and disorder . are catalase organisms Infecting infection of Aspergillus. ↑ with risk the of tracts. May granulomas have and GI/GU skin pulmonary skin, and infections. mucosal, Recurrent omphalitis the May of period as umbilical delayed the newborn cord. in with separation present defect pyogenes, overwhelming neutrophil Pseudomonas of infections incidence in and with aureus, chemotaxis/microtubule a S. S. species. ↑↑ polymerization.

neuropathy, includes and oculocutaneous neutropenia. syndrome The albinism,

Treatment antibiotics). and (IVIG supportive is to rarely adulthood. Patients survive a bone with treated may severe with Patients infections transplant. marrow be

Absolute neutrophil neutrophil with assays. count

is CGD. nitroblue test tetrazolium for diagnostic The

judicious use during infections. Treat with TMP-SMX; daily of antibiotics serious incidence of can the infection. ↓ IFN-γ Bone therapy marrow are transplantation new therapies. and gene

in (due a No pus defect). infammation minimal chemotaxis wounds to with High blood. in WBCs is curative. marrow Bone transplantation

granules neutrophils. Look giant for in of the treatment is transplant marrow choice. Bone

T AB 2.1 3-4. LE (continued) Immunodeficiencies Pediatric

angioedema stress episodes and Terminal 2–72 trauma. provoked of or lasting autosomal-dominant esterase hours by (hereditary disorder Complement recurrent ciency complement ciency def def An angioedema) C1 with (C5–C9) complex to membrane attack (MAC). Inability form airway life-threatening lead Can edema. to Recurrent or gonococcal infections. meningococcal glomerulonephritis. or Rarely, lupus

the of complement. function to hemolytic quantity Total (CH50) assess and complement prior and used ed be Purif FFP can C1 surgery. to esterase

antibiotics. and Meningococcal appropriate vaccine

B-cell Most def (50%). ciencies: common months Neisseria Typically after age organisms recurrent urinary sinopulmonary, S. pneumoniae, meningitidis). inﬂ uenzae, present six (H. encapsulated and infections tract with of with GI, deficiencies). for Treated IgA (except with IVIF

with (e.g., Tend low-grade ciencies: and to and months) intracellular T-cell fungal, def (1–3 bacterial infections mycobacteria). viral, present opportunistic earlier B-cell also be dysfunction seen. may 2°

infections, and Phagocyte mucous poor wound Characterized def by abscesses, ciencies: healing. membrane aureus), organisms common. with catalaseorganisms Infections fungi, are S. (e.g., and gram-enteric

with asplenia Present def Complement in or (sickle children splenic cell ciencies: disease). dysfunction congenital with Characterized infections recurrent organisms. bacterial encapsulated by

Asian children vasculitis particularly that of are A primarily 5 age), ancestry. young acute those < (80% multisystemic affects of years Divided sub-acute, acute, and chronic phases. into

criteria 1–2 presents required of (fever weeks are plus Acute more for following phase: with the and the four or diagnosis): below Lasts symptoms

ve f least at > Fever (usually for days. 40°C)

conjunctivitis sparing Bilateral, limbic area. the nonexudative, painless

rash truncal). (primarily Polymorphous

painful (often 1.5 least Cervical cm). lymphadenopathy one unilateral, > at with and node

Diffuse mucous chapped membrane dry, lips. tongue”); “strawberry red, (e.g., erythema

of palms indurative edema of fingertips hands of feet; the the the (in and the subacute phase). and late Erythema desquamation soles;

Other include gallbladder hepatitis, arthritis. and hydrops, manifestations sterile pyuria,

and lead disease Kawasaki can infarction! even coronary to myocardial Untreated aneurysms

> Rash ≥ Adenopathy and for swollen, BURN 5 aky f tongue skin) 40°C days) Hands (fever Strawberry (red, feet Conjunctivitis

after and 2–3 Subacute an additional of for phase: fever the abatement lasts Begins weeks. typically Manifestations are thrombocytosis elevated ESR. and echocardiography should develop children assessed artery Untreated coronary aneurysms at by diagnosis. (40%); be to may all patients begin

Chronic when disappeared; phase: clinical until lasts all ESR Begins have to symptoms returns baseline. and at Untreated expansion of children MI. aneurysmal are risk

High-dose ASA and (to (for inﬂammation and IVIG prevent aneurysms). fever)

for continued, then Low-dose weeks. ASA usually six is with chronic may aneurysms other antiplatelet ASA who require or Children medications. anticoagulation develop coronary

in not used is routine but Corticosteroids IVIG-refractory cases, use recommended. may be

Referral pediatric a to cardiologist routine management. artery follow-up assess are parts echocardiograms progression important and coronary for to of ongoing aneurysms of

present gradual autoimmune < age. manifesting disorder with An least loss stiffness” 16 of and motion years of is that at for “morning as patient weeks in arthritis a six rheumatoid Formerly as known arthritis (JRA). juvenile

Pauciarticular joints and (usually or are fewer common; ANA RF Most usually involved weight-bearing); . (oligoarthritis): four evaluation. slit-lamp young and females; exam is requires common for uveitis Involves No systemic symptoms.

more joints; Polyarthritis: Involves or symmetric. five rare younger disease; be disease. milder and is children RF may with ANA severe positivity indicates rare. symptoms Systemic are

hepatosplenomegaly, with salmon-colored Systemic-onset present rash; . disease): a RF (Still’s recurrent high fever 39°C), and ANA and > (usually May usually macular

and exercises. strengthening NSAIDs

(methotrexate; second-line agents immunosuppressive as agents. medications anti-TNF Corticosteroids etanercept) such and are

the Corticosteroids used presence carditis. of are in

that common suppurative ear the in A is cavity infection middle of children. Up episodes have age three least at to children of 75% the by of two. such and uenzae, inﬂuenza pneumoniae, catarrhalis, Common S. viruses virus. inﬂ pathogens include H. RSV, as uenza A, nontypable parainﬂ and Moraxella

and ear Symptoms feeding vomiting, difficulty diarrhea. include crying, irritability, or sleeping, pain, fever, Young ears. children on their may tug

insufﬂ TM, Signs exam of otoscopic retraction ex, mobility ↓ ator or of (test on (TM), with membrane light TM tympanic the and erythematous an TM reveal reﬂ bulging bulb). an loss

therapy. amoxicillin (80–90 for empiric 10 × days High-dose mg/kg/day) Resistant amoxicillin/clavulanic may require cases acid.

Complications media. TM mastoiditis, chronic perforation, cholesteatomas, meningitis, and otitis include can and media cause otitis resultant language loss Recurrent delay. speech hearing with tympanostomy tubes. media otitis require Chronic may

and months. acute < or age, primarily 2 airways infants often fall inﬂammatory small affects winter in An the that years the children of of illness uenza, is include parainﬂ uenza, inﬂ RSV the and common most cause; others metapneumovirus. respiratory is Progression to potentially failure fatal complication. a immunodeficiency. and gender, age lung prematurity, For heart months, RSV, 6 male risk include factors disease, < severe or

and with apnea rhinorrhea, (in fever, cough, young Presents low-grade infants).

expiration, percussion. wheezing, tachypnea, retractions, prolonged intercostal Exam expiratory reveals crackles, to hyperresonance and wheezing,

diagnosis; a do CXR. work Predominantly or need a clinical routine blood not cases

may the ﬂattened of hyperinﬂ CXR ation with be interstitial rule may and lungs show atelectasis. obtained and infiltrates, out to pneumonia diaphragms,

bronchiolitis specific RSV RSV for is aspirate or Nasopharyngeal be test effect and management little for has highly on treated to not). should of regardless (infants is whether but sensitive

primarily if is Treatment with mild disease treat ﬂuids and needed. using supportive; management nebulizers outpatient

prematurity underlying disease, 3 unreliable saturation in feeding, of oral a history weeks), dehydration/poor Hospitalize cardiopulmonary parents. toxic respiratory < distress, months, of 34 age the setting marked or of O2 appearance, 92%, < (<

Treat isolation, with and hydration, O2. inpatients contact continue only aerosolized attempted; A of albuterol albuterol may trial be if therapy effective.

of cause RSV most the bronchiolitis. is common

a treatment. in is controversial has drug antiviral that an bronchiolitis role Ribavirin heart, or disease. used with It in lung, high-risk underlying is sometimes infants immune

those high-risk or 2 a congenital winter history (e.g., antibodies heart prematurity, age with ≤ disease, (RespiGam Synagis) or for RSV of injectable monoclonal patients chronic in disease). years is polyor prophylaxis recommended lung of with

acute space. primarily larynx, viral the the An disease of subglottic within inﬂammatory and virus RSV; Pathogens include uenza (most 2, parainf and 3; common), inﬂuenza; 1 adenovirus. type superinfection tracheitis. to Bacterial may progress

characteristic followed worsens fever, (usually inspiratory barking agitation, with URI night). cough a that dyspnea, symptoms and a low-grade typically are at by stridor mild Prodromal hoarse voice,

impression; Diagnosed the by respiratory and distress. clinical degree of often stridor on based

from c. subglottic sensitive (see film specif the AP 2.13-2), may sign” classic neither nor “steeple Figure show but neck finding the is narrowing

and Table croup tracheitis. differentiates 2.13-5 epiglottitis from

2.13-2. FIGURE Croup.

x-ray airway subglottic the narrowing marked sign”). (“steeple The shows of from with permission, Saunders (Reproduced, CE. Treatment, Emergency Current 4th ed. & Diagnosis 448.) Lange, 1992: Appleton CT: Stamford, &

3-5. T 2.1 AB LE Tracheitis Epiglottitis, of and Characteristics Croup,

improves years Low None hours) Fever Intermediate inﬂ 2% days) (1–7 3 to presenting years drooling Seated, distress severity grade 2 (3 to Parainf fndings Often lateral Associated 88% symptoms cough, on Prodrome CXR leading virus None S. grade acute months group with months uenza days) AP extended H. Barking “Steeple Stridor on children Rapid affected voice, Pathogen racemic 3–7 grade (10 flm to Muffed neck Prodrome years lm Variable Onset 3 sign”’ f decompensation hoarseness hours) preference Incidence Position 8% aureus uenzae (4–12 Age respiratory None Response “Thumbprint epinephrine in narrowing to Subglottic High 3 stridor None sign”

Mild cool ﬂ and management with mist uids. Outpatient cases: therapy

nebulized May and O2, Moderate require IM cases: and supplemental epinephrine. racemic oral corticosteroids,

Severe cases Hospitalize stridor): (e.g., and give rest, racemic at inspiratory respiratory nebulized distress epinephrine.

infection the of serious rapidly and progressive (e.g., aryepiglottic structures supraglottic and folds). A epiglottis was b pathogen. immunization, 1° to type Prior the inﬂ uenzae H. causes species, Streptococcus now Common include

and nontypable agents. lead uenzae, H. Epiglottitis to can viral inﬂ

obstruction.

high (39–40°C), drooling, acute-onset mufﬂed dysphagia, with soft voice, cyanosis, a stridor. and Presents retractions, inspiratory fever

air the forward protruding position chin to with sit the in neck (“sniffing Patients entry. hyperextended a dog” “tripod” lean maximize and and position)

Untreated airway infection and can obstruction life-threatening respiratory to lead arrest.

Diagnosed by clinical impression. must causes 2.13-6). 2.13-5 and of and obstruction The localized include Tables differential airway (see diffuse diagnosis

def be diagnosis. airway nitive must secured before The throat an of airway light examine compromise, not otolaryngologist In potential or laryngospasm and present. unless the do is anesthesiologist

is visualization epiglottis swollen diagnosis a of made Definitive arytenoids. direct fiberoptic via and cherry-red,

x-ray 2.13-3). swollen shows (“thumbprint Figure Lateral epiglottis the a see sign”; obliterating valleculae

true emergency. is a disease This Keep transfer (and calm, anesthesia, the OR. and patient patient call parents) the to the

Treat tracheostomy endotracheal cefuroxime). or IV and (ceftriaxone antibiotics intubation with or

of coli. Bacterial < and common 3 meningitis S. occurs years E. N. meningitidis, children include often age; most in pneumoniae, organisms children agents the ages. occur of viral Enteroviruses all and in of meningitis are common most sepsis. sinofacial trauma, factors infections, and include Risk

high of and the nuchal with rigidity. fever, triad presents classically ■Bacterial headache, meningitis

LE AB 2.1 T 3-6. Peritonsillar and Abscess Comparison Abscess Retropharyngeal of

months to Six years. group affected Age six > 10 age. Usually of years potato” voice; History/PE drooling; “hot Muffed trismus; lymphadenopathy. cervical the Usually in mass pharyngeal unilateral; see posterior wall on visual inspection. may laterally. of tonsil the Muffed and displacement medially trismus; potato” “hot affected drooling; voice; common); S. Bacteroides. Pathogen (most aureus; A Group streptococcus (most common); anaerobes. Group A S. aureus; S. pneumoniae; streptococcus position the extended (sitting up worsens symptoms). the neck fexing or neck with Preferred Supine None. should lateral ≤ vertebral neck Diagnosis corresponding plane 50% of tissue soft the of x-ray, the body. On the width be cellulitis. the Contrast CT neck differentiate from of abscess helps Usually clinical. incision or and abscess; Treatment antibiotics. Aspiration of drainage antibiotics. +/− tonsillectomy; and Incision drainage

2.13-3. FIGURE Epiglottitis.

classic obstructed airway arrow) lateral x-ray. The are seen sign”; on neck and (“thumbprint swollen epiglottis CE. Saunders from (Reproduced, with permission, 4th nosis & ed. Emergency Treatment, Diag Current Stamford, 1992: Lange, CT: & Appleton 447.)

and prodromal is includes meningitis Viral a preceded throat, that typically sore illness fever, fatigue. by

on knee meningeal Brudzinski’s of irritation. (pain is with and neck nonspecific sign sign extension hip Kernig’s when are the ﬂexion) ﬂexed) (pain passive signs

of petechial palsies) (papilledema, ICP or may include (N. findings nerve rash physical cranial exam signs ↑ Additional meningitidis). in a bulging neonates Signs hypothermia, vomiting. lethargy, include hyperor poor tone, and fontanelle,

out Head herniation). brain of rule stem ICP CT to (risk ↑

LP; send levels, Perform with differential, protein Gram count an culture. stain, cell and glucose and

(ceftriaxone, can ampicillin) excluded. administered antibiotic therapy meningitis vancomycin, until bacterial Empiric be regimens should be

receive Neonates or and should gentamicin. ampicillin cefotaxime birth). is mother time (e.g., if at acyclovir had Consider concern herpes the the HSV infant’s of if encephalitis lesions the for there

should children vancomycin. and receive Older ceftriaxone

Bordetella infection (whooping pertussis a cough), by bacterial grambacillus. A caused The wanes but in (given DTaP early immunity childhood) by adolescence. protective, five vaccine is doses in serve Adolescents primary adults for the young as reservoir pertussis. and in for a life threatening infection children infants milder adults. older young generally but be can Pertussis and is

and catarrhal three and (mild URI lasts stages: emesis; (1) weeks), Has whoop (symptoms wane). convalescent cough post-tussive symptoms; months), paroxysmal (paroxysms (2) inspiratory of 2–3 (3) with 1–2 lasts

stage. most but are in stage Patients contagious present in often catarrhal the paroxysmal most the

The < infant age apnea. emesis with an months post-tussive of 6 and presentation classic is

(often elevated an show 70%). WBC count lymphocytosis with Labs ≥

the standard. is gold Culture

Hospitalize age. < infants of months 6

care erythromycin to 14 days and patients close × contacts). Give contacts day (including

been days antibiotics therapy Patients if to of initiated. school or five return elapsed day have no has weeks until care have until or administered three not should been

2.13-7 presentation outlines Table exanthems. of the viral common clinical

TABLE 2.13-7. Exanthems Viral

Erythema low often B19 fth disease) Parvovirus grade. infectiosum absent Prodrome: (f is fever None; or “Slapped-cheek,” erythematous Rash: rash. and An and the pruritic, trunk legs. erythematous, arms to starts on maculopapular spreads rash the with sun and exposure. fever Worsens encephalopathy. Arthritis, anemia, hemolytic is fetal hydrops death. and with Congenital infection associated may be those (e.g., or def ↑ ↓ cell (e.g., RBC anemia). with iron production sickle RBC in with anemia, crisis in Aplastic ciency turnover spherocytosis) severe precipitated children hereditary (small on red spots Paramyxovirus 1–2 Low-grade central Prodrome: after appear Koplik’s Coryza, “3 and Conjunctivitis gray Cough, fever Measles spots specks) with the buccal days. mucosa C’s”); irregular (the with maculopapular erythematous spreads the rash Rash: feet. toward head the from An laryngotracheitis. media, Common: pneumonia, Otitis Rare: sclerosing Subacute panencephalitis.

2.13-7. TABLE Viral Exanthems (continued)

or virus tender, lymphadenopathy. Rubella Asymptomatic generalized Rubella Prodrome: erythematous, distally. on that starts an with Presents and the also Rash: tender rash face maculopapular spreads as measles, to often may with and low-grade fever seen rubella a Polyarthritis children contrast have appear only be do not ill. In adolescents. in complication rare of thrombocytopenia infection). postnatal Encephalitis, (a anomalies. Congenital congenital associated infection is with days. high onset (> no HHV-6 fever for infantum symptoms 40°C); 3–4 Prodrome: of Roseola Acute other maculopapular the and to extremities) (begins < spreads Rash: rash hours. 24 on as appears the often breaks and and fever quickly face A lasts trunk result seizures of as occur Febrile a fever onset. may rapid malaise virus (VZV) hours. fever, Varicella-zoster by the Prodrome: 24 and anorexia, Mild Varicella precede rash healing. are pruritic, lesions Rash: at stages often of Generalized, different “teardrop” vesicular periphery; Infectious 24 lesions crust over. until before eruption from hours with Progressive hepatitis occurs and in varicella meningoencephalitis children. immunocompromised congenital anomalies. associated with is infection Congenital pain along Reactivation zoster starts as Varicella Prodrome: sensory affected VZV of varicella an infection; nerve. Rash: “teardrop” Pruritic dermatomal vesicular a distribution. in rash is unless immunocompromised. the Uncommon patient arthritis. Encephalopathy, meningitis, TTP, Guillain-Barré aseptic syndrome, pneumonitis, cellulitis, disease Prodrome: A oral pain. Fever, Hand-foot-and-mouth anorexia, Coxsackie feet the hands Oral ulcers; the sometimes buttocks. rash vesicular on maculopapular and on and Rash: None (self-limited).

category) each 2 1, APGAR (0, in

> and cough) pink) stimulation with 100) grimace (0, trunk, (0, 100, grimace, < Grimace Appearance (blue/pale, all Pulse pink

(limp, (0, some, effort irregular, Respiratory active) Activity regular)

pathologic. always hyperbilirubinemia is Direct

rapid need the neonatal scoring for helps system evaluate A resuscitation. that is Each parameters (see the one score five and assigned of minutes a of five mnemonic at 0–2 APGAR) birth. after

Typically good of reﬂect Scores adaptation. cardiopulmonary 8–10:

resuscitation. the of possible for Scores 4–7: Indicate need stimulated, ventilatory support. possibly given be Infants should and observed,

0–3: Scores need for resuscitation. Indicate immediate of the

Table describes congenital 2.13-8 selected malformations.

elevated due bilirubin mg/dL) ↑ concentration (> hemolysis or ↓ serum to 5 An excretion. follows: Subtypes as are

hyperbilirubinemia: (direct) Always Conjugated pathologic.

(indirect) hyperbilirubinemia: physiologic be pathologic. Unconjugated May or for 2.13-9 See Table characteristics. differentiating

that A complication ganglia, hyperbilirubinemia deposition results cerebellum. pons, in the unconjugated and bilirubin basal Kernicterus: from irreversible of It be occurs at of levels and fatal. typically mg/dL 25–30 can > prematurity, include Risk and factors asphyxia, sepsis.

following: differential includes The the

syndrome, (neonatal cholestasis infections TPN Extrahepatic metabolism, (biliary Conjugated: syndrome, Rotor’s atresia, errors cholestasis cholestasis), Disease TORCH intrahepatic cysts), chapter). the (see Infectious inborn hepatitis, Dubin-Johnson of choledochal

Gilbert’s ↑ (e.g., Physiologic breast sepsis, disorders bilirubin hemolysis, Unconjugated: circulation GI of jaundice, enterohepatic Crigler-Najjar jaundice, hemolysis, syndrome. syndrome, milk metabolism, obstruction),

on milk diet should RBC deficiencies, exposure, drug history or defects). focus The (hemoglobinopathies, history enzyme and formula), family intrauterine (breast

or hemoglobinopathies of bruising, passage petechiae, or infection, delayed may reveal hepatomegaly). distention, (cephalohematomas, dysfunction (abdominal of hepatic dark exam light-colored pallor, meconium, and Physical urine), stools, signs GI

poor ↑. high-pitched seizures; as progression follow concentrations a cephalopedal hypertonicity, jaundice and lethargy, Kernicterus bilirubin presents a cry, with may feeding,

mother bilirubin Rh infant CBC Coombs’ blood test with blood or (for ABO levels. peripheral typing smear; of and incompatibility); and

suspected cholestatic and/or scan disease. Ultrasound HIDA confirm can

T AB LE 2.1 3-8. Selected Congenital Malformations

Tract the f between Tracheoesophageal and esophagus. trachea stula Anal, Tracheal, Limb) anomalies. as Associated Renal, VACTERL esophageal Cardiac, Esophageal, such defects atresia (Vertebral, with and ↑ inability Polyhydramnios Presentation: gagging, feed, respiratory distress. pneumonia, in to oral utero, aspiration secretions, showing the esophageal an identifes Diagnosis: coiled tube in atresia. esophagus NG CXR tract presence bronchoscopy. the suggestive; in of air GI is The with confrm Treatment: repair. Surgical (Bochdalek). left segments thorax; protrude diaphragmatic GI posterior tract the Congenital into hernia the through are 90% diaphragm the pulmonary bowel hypoplasia sunken sounds pulmonary over Respiratory (from distress left abdomen; Presentation: hemithorax. hypertension); and Diagnosis: Ultrasound confrmed postnatal utero; in CXR. by to or Treatment: ventilation extracorporeal repair. manage surgical oxygenation hypertension; High-frequency pulmonary membrane the sac. the (usually abdominal no Gastroschisis the of next with only on right) to Herniation through the wall umbilicus intestine atresia. with premature; stenoses Presentation: associated GI often Polyhydramnios in or utero; surgical A Treatment: emergency! possible Single-stage of is cases. closure 10% in only abdominal through at of sac membrane. by viscera wall abdominal the Omphalocele Herniation amniotic a umbilicus and into peritoneum covered the Polyhydramnios associated with defects. other in and cardiac Presentation/diagnosis: often GI utero; premature; trisomies. in Seen syndrome and Beckwith-Wiedemann fully rupture; intact, patient is postpone the C-section resuscitated. if Treatment: is sac can sac the correction until prevent surgical gauze. Keep the covered/stable and petroleum with sac prevent NG to abdominal Intermittent distention. suction to recanalize gestational during Duodenal Complete 8–10. atresia partial of duodenal or the lumen failure weeks Polyhydramnios bilious cardiac/GI (e.g., frst with Presentation: anomalies hours other anus). syndrome Down and utero; emesis associated in pancreas, annular feeding; after within malrotation, imperforate to the stomach sign site radiographs the “double-bubble” show Abdominal of proximal in the (air atresia. bubbles duodenum) Diagnosis: and the Surgical Treatment: repair.

aminoacidopathies cultures, LFTs, sweat For α1-antitrypsin blood check acids, for direct bile tests test, and hyperbilirubinemia, deficiency. and

and/or jaundiced is a workup A and monitoring. hypotensive, ICU full tachypneic sepsis neonate febrile, who needs

causes underlying Treat (e.g., infection).

or > mg/dL). unconjugated with (for exchange 20 severe elevations (for Treat hyperbilirubinemia mild transfusion elevations) phototherapy Start

T LE AB 2.1 3-9. Pathologic Physiologic Jaundice vs.

common infants. preterm of failure respiratory most the cause is in RDS

glucocorticoid a An L/S administration. need for ratio 2:1 < maternal indicates

until Not birth. after hours 72 present in life. frst Present 24 of the hours 5 ↑ Bilirubin < mg/dL/day. Bilirubin ↑ 0.5 > mg/dL/hour. mg/dL. Bilirubin at < 14–15 peaks ↑ > 15 to mg/dL. Bilirubin 10% bilirubin total. is of Direct < > bilirubin is of total. 10% Direct Resolves by in infants. week preterm in two term weeks one and infants Persists week preterm term infants. in beyond infants in two one weeks and

mg/dL) earlier for preterm infants. (10–15 phototherapy Phototherapy can to with skin hyperbilirubinemia conjugated bronzing. lead

formerly The as disease. infants infants born known of (affects membrane at respiratory failure cause preterm common in 28–30 > hyaline 70% of gestation); most weeks’ compliance, atelectasis. def poor collapse, lung to Surfactant ciency and leads alveolar factors and second of include the maternal born DM, Risk male twins. gender,

Presents and intercostal > expiratory hours in rate of 48–72 hypoxemia, first the progressive grunting. a ﬂaring, nasal with respiratory retractions, 60/min, cyanosis, life

blood infection. Check out and cultures CBC, rule ABGs, to

mainly characteristic findings: is based on Diagnosis CXR

CXR. atelectasis, on and diffuse “Ground-glass” bronchograms appearance, RDS: air

ﬂ results streaking the newborn: tachypnea in Transient interlobular Retained perihilar amniotic uid in fissures. prominent of

infiltrates; Coarse, Meconium irregular pneumothoraces. aspiration: hyperexpansion and

diagnosis. neutropenia, tracheal the and Gram aspirate, suggest Nonspecific infiltrates; pneumonia: stain patchy Congenital

pressure or Continuous ventilation. mechanical intubation (CPAP) positive and airway

mortality. Artificial administration surfactant ↓

a if risk via for ratio weeks’ lung uid. lecithin-to-sphingomyelin mothers (< 30 the preterm > Pretreat delivery gestation) at in and of presence ﬂ 30 maturity weeks, fetal (L/S) monitor with corticosteroids; amniotic phosphatidylglycerol

of treatment. prematurity, intraventricular positive ventilation, barotrauma and NEC pressure Persistent of complications retinopathy bronchopulmonary hemorrhage, PDA, from are dysplasia,

disorders nonhereditary, the posture; of common and movement range in movement most of A disorder nonprogressive children. is Often perinatal in but unknown. from results most insult, the neurologic cases cause to trauma, exposure perinatal low maternal neonatal hemorrhage. birth and factors Risk asphyxia, include infection, malformation, prematurity, brain weight, intrauterine cerebral the include following: Categories

or paresis Pyramidal all (spastic): Spastic any of limbs. Accounts of 75% for cases. to Mental present 90% in is up of retardation cases.

result (dyskinetic): damage to Extrapyramidal extrapyramidal A of tracts. purposeful writhing, (uncontrollable and movements), choreoathetoid, are posturing). or Subtypes (difficulty coordinating jerking, dystonic ataxic worsen sleep. Abnormal movements during stress with disappear and

disabilities, and disorders, deficits. impairment, hearing be or with associated speech behavioral learning seizure May vision disorders,

tone/contractures, and/or may hyperreﬂexia, pathologic ↑ limbs underdevelopment. (e.g., weakness, reﬂexes show Babinski), Affected

■Toe common. walking are gait scissor and may and be scoliosis dislocations seen. Hip

by Diagnosed impression. clinical may be intracranial or structural CT hemorrhage useful infants malformations. identify in or to Ultrasound MRI is diagnostic children. older in be in EEG patients useful seizures. may with

for There cure cerebral is palsy. no and therapy, Special help. physical of education, release contractures braces, may surgical

or with spasticity baclofen. Treat diazepam, dantrolene, Baclofen severe contractures. alleviate pumps and may posterior rhizotomy

who children causes. infection six or of have months of in intracranial Usually age occur no and five evidence years between other relative. a close seizures factors febrile in rapid a a ↑ and in include Risk temperature history of in seizures recur of 30% Febrile patients.

the roseola). otitis occur (e.g., underlying be first onset media, may an and usually during sign of ■Seizures fever illness the of

The is motor common symptom development. delayed most presenting palsy cerebral of

an infection suspected Perform febrile seizure. is patient a if a CNS with LP in

epilepsy. lead brain damage, not to do seizures not febrile usually an ↑ and Simple recur, of cause do risk not do

common CNS tumors followed ALL lymphomas. the and most malignancy, childhood is by

simple Classified complex: ■ as or

seizure 24-hour 15-minute), short-duration A Simple: (< period. one in a with seizure generalized typical. seizure High onset within fever of hours the fever are 39°C) and (>

24-hour seizure, Complex: long-duration period. in focal 15-minute) (> multiple or or A a seizures for fever may days Low-grade present. before several seizure be onset

a on infection. Focus source finding of signs fontanelle) of after is a if there bulging consciousness, CNS meningismus, ↑ tense/ infection ruling ICP. altered LP indicated (e.g., anterior clinical are out

presentation > are months needed febrile seizures of with age. 18 is in consistent if studies lab children No urine, workup 12 CSF blood, culture). months UA, a sepsis need < Infants and of and (CBC, age

electrolytes, UA, differential. glucose, CBC blood For atypical and serum cultures, with presentations, obtain

illness. (acetaminophen; of antipyretic and syndrome) risk in ASA therapy light Use underlying of treat avoid Reye’s any the therapy that of seizures. febrile Note does ↓ not the recurrence antipyretic

including MRI. evaluation, For a EEG seizures, complex and thorough perform an neurologic phenobarbital) diazepam be (e.g., necessary. may or Chronic therapy anticonvulsant

of 30% episode. initial The is year and one risk highest is the of recurrence within < developmental febrile ↑ risk abnormalities epilepsy. seizures, no there or For of is simple

development epilepsy, delay. febrile factors history and exam abnormal the developmental of Risk or seizures an family for epilepsy risk), of (~10% neurologic complex include a

origin. of lymphocytic myeloblastic hematopoietic malignancy or A childhood The leukemias > common (ALL cases most 97% acute are of malignancy; AML). between common frequently years seen childhood. children children male most age; in AML male two most and in ALL throughout five is African-American is of Caucasian marrow Associated congenital 21, combined and Fanconi’s failure anemia, prior states. with bone immunodeficiency, trisomy severe radiation,

onset. Symptoms in abrupt are to by bone and/or neutropenia), (anorexia, (from refusal pain are weight, followed are ecchymoses, initially nonspecific bear and They anemia, fever fatigue) with hepatosplenomegaly. petechiae,

metastases be headache, and vomiting, may papilledema. CNS associated with

spinal or soft-tissue a skin tumor can a present greenish chloroma, the on ■AML with cord.

numbers CBC, cells). peripheral studies, of blast and (high blood coagulation smear Peripheral smears 90% lymphoblasts show cases. in of can normal, counts WBC be or high. low,

a B-cell of Obtain and help confirm bone and for genetic assay to diagnosis. analysis, antibodies marrow the (TdT panel aspirate a Tand which antigens) monoclonal immunophenotyping

mass. a CXR out to mediastinal rule

and based, including consolidation, Chemotherapy maintenance phases. induction,

treatment. lysis Tumor to hyperphosphatemia, common syndrome during and initiation prior of the hyperuricemia) is (hyperkalemia, allopurinol, and intake. urine of Treat the onset phosphate diuretics, with syndrome at of ﬂ alkalinization, any reduction u-ids,

regimen. chemotherapy

tumor of crest neural An origin. embryonal of metastases presentation. patients 70% are than and half age, 2 have More distant at < years of of patients oncogene. Hirschsprung’s the and Associated neurofibromatosis, disease, with N-myc

most sites cervical and commonly abdominal, descending thoracic, are order). (in Lesion

compression tumor). Symptoms (may paraspinal mass Horner’s nontender a midline), the syndrome, include may vary hypertension, location with a and (from cross cord abdominal or may

may FTT, fever. and Patients have anemia,

50% More have will patients at of than diagnosis. metastases include nodules, hepatomegaly, marrow proptosis, opsoclonus/myoclonus. and subcutaneous suppression, bone Signs

CT fine-needle of aspirate scan; tumor. Histologically rosette with appears characteristic pattern. blue tumor cells a round, as small,

catecholamines and HVA). (VMA 24-hour urinary Elevated

aspirate. marrow and scan Bone bone

BUN/creatinine. CBC, LFTs, panel, coagulation

postsurgical excision radiation. chemotherapy Local plus and/or

Wilms’ tumor is associated

seen origin of of in age. tumor 2–5 children most that renal years commonly embryonal is A with syndrome (hemihy-hemihypertrophy. Associated Beckwith-Wiedemann

WAGR mental Aniridia, pertrophy, Retardation). macroglossia, Genitourinary syndrome visceromegaly), and (Wilms’, neurofibromatosis, abnormalities,

abdominal asymptomatic, nontender, as an mass. smooth Presents

hypertension, fever, hematuria microscopic are pain, gross seen. Abdominal and or

UA. and CBC, creatinine, BUN,

Abdominal ultrasound.

of CT the metastases. scans are chest to and used abdomen detect

chemotherapy nephrectomy and Local postsurgical radiation and with histology. stage on and resection depending

and distinguish to sarcoma Ewing’s osteosarcoma It (see between 2.13-10). is Table critical

of aspect every An well-child important visit. advice the Commonly tested includes following:

LE AB 3-1 T 0. 2.1 Sarcoma vs. Ewing’s Osteosarcoma

(neuroectoderm); Sarcoma with chromosome translocation. 11:22 associated Osteoblasts (mesenchyme). male adolescents. Commonly in Caucasian seen in male seen Commonly adolescents. pain and History/PE swelling. Local common. (fever, are Systemic anorexia, fatigue) symptoms Local pain swelling. and symptoms are rare. Systemic humerus). (femur, pelvis, f bula, Midshaft long of bones Location (distal bones Metaphyses tibia, humerus). long proximal proximal of femur, Metastases lungs to in 20%. Leukocytosis, ↑ ESR. lesion on Lytic plain x-ray. with bone reaction “onion periosteal skin” phosphatase. ↑ alkaline bone lytic “Sunburst” lesions. Chest out CT to rule pulmonary metastases. Local chemotherapy, and radiation. excision, Local excision, chemotherapy. Epidemiology Treatment Diagnosis Origin

48.8°C < heater Keep (< 120ºF). at the water

should their of sleep animals the other on Babies risk toys without in the SIDS). or (to any crib stuffed backs ↓

1 age face the child is should should in can back 20 if (seats and rear facing be the lbs). placed seats weighs year safety the be of of Car and > forward car >

to six a given months; be then solid prior should foods should and introduced at gradually one No time. they be prior to milk give months. not cow’s Do 12

ipecac poisoning. recommended Syrup (an routinely no of is emetic) longer accidental for immediately for Poison contacted should be assistance. control

Objective stem to newborns prior emissions screening for (otoacoustic common. hearing discharge brain response) and/or auditory is

infections. TORCH history is children with measles mumps, and otitis for Objective infections, recurrent middle or a meningitis, ear and of hearing chronic indicated screening media

birth. The checked at should be red reﬂex red Leukocoria of lack ex. a reﬂ the is

of pediatric to misalignment) images should a loss). be of in age; surgery corrective leading normal occlusion, eye, by amblyopia a months children three lenses, vision may (ocular (suppression evaluated ophthalmologist and retinal permanent three require months, to prevent until and/or beyond misaligned Strabismus is

CDC-recommended summarizes population. for The vaccinations chapter Epidemiology pediatric the and Contraindications follows: in as this precautions are population

Contraindications:

component to vaccine. a a prior or vaccine of dose Severe allergy uenza MMR vaccine. may or are receive to who not inﬂ allergic eggs Patients

seven vaccination. days within of Encephalopathy prior pertussis

patients MMR Avoid pregnant live vaccines and (oral patients and receive immunocompromised polio varicella). may (exception: varicella, HIV MMR) vaccine, in

Precautions:

moderate or fever). Current without to (with illness severe

> to 48 of hours of 3 vaccination). shocklike 40.5°C, three vaccination, vaccine state, within hours persistent within days (fever for > Prior or seizure reactions crying pertussis

of A history past in the receiving year. IVIG

are not contraindications The following to vaccination:

low-grade and/or Mild fever. illness

antibiotic Current therapy.

Prematurity.

(sickle polysaccharide to should Pneumococcal immunodeficient). groups cell administered or (PPV) high-risk splenectomy, be vaccine disease

congenital indicates cataracts, of or prematurity. retinopathy Leukocoria retinoblastoma,

low as and intelligence levels exposed New 10 to μg/dL. evidence outcomes as children shown has among impaired neurodevelopmental lead

lead-contaminated is from paint. to dust Most children leaded in due household exposure percentages 12 for 24 or patients be blood should Screening lead performed routinely zip at months of elevated and homes codes high-risk in with high levels). areas living (pre-1950s

vomiting, intermittent hyperactivity foot neuropathy irritability, Presents apathy, anorexia, or intermittent abdominal with constipation, and (wrist or peripheral pain, drop).

confusion, Acute coma. ↑ levels 70 vomiting, > (usually with seizures, and μg/dL) characterized by encephalopathy is ICP,

Blood level. lead

and blood anemia stippling. peripheral basophilic CBC hypochromic smear show and microcytic,

45 at asymptomatic: exposure. Retest μg/dL 1–3 months; of remove lead sources and <

Chelation [DMSA]). EDTA 45–69 therapy succimer (inpatient μg/dL: or oral outpatient

BAL dimercaprol]). (inpatient μg/dL: therapy [IM ≥ 70 EDTA + Chelation

addition is used not in drug, SSRIs, that should with be MAOIs. Buspirone to another

present overwashing dermatologist nonpsychiatrist— e.g., a complaint patients with OCD to they initially skin to consult hands. 2° Many a may a

worry that impairment life or leads Uncontrollable, or signifcant excessive distress. anxiety activities in or to events about

male-to-female The clinical 20s. is 1:2; is usually early onset in ratio the

anxiety more (restlessness, with concentrating, diff three and Presents muscle sleep). disturbed more symptoms irritability, (six days on somatic tension, months) most fatigue, with culty or Hx/PE: or

Tx:

changes, psychotherapy, medication. Lifestyle are most SSRIs, and venlafaxine, 2.14-1). often Table buspirone used (see for symptom Benzodiazepines may immediate used relief. be

initiated (e.g., benzodiazepines as SSRIs) soon in Taper of light the tolerance high risk as and with treatment long-term is of dependence. alcohol to develop Do of those not benzodiazepines turkey,” withdrawal. patients symptoms as potentially withdrawal lethal “cold stop may similar

is education essential. Patient

and/or Characterized dysfunction and cant that social personal or signif lead in obsessions by compulsions distress areas. to

females. adolescence is prevalence presents Typically males or adulthood; in late and equal early in condition to chronic a that treat. is cult Often diff

impulses, and attempts occur to despite Hx/PE: to oneself contamination, loved fear of or distress to harm or and marked them. intrusive patient’s the ■Obsessions: to unwanted, Persistent, ideas, lead prevent (e.g., or thoughts, fear images of ones) anxiety that

2.1 T LE 4-1. AB Medications Anxiolytic

anxiety PTSD. uoxetine, disorder, for treatment escitalopram) OCD, generalized SSRIs citalopram, (f paroxetine, First-line and sertraline, Nausea, agitation. somnolence, dysfunction, GI upset, sexual OCD, Buspirone anxiety PTSD. Generalized disorder, with Seizures chronic use. dependence, or withdrawal. No tolerance, Performance anxiety, β-blockers PTSD. Bradycardia, hypotension. insomnia, spasm, sleepwalking. night alcohol withdrawal, muscle terrors, Benzodiazepines Anxiety, disinhibition young abuse, ↓ in patients; risk tolerance, or duration; and old sleep of dependence; confusion. at (competitive Flumazenil receptor) Antidote to GABA intoxication. benzodiazepine antagonist injection and Resedation; vomiting, site. the dizziness, at nausea, pain

(e.g., Compulsions: hand or tasks, that acts counting, neutralize anxiety mental rituals behaviors for elaborate from Repeated obsessions ordinary checking). washing, excessive

recognize obsessive-compulsive irrational excessive or Table of products Patients personality their own these (vs. OCPD; as minds disorder, see 2.14-2). behaviors and Patients they rid wish the obsessions of could compulsions. get and/or

cognitive-behavioral (CBT) are Pharmacotherapy and frst-line Table see therapy exposure relaxation treatment; Tx: desensitization pharmacologic using 2.14-1); techniques. (SSRIs imperative. Patient is education

Characterized panic by attacks. recurrent, unexpected

males. Two females more times to common than in three in present is in Agoraphobia 30–50% of cases. age at but of age. onset The any average occur may is 25,

Hx/PE:

fear the peak of discrete Panic following or hot of crazy,” “going symptoms which or attacks depersonalization, ned develop four discomfort diaphoresis, minutes: 10 trembling, palpitations, ashes. intense least chest tachypnea, nausea, def fear at of dizziness, within periods are abruptly or pain, and as in dying f

Perioral low and/or acral c produce attacks, oxygen to fairly are when paresthesias, specif hyperventilation which and panic present, saturation.

that of change precipitate one may attacks—e.g., the signifcant behavior about present as having Patients or or concern a attacks. attacks months more additional avoiding with of situations result

panic if that the Elucidate so in patient also addressed agoraphobia be a with can plan. has without treatment agoraphobia disorder or

should include The differential the following:

MI, conditions: def arrhythmias, B12 Angina, ciency, vitamin Medical pheochromocytoma. hyperthyroidism,

anxiety, Substance-induced disorder, generalized Psychiatric anxiety PTSD. conditions:

Tx:

SSRIs, CBT, TCAs). (e.g., pharmacotherapy

the light avoided and Table in tolerance for be use immediate but Benzodiazepines addiction clonazepam) potential should used of relief, for 2.14-1). (see may long-term be (e.g.,

long-term as Taper is (e.g., SSRIs). benzodiazepines as soon treatment initiated

into panic short is mild SSRI within half-life day. go but to that sometimes an it disorder, Alprazolam such a patients used is can has a that treat withdrawal (Xanax)

2.14-2. TABLE vs. OCD OCPD

compulsions. by Characterized and/or obsessions and excessively exible. are inf conscientious Patients want and of rid (ego-dystonic). recognize them the obsessions/ compulsions to Patients be their behavior (ego-syntonic). do recognize Patients not problematic as

is public alone ned fear being of as in def places. Agoraphobia it means the “fear marketplace.” of translated, Literally

combat. and (2) of PTSD males Top (1) in causes are rape childhood rape. and abuse Top (2) (1) in causes females are

high potential. history abuse, in of benzodiazepines of addictive patients substance a be avoided with In should their view

follows: as Defned

in situations marked by phobia: provoked embarrassment may occur. fear performance which Characterized or by Social social be and It public in general speaking, social adolescence. in public) interaction) (e.g., urinating (e.g., often or specifc may begins

heights, animals, or is to situation object by provoked (e.g., phobia: airplanes). exposure a Anxiety Specific feared cases Most childhood. in begin

or unreasonable of and signifcant situation leads is avoidance Hx/PE: and/or in or object with or an to that fear function. Presents impairment excessive persistent distress related of present. panic may attacks A history be traumatic events or is that their excessive. fear recognize Patients

Tx:

through exposure involving or desensitization object situation and relaxation Specific to techniques. incremental feared phobias: the CBT and options supportive, insight-oriented psychotherapy. include Other family,

anxiety) low-dose 2.14-1). used (see be performance may phobias: benzodiazepines, Social SSRIs, Table β-blockers CBT, (for or

combat, horror. extreme, (e.g., Follows event violent assault, traumatic crime) exposure or that an a evoked to witnessing helplessness, intense life-threatening fear,

Hx/PE:

numbed impairment detachment, responsiveness lead by the startle) functioning. arousal trauma, with Characterized (e.g., hypervigilance, anhedonia), stimuli (e.g., of and nightmares), (e.g., that to the signifcant in exaggerated avoidance associated of reexperiencing ↑ distress or event

1 must Symptoms month. > for persist

substance and irritability, change, abuse, suicidality concentration, guilt, personality be may present. poor disturbance, sleep depression, Survivor amnesia,

controversy prevalence regarding which overdiagnosed. Some PTSD, the some is feel of exists clinicians consider diagnoses It differential—e.g., disorder. or therefore in adjustment depressive personality prudent the carefully to major disorder, is other disorder,

Tx:

helpful Table buspirone, (see and are line; frst be 2.14-1). may TCAs, MAOIs SSRIs

α2-agonists include Short-term anxiety clonidine). agents (e.g., targeting β-blockers and

high should as light incidence of in individuals substance addictive potential, avoided but used be among their PTSD. also Benzodiazepines are there abuse is of with a

and are useful. groups support Psychotherapy

judgment, orientation, Affect attention. and memory,

cognitive An deficits. impairment global in functioning with consciousness stable. Level is of years is highest > 85 of among Prevalence age. those The and course persistent is progressive. disease most (50%) dementia are multi-infarct Alzheimer’s (25%). causes The and common the Other outlined DEMENTIAS. are in causes mnemonic

following: more memory include one or of criteria the impairment and Diagnostic

Aphasia: impairment. Language

activities. Inability perform motor to Apraxia:

to Agnosia: objects. Inability previously known recognize

the abstracting) organizing, with and presence executive planning, (problems in clear sensorium. function a of Impaired

wandering mood, behavior and are and changes common Personality, (e.g., aggression).

and careful critical. are A physical history be performed. Serial exams mini-mental should status

CBC, RPR, Rule causes treatable or dementia; TFTs, B12/folate, out UA, a MRI. and HIV, of obtain CMP, ESR, head CT

outlines dementia 2.14-3 key from characteristics n delirium. Table distinguishing

TABLE 2.14-3. Dementia Delirium vs.

of dementia— Causes

diseases Huntington’s) (Parkinson’s, Degenerative

Endocrine pituitary, (thyroid, parathyroid, adrenal)

Metabolic vitamin ciency, Wilson’s B12 (alcohol, glucose, def disease) electrolytes, hepatic, renal,

metals, monoxide, drugs) Exogenous (heavy carbon

HIV, encephalitis, prion Infection diseases, disease) (meningitis, endocarditis, syphilis, Lyme

vasculitis, pressure (vascular normal ischemia, dementia, Stroke/Structure hydrocephalus)

(f attention Impaired Level uctuating). of alert. Usually Onset Acute. Gradual. hour. from to Course hour Fluctuating Progressive deterioration. Consciousness Clouded. Intact. Hallucinations or (often visual Present tactile). highly patients in disease. in Occur approximately 30% of advanced Prognosis Reversible. causes reversible. are irreversible, but and due treatable to up to Largely of cases are 15%

of Major causes delirium—

common to dementia. delirium for superimposed is be It on

I depressive or present MDEs types major disorder be disorder in and in bipolar can II.

cues a for daily patient’s rigid life. the environmental and Provide structure

inhibitors used treat. Cholinesterase are to used antipsychotics for agitation. may Low-dose be confusion. may disinhibition Avoid benzodiazepines, and worsen which

are support and caregiver, education imperative. patient Family, and

period develops to consciousness cognition (usually with An a over days). acute altered of that short disturbance of time hours (e.g., patients the psychosis) ICU are susceptible. elderly, particularly Children, hospitalized and I causes the in WATCH mnemonic DEATH. are Major outlined are Symptoms the potentially be underlying cause can reversible if treated.

Presents waning with of consciousness acute lucid waxing disturbances delusions). perceptual with and (hallucinations, intervals illusions, onset and

stuporous. or may be anxious, combative, Patients paranoid,

at (sundowning). characterized sleep-wake cycle, a short-term symptoms reversed by a and memory, Also ↑ attention night span and ↓

neurologic vitals, pulse Check glucose; physical and oximetry, exams. perform and

infection use, benzodiazepines), elderly; signs of Note UTI UA). or (occult common steroids, check in (narcotics, medications (kidney, substance episodes, is anticholinergics, problems, organ the liver), failure and recent prior medical

lab underlying identify to cause. Order radiologic studies possible and a

often is (delirium causes reversible). underlying Treat

electrolytes. fuids Normalize and

the environment. Optimize sensory

Use agitation psychotic antipsychotics haloperidol) symptoms. and for (e.g., low-dose

patient Conservative prevent the may to necessary or use be restraints others. of physical harm to

affective disorders. as known Also

depressive (MDEs). characterized disorder or A mood major one by episodes more from to prevalence 25%. male-to-female ratio 1:2; lifetime 15% is ranges The in elderly, Onset prevalence usually mid-20s; the the is age. with in ↑ stress illness risk. and ↑ Chronic suicide. die Up of by to 15% patients

(loss five a or SIG two-week more interest/pleasure) Diagnosis signs/symptoms depressed from period. requires anhedonia E mood the of for CAPS or mnemonic and of the that be may mistaken for Table depression. outlines 2.14-4 conditions differential diagnosis the depression subtypes include Selected following:

features: Psychotic delusions/hallucinations. mood-congruent Typically

within recurrence. postpartum; risk has month a Postpartum: and incidence one high 10% Occurs a of Psychotic common. symptoms are

sensitivity. by hypersomnia, Atypical: and rejection Characterized weight gain,

most to commonly particular occur episodes season, Depressive a during winter. tend Seasonal: therapy +/– to well light Responds antidepressants.

a depression: MDE with dysthymia. in Double patient Has than poorer a alone. prognosis MDE

50–70% Effective patients. of in Pharmacotherapy: Table weeks 2–6 to effect; ≥ 2.14-5). treat (see take months 6 for Allow

either Psychotherapy more combined alone. Psychotherapy: effective than antidepressants treatment is with

(ECT): therapy Electroconvulsive

or highly depression, lifesaving Safe, improvement for reserved if in effective, is that needed. depression therapy psychotic refractory often mood is rapid or

T AB 4-4. 2.1 LE Major Depression Differential Diagnosis of

of episode— depressive Symptoms a

(loss activities) of Interest interest or pleasure in

worthlessness guilt) inappropriate Guilt of (feelings or

CNS other disorder to medical pancreatic Hypothyroidism, neoplasm stroke Mood dementias, Parkinson’s parathyroid due ACA (especially neoplasm, disease, stroke), (e.g., disorders. a condition cancer), drugs, OCPs. mood disorder Substance-induced alcohol, Illicit corticosteroids, antihypertensives, mood meeting MDE. Adjustment not with symptoms disorder MDE criteria A the of constellation but depressed for resembling an months an Occurs able stressor. three identif within of bereavement loved Occurs after the a of loss one. Normal impairment/suicidality; but with varies resolves severe one norms. in cultural No usually year, lead disorder to treatment. May major depressive requiring them as as recognizes person Illusions/hallucinations deceased normal be the long as of such. the can often two depression years; for time Milder, resistant. the with most mood depressed of treatment at chronic Dysthymia present least

4-5. AB T LE 2.1 Effects Indications Common of Antidepressants and Side

sertraline, uvoxamine citalopram, f and Depression anxiety. SSRIs Fluoxetine, paroxetine, GI side agitation, Sexual diarrhea. tremor, effects, insomnia, distress, cardiovascular syndrome with are occur changes, used collapse) if can status (fever, myoclonus, MAOIs. SSRIs Serotonin mental pulmonary Paroxetine cause can fetus. in the hypertension venlafaxine, and Bupropion, pain. trazodone chronic mirtazapine, anxiety, Atypicals Depression, side seizure sexual minimal threshold; ↓ Bupropion: effects. as seizure disorders in as patients. in with well eating patients Contraindicated hypertension. Venlafaxine: Diastolic gain, sedation. Mirtazapine: Weight Highly priapism. sedating; Trazodone: desipramine, enuresis chronic amitriptyline, Depression, pain, (imipramine). migraine Nortriptyline, anxiety imipramine headaches, disorder, overdose long conduction with (e.g., Lethal to owing QRS). arrhythmias cardiac following OD. the 3–4 ICU in Monitor an days for sedation). (dry retention, urinary constipation, effects Anticholinergic mouth, (patch Phenelzine, atypical. tranylcypromine, available) Depression, form selegiline especially Hypertensive if crisis red (cheese, taken with wine). high-tyramine foods hypotension, Sexual effects, gain. orthostatic side weight TCAs MAOIs

least weeks two starting an MAOI. before at Discontinue SSRIs f was f uoxetine. if patient Wait the on ve weeks

impaired and and mania to psychiatric 2° and self of Mixed others. to risk are harm great emergencies judgment states

also used for be mania psychosis. May and treatments. 6–12 Usually requires

include postictal and amnesia. anterograde confusion, effects headache, arrhythmias, Adverse

risk include relative ■Contraindications high MI/stroke, recent mass, (a anesthetic and intracranial contraindication).

seasonal Phototherapy: a pattern. for depression has Effective whose patients

Now (TMS): for Transcranial approved stimulation major of depression. the magnetic treatment as but as effective as not as about effective is ECT. medications is TMS

1% II; approximately equally. Prevalence I affected 3% are type for females and and type for additional an is males illness history of risk. bipolar A ↑ family signif cantly Average is 20, to episodes of mood frequency age. ↑ onset the and tends of age with those 10–15% to by affected of suicide. Up die mixed as Subtypes one I: are or follows: At least ■Bipolar manic hospitalization). episode requiring (usually

At (less one episode least intense Bipolar one mania). and MDE II: hypomanic than the do manic criteria Patients or not full for episodes. mixed meet

manic, episodes more mixed, year. (MDE, or in cycling: or one hypo-manic) Four Rapid

years. and > periods with depression and alternating Cyclothymic: 2 severe, hypo-mania less Chronic for moderate of

clinical outlines presentation FAST of DIG mania. mnemonic the The

(e.g., pleasurable report behaviors, in activities features. Patients activity), spending engagement and/or or reckless psychotic excessive may excessive sexual

Antidepressant trigger manic use may episodes.

DIG episode persistently is one manic plus or A elevated, FAST more mood irritable expansive, or of week symptoms. three common are Psychotic symptoms in mania.

not occupationally, or Symptoms medical signifcant lead to impairment a and due to substance or condition socially, are familially.

Hypomania and does or psychotic require similar impairment hospitalization. does symptoms marked functional is but involve not not

the antipsychotics Mania: for mood stabilizers and the in phase psychotic 2.14-6) acute ■ of (see maintenance Table discussion Give dis- (see therapy

2.14-6. TABLE Stabilizers Mood

Symptoms of mania—

thoughts) of 439 ideas mood First-line Agitation Lithium Activities/psychomotor (or racing stabilizer. Flight augmentation for for with in mania in antipsychotics), for and disorders, depression Used prophylaxis bipolar acute treatment. combination (in Thirst, weight diabetes insipidus, in polyuria, used trimester), (if gain, vomiting. diarrhea, frst hypothyroidism, tremor, teratogenicity the acne, seizures, nausea, monitored). level therapeutic be Narrow blood (but window can with 1.5 > mEq/L; presents Lithium renal ataxia, failure. delirium, toxicity: dysarthria, and acute Avoid lithium ↓ patients in with renal function. Carbamazepine mood stabilizer; Second-line trigeminal neuralgia. anticonvulsant; leukopenia, skin rash, block. Nausea, AV anemia (monitor CBC biweekly). aplastic Rarely, Stevens-Johnson syndrome. anticonvulsant. Bipolar disorder; tremor, alopecia, weight gain. GI sedation, (nausea, vomiting), pancreatitis, and thrombocytopenia, hepatotoxicity, fatal Rarely, agranulocytosis. mood anticonvulsant. Second-line stabilizer; syndrome. Blurred Stevens-Johnson distress, GI vision, monitor dose to slowly rashes. for ↑

below). Characteristics personality of disorders— orders beneft agitation. of be refractory in Benzodiazepines may

Mood stabilizers +/– antidepressants. depression: Bipolar mood avoid inducing 2.14-6) Start stabilizers to Table (see first mania. to refractory be used may ECT treat cases.

augmented at antidepressant with levels blood depression In with depressive predominantly be low-dose severe 0.4–0.6 or features, bipolar with mEq/L. can treatment II lithium—e.g., of patients

as individual’s of predictable. defned generally emotional and are and stable which set Personality traits, an can be behavioral when and Personality chronically of and become aspects mnemonic traits affect maladaptive most disorders (see defned life the MEDIC). one’s rigid one’s are by early Onset occurs adulthood. Personality defned axes are following the (see page). the II under DSM-IV disorders of Axis defnition on in disorders are in Table 2.14-7. outlined Specifc

LE 4-7. 2.1 TAB Symptoms Personality of Disorders Signs and

Distrustful, as others’ motives malevolent. interpret suspicious;

detached emotional Isolated, “loners.” Restricted expression.

Odd behavior, perceptions, and appearance. thinking; Magical ideas of reference.

psychiatrists, psychiatrist. between relationships form are therapeutic to distrustful and diffcult Patients making and it patient of suspicious

honest, Be noncontrolling, clear, nondefensive. and

relationships, emptiness. self-image; Unstable feelings mood, and of Impulsive. of History suicidal or self-harm. ideation

and seeking. attention emotional Excessively Sexually provocative; theatrical.

Grandiose; have need of admiration; entitlement. sense Lack empathy.

and laws. Violate norms, of rights others, social Impulsive; remorse. lack disorder. as Begins in childhood conduct

rules the Patients demand attention. and change manipulative and They demanding staff are and will members. split

frm. Be plan. the to treatment Stick

Be fair. punitive be Do or not derogatory.

consistent. Be change rules. Do not

perfectionism, ciency. the Preoccupied expense with at control and eff of order, Infexible values. morals,

inhibited; sensitive. rejection Socially disliked or ridiculed. Fear being

need Submissive, clingy; of. taken care to be making Diffculty decisions. helpless. Feel

sabotage controlling Patients their and may are treatment. actions. inconsistent may Words with be

power Avoid struggles. not Give recommendations, into decisions. patients do but push clear

reaction and about activities, to attitudes, variability, mood Ask stress.

chronic Patients responsibilities, have and problems dealing with stressors. roles, have problems, patterns, may and their behavior They culty understanding their cause changing their diff also diffculty deny behavior, psychiatric care. refuse of the frequently have

is the Psychotherapy mainstay therapy. of

or for with comorbid psychotic cases mood, Pharmacotherapy is signs/symptoms. reserved anxiety,

disordered with clear delusions, Characterized disrupted hallucinations, sensorium. by thoughts, disturbances, behavioral a and functioning social

are affected Prevalence is approximately Epidemiology: and 1%; equally. males females has in early earlier those spring. or incidence and 18–25) an in in winter in born onset ↑ Peak than 25–35), males females (ages (ages is risk. relatives ↑ frst-degree Schizophrenia in also commit of affected Ten those suicide. percent

hyperactivity; (frontal cortical hypoactivity; Etiologic as and brain and neurotransmitter dysregulation on abnormalities theories on effcacy antagonists) CT such (enlarged ventricles ↓ dopamine MRI Etiology: dopamine and limbic abnormalities focus of volume). are follows: Subtypes as

Delusions patient) of persecution hallucinations (often the present. are and/or Paranoid: of usually preserved. Cognitive function is prognosis. the overall Associated with best

patterns Speech affect. disordered with Disorganized: fat highly and disinhibited are behavior and disorder thought contact The has reality. and pronounced, poor the patient with is prognosis. worst the Carries

or echolalia, of echopraxia. more disturbance or waxy the by A characterized with Catatonic: psychomotor two negativism, rare immobility, following: form excessive fexibility, mutism, activity, motor extreme

six disorder. for more of often months symptoms: Hallucinations the auditory), dysfunction: and or more Two occupational behavior, are following thought or (most disorganized speech, continuously bizarre with present or delusions, social

lack Flat speech, emotional purposeful of of symptoms: reactivity, affect, anhedonia. actions, ↓ and poverty

differential following: The the includes

a months. Schizophreniform disorder: duration with Symptoms < schizophrenia of of 6

Schizoaffective a disorder bipolar affective (major with disorder: the of Combines disorder). major depressive or schizophrenia symptoms disorder

to the mental contributing classify individual’s the Five are by used to state: an factors DSM-IV categories

disorders. Psychiatric I: Axis

disorders retardation. Personality mental Axis and II:

Axis Physical problems. and medical III:

IV: and Axis stressors. Social environmental problems/

Functioning Axis overall patient’s on of Global level of and functioning of rates V: to The 100 Assessment a occupational, (nonfunctional) social, areas). functioning psychological scale 1 several across high (extremely which (GAF), a

Table Antipsychotics (see 2.14-8); long-term follow-up.

illness vocational psychotherapy, may Supportive and skills, help. social training in tion, rehabilita education treat. to more be ■ diffcult to used may Terms symptoms describe

psychosis: components of

f idiosyncratic false A Delusion: xed belief.

of external an event existing Perception without or object stimulus. Hallucination: an

actual perception of stimulus. Illusion: external an False

of hyperactivity/impulsivity. A excessive and/or persistent pattern inattention in More males; ages between 13. typically 3 and presents common Often shows pattern. familial a

listed at leading each for six requires symptoms more two and below from signifcant more Diagnosis social impairment. or category to settings, in six months or least academic before must present be seven. Some age patients symptoms in

to; does has listen spoken attention detail careless in span Poor attention when schoolwork/play; ■Inattention: or not poor difficulty mistakes; to

T LE AB 4-8. 2.1 Medications Antipsychotic

Haloperidol, injection), given quetiapine, antipsychotics droperidol, thioridazine, effects. f Currently antipsychotics in schizophrenia ziprasidone, (also Typical Atypical olanzapine, uphenazine, for depot and EPS aripiprazole anticholinergic fewer chlorpromazine frst-line long-acting available risperidone Clozapine, treatment treatment severe resistance reserved severe is and for tardive dyskinesia. Clozapine 2 DM, Weight type QTc sedation, prolongation. somnolence, and gain, CBC requiring Agranulocytosis (clozapine). weekly monitoring

acute agitation, mania, syndrome. disorders, acute Psychotic Tourette’s of schizophrenia; block for more receptors. D2 dopamine effective primarily be Thought to symptoms

whom a uphenazine). f in compliance in forms issue, depot For major patients antipsychotics come that consider (haloperidol, is

see 2.14-9), hyperprolactinemia. Table (EPS;

effects retention, Anticholinergic mouth, urinary (dry constipation).

Seizures, and prolongation. sedation, QTc hypotension,

(thioridazine). syndrome: malignant Neuroleptic

elevated instability, CK, Fever, rigidity, muscle consciousness. autonomic clouded provide Table the Stop dantrolene 2.14-9). (see medication; bromocriptine supportive ICU; or care in administer

LE 2.1 T AB 4-9. Symptoms Extrapyramidal and Treatment

dystonia Involuntary spasm (e.g., Acute muscle or crisis). contraction torticollis, oculogyric or (benztropine some dosing need antipsychotics these. prone who may are to on of diphenhydramine); patients dystonic prophylactic reactions Anticholinergics regular distressing. Akathisia which Subjective/objective being is restlessness, perceived as and try (propranolol). ↓ β-blockers neuroleptic anticholinergics help. may or Benzodiazepines (e.g., shuffing cogwheel Pseudoparkinsonism gait, rigidity). a dopamine (amantadine). anticholinergic agonist (benztropine) Give or an ↓ (if tolerated). discontinue dose of neuroleptic or the oral-facial Stereotypic movements. sensitization. Likely dopamine from receptor Often irreversible (50%). (e.g., or more neuroleptic; or neuroleptic Discontinue changing attempt treatment to risperidone). with appropriate ↓ dose drugs; and the clozapine consider of decreasing dyskinesia. worsen initially or may tardive anticholinergics neuroleptics Giving

instructions to and forgetful tasks; finishing tasks; following items needed distracted. complete or is easily loses

others. wait cannot ■ runs seat Hyperactivity/impulsivity: classroom; play leaves Fidgets; in turn; excessively; not inappropriately; quietly; does talks interrupts around

cation). Initial nonpharmacologic treatment (e.g., be modif behavior may considered factors. not etiologic additives Sugar and food are

following: the treatment includes Pharmacologic

Methylphenidate of (Cylert). (Strattera), pemoline dextroamphetamine and (Adderall), (Ritalin), salts amphetamine Psychostimulants: mixed atomoxetine dextroamphetamine (Dexedrine), medication tic when ↓ growth effects stopped). is exacerbation, irritability, velocity ↓ and appetite, insomnia, include (normalizes Adverse

Antidepressants (e.g., bupropion) and nortriptyline, α2-agonists clonidine). (e.g., SSRIs,

in common males. More sclerosis be fragile May tuberous and with syndrome. associated X Symptom vary severity IQ widely. and

restricted and together ■Characterized impaired three. age abnormal evident and interaction with activities communication before interests, by or social

home school). two settings in must Children symptoms (e.g., and more ADHD or exhibit

Conduct in seen disorder Children. is Antisocial in Adults. disorder is personality seen

and relationships. fail develop behaviors Patients normal in (e.g., to social smile, lack eye social contact) interest

spoken absent. language is of The delayed or development

behavior preoccupation (e.g., and restricted (e.g., parts objects). show speech of Children f hand stereotyped with interests apping) and

disorders developmental Other include following: the pervasive

syndrome: of social marked and delays. cognitive behaviors, and activities, interests or language repetitive An autism-like without disorder impairment Asperger’s

Rett’s language, neurodegenerative with of genetic growth, normal of females (e.g., progressive disorder: A development. impairment disorder coordination) five head after months

(e.g., disorder: after social language, skills, play). years motor development Childhood control, regression skills, 2 Severe normal developmental > disintegrative bladder/bowel of

symptom-targeted behavior). behavioral and (e.g., neuroleptics management, for SSRIs stereotyped special medications education, Intensive for aggression;

and are counseling crucial. Family support

disorder. disorder Include ant oppositional conduct def and

of patients in abuse. and males history a common among with More

Hx/PE:

persistent norms rights more. societal violating or of one pattern disorder: repetitive, age-appropriate or of rules Conduct for the year others or basic A animal may lying, stealing, (e.g., nonaggressive rape, people). (e.g., annoying be cruelty) aggressive robbery, or deliberately Behaviors in adulthood. disorder progress May personality antisocial to

arguing) of six defiant, pattern for negativistic, Oppositional disobedient, defiant losing and (e.g., A authority disorder: fgures or hostile months. toward more behavior temper, to disorder. conduct May progress

family Individual and Tx: therapy.

status of exhibit often Occur in in and a males more (SES); pattern. frequently low familial socioeconomic those

Hx/PE:

for lower functioning expected or education written and test measured than is achievement as age, by Academic expression. in substantially intelligence, standardized mathematics, reading,

interfere activities. with schooling daily problems signifcantly and Learning

disorders physical (e.g., social (e.g., factors out rule and Always deafness) non–English speakers).

strategies. individualized classes include Tx: Interventions or remedial learning

with during male and inborn substances of teratogens, congenital Associated metabolism, abnormalities, chromosomal errors alcohol/illicit infections, pregnancy. gender,

Hx/PE:

functioning intellectual adaptive functioning of of Patients (an have IQ age in subaverage (e.g., is 70) with skills); onset deficits social hygiene, before 18. < the signifcantly

35–49), (IQ of (IQ of are cases), 85% profound Levels 20). and severity (IQ 50–70; 20–34), < moderate severe mild (IQ

mothers prevention mental children. 1° public possible and and causes retardation of consists health general care providing screening Tx: and the optimal to about educating prenatal of their

family speech support; intervention; and and counseling Treatment behavioral and therapy; educational assistance; language include training. social occupational/physical measures therapy; skills

shows males; More common a genetic predisposition. in ADHD, disorders, and learning OCD. Associated with

Hx/PE:

to prior age Begins 18.

year day, (e.g., many vocal recurrently, > by and with (e.g., grunting, per or blinking, occurring times impairment. tics grimacing) Characterized occupational multiple coprolalia) motor for 1 social

pimozide) Tx: include (haloperidol, Treatments clonidine. receptor dopamine or antagonists Behavioral adjustment may social of beneft, aid can and in be coping. and counseling therapy Stimulants can tics. worsen or precipitate

Fetal number is syndrome of the one alcohol cause avoidable retardation. mental

of = words. repetition obscene Coprolalia

dependence— of Features substance

use lead of signifcant and clinically substance to are substance dependence that abuse impairment. substance maladaptive patterns Both dependence from distinguished abuse substance follows: is as Substance

Requires Substance the abuse: following one year: of one more in or

responsibilities Failure at to fulfill home. school, work, or

Use situations (e.g., hazardous driving in while intoxicated). physically

the during problems of time use. substance Legal

recurrent over with substance to interpersonal substance of the or use 2° despite (e.g., use frequent the such use). problems spouse Continued arguments social effects

three the of Substance in Requires year: dependence: more one or following

effect. and desired of larger Tolerance same to obtain progressively amounts the use

the symptoms taking substance. not when Withdrawal

attempts or to cut the use down substance. from Failed abstain

period: Three of seven more within or 12-month a

use and continued (physical psychosocial) with Harm

down/ Desire cut control to

Time obtaining/ is ↑ substance using the spent

a of of A abuse. trumps diagnosis diagnosis dependence substance substance

pills). to a for the prescription doctors (e.g., obtain many spent substance Signifcant pain visiting obtaining time

activities. life Isolation from

substance intended. than amounts the greater of Taking

the substance psychological use. or to 2° the recurrent problems of Continued abuse substance despite effect physical

so often underreported, information out use seek from or family Substance is denied friends. and collateral

LFTs, EtOH blood and urine level. screens, and serum Check toxicology

selected in intoxication for management The of drugs is 2.14-10. Table described

4-1 0. LE AB 2.1 T and Signs Substance Abuse of Symptoms

impairment, lability, memory coma. Disinhibition, impaired aggression, Alcohol slurred hallucinations, judgment, blackouts, speech, emotional ataxia, nausea, tachycardia, Tremor, hypertension, DTs, malaise, seizures, agitation. depression CNS and overdose). in constriction, Euphoria depression, constipation, pupillary Opioids to apathy, respiratory leading threatening (life opioids reverse and long-acting antagonist receptors with methadone). particularly opioid clearing effects opioids, before as (beware of such Naloxone/naltrexone will block stomach cramps, yawning. myalgias, lacrimation, diaphoresis, Dysphoria, vomiting, pupils, nausea, rhinorrhea, diarrhea, piloerection, fever, anorexia, insomnia, dilated and Opioid seizures. all is life cause not not withdrawal over,” “hurts threatening, does pupillary Psychomotor anxiety, judgment, agitation, euphoria, fever, wakefulness/attention, diaphoresis, seizures, arrhythmias, impaired delusions, prolonged Amphetamines dilation, hypertension, tachycardia, angina, hallucinations. agitation antiemetics, for medications and given (e.g., severe NSAIDs). Haloperidol can symptom-targeted be sleep anxiety, hunger, depression/dysphoria, cramps, fatigue, with stomach Postuse disturbance, “crash” headache, nightmares. lethargy, Cocaine impaired tachycardia, paranoia, death. Psychomotor dilation, hypertension, sudden hallucinations, pupillary judgment, euphoria, agitation, ECG pain”). ischemia seen chest are changes (“cocaine often from symptom-specifc agitation control severe to hypertension). (e.g., haloperidol with Treat medications along for with craving, bugs.” Postuse “crash” ↑ malaise, depression, severe angina, “cocaine suicidality, with hypersomnolence, appetite, nightmares,

T AB 4-1 LE 2.1 0. Symptoms and Substance (continued) of Abuse Signs

delirium. fever, psychomotor impulsiveness, vertical/horizontal agitation, ataxia, seizures, (PCP) violence, impaired belligerence, psychosis, tachycardia, hydrochloride nystagmus, judgment, Phencyclidine hypertension, Assaultiveness, reassure. or symptoms; for benzodiazepines otherwise severe Give haloperidol drug. gastric Acidifcation eliminate help of urine lavage the or can reabsorption severe, Recurrence of symptoms sudden onset due of in random violence. tract; GI to intoxication the fashbacks, colors depression, hallucinations, impaired dilation, heightened hypertension, delusions, intense). become Marked more senses visual LSD or judgment, tachycardia, diaphoresis, pupillary anxiety (e.g., anxiety. traditional for benzodiazepines antipsychotics symptoms; psychotic counseling; Supportive for judgment, withdrawal, dry impaired injection, social time, Euphoria, appetite, anxiety, conjunctival syndrome. Marijuana slowed hallucinations, mouth, paranoia, ↑ of sense amotivational Barbiturates margin; respiratory Low depression. safety life-threatening cardiovascular seizures, collapse. Anxiety, delirium, Interactions alcohol, mild somnolence, ataxia, with respiratory depression. amnesia, Benzodiazepines elderly; for can agitation relatively in in (Avoid paradoxical insomnia using low doses.) cause even the tremor, seizures, hypertension, death. tachycardia, Rebound insomnia, anxiety, psychomotor arrhythmias, tachycardia, twitching, muscle Restlessness, agitation. fushed face, diuresis, insomnia, gain, irritability, depression, lethargy, craving. weight Headache, anxiety, arrhythmias. insomnia, Restlessness, gain, Irritability, culty concentrating, anxiety, weight craving, insomnia. bradycardia, headache, diff Nicotine Caffeine

those years the in often more of although and 21–34 females is rising. in males Occurs (4:1) in incidence age, family history. a with associated Also

symptoms Hx/PE: Table and for withdrawal. See of the 2.14-10 intoxication and other as of for signs as palmar complications. end-organ Look symptoms erythema telangiectasias for well or

CAGE with the Screen questionnaire. Dx: Monitor vital withdrawal. of evidence signs for MCV. LFTs, and may reveal Labs ↑ LDH,

Tx:

abnormalities. electrolyte correct Rule complications; medical out

a Start taper benzodiazepine withdrawal symptoms. for symptoms. Add for and psychotic haloperidol hallucinations

lead of opioid enlarged because sign Pinpoint reliable always not to can or coingestions pupils ingestion pupils. are normal a ↓breath for a ↓ track look and sounds. Also rate, respiratory marks,

questionnaire: CAGE 1.

felt to Cut drinking? Have your need you down ever on the

2.

of drinking? ever Have by you felt your criticism Annoyed

3.

Guilty you ever felt about drinking? Have

4.

ever had Eye take Have a morning opener? you to

“yes” alcoholism More than likely. answer makes one

two nervosa: types of are anorexia There

and thiamine) encephalopathy. Give folic glucose before (which prevent administer Wernicke’s multivitamins depletes to thiamine acid;

with anticonvulsants a Give patients seizure history. to

with aid dependence. Group can naltrexone or patients therapy, disulfram,

Long-term rehabilitative therapy (e.g., Alcoholic Anonymous).

Cx: ■

Mallory-Weiss ulcers, or gastritis, varices, GI bleeding from tears.

trauma sustaining pneumonia, syndrome, psychosis, peripheral of Korsakoff’s DTs, hallucinosis, Pancreatitis, neuropathy, disease, liver cardiomyopathy, (e.g., risk subdural Wernicke’s alcohol aspiration fetal hematoma). anemia, encephalopathy, ↑ alcoholic

self-esteem, gender, high and factors female Risk low SES. include such OCD, associated depressive as gymnastics, disorder, major Also and and anxiety, careers running. modeling, with ballet,

2.14-11): Hx/PE: Diagnosed (see Table as follows also

of that Body 85% expected. weight is <

refusal maintain distorted as fat), perceive weight themselves with normal weight, body present and image a intense amenorrhea. an Patients (patients body gain, fear to of

(e.g., or restrict laxatives, exercise) binge vomiting, excessive fasting, and purge and diuretics). (through Patients

hypothermia (as symptoms 35°C). cold skin, lethargy, low lanugo, hypotension, include dry as Signs and bradycardia, and intolerance,

Measure weight; height CBC, ECG. and and Dx: levels, electrolytes, endocrine check Perform conditions. screen to co-morbid for evaluation a psychiatric patients

Tx:

intake stabilize to gain. weight restore status to monitor Initially, focus caloric nutritional and weight; then on

and rehydrate, correct necessary restore electrolyte status, Hospitalize if to nutritional imbalances.

group medically stable, patient psychotherapy. Once family, the is initiate individual, and comorbid and anxiety. Treat depression

arrhythmias, bradycardia, valve Cx: amenor- prolapse, Mitral hypotension,

TABLE 2.14-11. Bulimia Anorexia vs.

Disturbed measures to avoid body excess Body purging, gain image extensive image; exercise). use (e.g., weight Same. eating May occur. Binge Same. Patients expected are (≥ weight). 15% below underweight or of overweight. weight normal are Patients are illness be by thus may their not Patients resistant and treatment. typically distressed to are about Patients are their distressed to and easier are symptoms typically thus treat. toward multiple consecutive 2.1412). stress abnormalities nephrolithiasis, (see fractures, three rhea Table thyroid osteoporosis, Weight (missing Attitude pancytopenia, cycles), illness medical > complications Mortality suicide from is or 10%.

mood low and OCD. disorders, common self-esteem, with associated among More women;

criteria Diagnostic follows (see Hx/PE: are as also Table 2.14-11):

or weight have overweight. normal are Patients include more have a patients binge purging or week least or that months, of behaviors three For for eating times fasting. at and compensatory two episodes

behaviors. are usually ashamed conceal Patients their and

dental hand enamel enlarged erosion, scars (from inducing parotid vomiting). glands, dorsal Signs surfaces the on and include weight. have body Patients normal usually

modifcation Psychotherapy image. behavior focuses on Tx: and body nondepressed both effective for may Antidepressants patients. and depressed be

Table See 2.14-12. Cx:

not usually aging. does ↓ activity in Interest sexual with

the orgasm intensity ↑. ↓, period refractory orgasm and usually genitalia stimulation of require before longer of periods reach the length the of to ↑ Men time next the orgasm; of for

thinning, result women, dryness vaginal which ↓ in In leading discomfort levels may menopause, to coitus. and during after estrogen be suppositories, treated estrogen or vaginal other May with HRT, creams. vaginal

engagement Preoccupation with urges, with sexual fantasies, signifcant in 6 life. one’s > unusual months impairment for or behaviors or in clinically (e.g., criminal 2.14-13. Table Includes see pedophilia); sex offenders or before and puberty. usually men, exclusively in almost during Found begins

is objects. to Sexual derived unique exposures excitement from or situations, certain individuals,

AB 4-1 2. 2.1 LE T by Complications easily Medical Eating Disorders anorexics are their engaged and more more than in behavior of be disturbed therapy. to patients behavior, associated resistant with Anorexic treatment. their making health risks them deny

of Bupropion seizure in patients be should with with the avoided associated threshold. is disorders, it eating as treatment ↓ a

Hypothermia Neurologic: Electrolyte Delayed QT Abdominal Hypotension abnormalities Amenorrhea Hematologic: fractures gastric Sudden death decay pain emptying Seizures erosions Cachexia Arrhythmias Osteoporosis, Nephrolithiasis Leukopenia Prolonged Dental Lanugo and interval Musculoskeletal: Dermatologic: stress Fatigue Bradycardia

T 3. 4-1 2.1 LE AB Common of Features Paraphilias

exposing arousal stranger. one’s a genitals to Sexual from Exhibitionism Pedophilia or children. activities with sexual behaviors Urges involving or sex. involved unsuspecting Observing in persons unclothed Voyeurism arousal. Use for objects sexual clothing) of (often nonliving Fetishism Transvestic sexual Cross-dressing for arousal. fetishism person nonconsenting a Touching against subways). (common one’s in Frotteurism genitalia or rubbing arousal partner. on suffering sexual inficting Sexual from Sexual sadism Sexual Sexual humiliated, threatened. arousal masochism hurt, bound, being from or

behavioral Tx: and insight-oriented therapy. includes Treatment ■ psychotherapy activity. have Depo-Provera) for (e.g., used Antiandrogens paraphilic been hypersexual

role the identification with intersexual disorders. one’s and sex Strong, gender cross-gender the or absence persistent assigned assigned of sex in of discomfort reassign the dressing sex pursuing sex, surgeries history like taking Patients opposite of their hormones, a to or have may sex.

in females. in common More males than addressed anxiety, with and which may Associated abuse, depression, personality treated. disorders, be substance and

and about patterns. patient behavior is culturally Tx: Treatment includes complex educating the acceptable include or options females). estrogen testosterone for for sex-reassignment treatment males, (e.g., surgery Other hormonal Supportive helpful. psychotherapy is

orgasm or arousal, in sexual or with desire, intercourse. sexual pain Problems

biological third psychological 30%; factors. one-third to attributable to are factors and Prevalence is of another cases

Treatment Tx: on the condition. particular depends and Pharmacologic (Viagra) (Wellbutrin). bupropion strategies include sildenafl strategies focusing. sensate Psychotherapeutic include

their adults of all to of one-third from American type some during Up sleep lives. disorder suffer to or that rhythm describes any The leads term a the sleep. dyssomnia condition of normal pattern disturbance in most is Insomnia example. common the include gender, of mental advanced female age. disorders, abuse, factors Risk medical and presence substance and the

Affects 30% of causes up the or mental sleep physical not to to population; conditions. general attributable that disturbance is anxiety, Often sleep. enough become patients may by with and exacerbated getting preoccupied

with or that difficulty Patients a nonrestorative of present history sleep present is three Dx: least month. at maintaining one sleep initiating for a or times week

Tx:

hygiene therapy initiation of the sleep includes good include measures, following: First-line the which

a sleep Establishment of schedule regular

Limiting of intake caffeine

naps daytime Avoidance of

evening the baths in Warm

of the bedroom and sexual only for activity sleep Use

Exercising the day in early

bedtime Avoidance meals large of near

initiated and with (< therapy periods be time 2 should considered weeks). second-line short for Pharmacotherapy is of care (Sonata), (Ambien), (Desyrel). and agents zolpidem diphenhydramine zaleplon trazodone include Pharmacologic (Benadryl),

> for excessive or a sleep patient daytime Dx: complains month. of sleepiness 1 that Diagnosed when nighttime occurs medications, hygiene, to poor excessive cannot or somnolence be sleep, attributable illness, sleep insuffcient The medical narcolepsy. or mental

Tx:

as therapy amphetamines. stimulant First-line such drugs includes

SSRIs some such Antidepressants may be as patients. in useful

affect to up the May of 0.16% population. 30. the Onset of by typically adulthood, before age generally occurs young a of have forms Some genetic may component. narcolepsy

Dx:

for basis months. three excessive latency daily on and a at somnolence include Manifestations daytime least sleep ↓REM avoid attacks Sleep asleep. the patients classic falling cannot symptom; are

processes. and involve somatoform malingering distinct disorders disorders are Factitious and that intentional conscious in they from

may characteristic the sleepiness following: be with associated ■The excessive

leads Cataplexy: that collapse. tone of Sudden to loss muscle

Occur patient asleep. as falling Hypnagogic the hallucinations: is

Occur the Hypnopompic as patient hallucinations: awakens.

awakening. paralysis: Sleep paralysis upon Brief

drugs for scheduled cataplexy. daily ■ as Treat Tx: give of such naps regimen stimulant a amphetamines; with SSRIs plus

excessive lead daytime and disruption. that disturbances to during sleep 2° in Occurs sleep to somnolence breathing either be or central peripheral. Etiologies can

effort and which Central respiratory ow A (CSA): sleep in airf both condition apnea cease. awakenings the is morning CSA mood changes, night. during repeated to linked headaches, and

in respiratory as a apnea the airf obstruction along ceases which Obstructive ow A of sleep passages. result condition (OSA): is with snoring. OSA strongly associated male gender, a (recession or airway upper large factors prior retrognathia mandible). include surgeries, septum, of nasal deviated Risk and a obesity, tongue, the uvula

both results in of cessation event. forms, In apneic arousal the

depression, sudden with death headaches, pulmonary hypertension. ↑ blood infants Associated pressure, and systolic in elderly, and

CSA; sleep ↓ of Dx: number (polysomnography) document arousals, from and the disorders. seizures, movement episodes possible disorders, other of OSA saturation; studies or distinguish O2 identify Sleep and obstructions,

Tx:

(CPAP). Nasal airway OSA: pressure continuous positive loss if Weight obese. most surgically. hypertrophy, due In children, is corrected which cases tonsillar/adenoidal are to

backup (e.g., Mechanical a cases. CSA: for BPAP) severe with ventilation rate

periods. actual by a of sleep and disorders A desired spectrum between characterized misalignment ed. jet-lag Subtypes delayed unspecif type, and include type, sleep-phase shift-work type,

Tx:

days within usually 2–7 without Jet-lag treatment. type specific resolves

Shift-work light to type may therapy. respond

be desired if useful hours given the bedtime. may Oral to prior 5½ melatonin

generally with etiologies. symptoms, varying often present Patients medically unexplained somatic with

have disorders: conscious Somatoform control over symptoms. no Patients Table in outlined fve main The are 2.14-14. categories

assume the role symptoms self-injury (1° fabricate Factitious or sick cause gain). to disorders: Patients common males. in More

syndrome: Common Munchausen’s workers. among care health

the proxy: “caregiver” and concerned taking of onlooker. syndrome makes by else someone A role on ill Munchausen’s enjoys

or symptoms financial intentionally of Malingering: feign gain 2° for benefit or Patients housing. cause

of who age ll affects years < the women frequently following 35 f criteria: Most

are Are have abusers discord substance abuser; who is partner or and experiencing a or a substance marital

of SES, pregnant, restraining or obtained order. a are have Are low

In patients illness malingering, for gain. intentionally personal simulate

are are family usually known (and often Sexual to male members). the often are abusers victim and

TABLE 2.14-14.

sexual, and with different Somatization chronic disorder GI, symptoms pain from neurologic, organ Multiple, systems somatic multiple complaints. surgeries; contacts and/or functional cant clinical Frequent impairment. signif is ratio The of onset 1:20; before usually age male-to-female is 30. appointments with Schedule identifed communication specialists; and caregiver 1° who maintains consultants with regular the psychotherapy. function Conversion medical defcits Symptoms of paralysis) with (e.g., or motor seizure-like incompatible processes. sensory or disorder voluntary movements, blindness, intense stress emotion. temporal relationship or to Close in groups. and and lower in less young educated More common socioeconomic females Usually may resolves help. psychotherapy but spontaneously, of medical leading Preoccupation Hypochondriasis disease fear having despite distress/impairment. with to or reassurance, serious signifcant a physical a disease. involves of history Often prior women are Men equally affected. and in is adulthood. Onset Manage with therapy the patient’s 1° regular with caregiver. group and appointments schedule physical disorder that Body an distress/impairment. cant Preoccupation defect with imagined to or abnormality leads signif dysmorphic to or plastic present often dermatologists surgeons. Patients Has predominance. slight a female depression. associated with be May is t. profle of SSRIs Intensity pain processes. physiologic symptoms or may Somatoform inconsistent of with benef disorder pain be with relationship factors. temporal psychological Close More years is peak 40–50 age. of common in females; at onset May with associated be depression. therapy. psychotherapy, and behavioral therapy), Treatment rehabilitation (e.g., physical includes usually not is Analgesia helpful. (venlafaxine and and be therapeutic. TCAs duloxetine) SNRIs may

cause accidents) Suicide and third 24-year-olds the the among death leading of in States. United 15to (after homicide is

required inpatient patients is for Emergent hospitalization with intentions. suicidal

are more become childhood of Victims adult victims likely of to abuse abuse.

Hx/PE:

have with frequent and multiple ER Patients typically complaints, unexplained visits, delayed treatment. somatic medical injuries or They act may contact also afraid avoid hostile. or eye

precocious UTIs, STDs, Children exhibit problems. sexual trauma, or behavior, psychiatric may and genital anal

leave partner clues the or the a who refuses to patient questions Other room. for answers exam include

in of patient’s Perform assessment close safety domestically the personal and Tx: their relationships. screening a medical support about and appropriately. the and refer care, services emotional counseling; patient Provide educate support, crucial. is Documentation

year eighth the cause overall States; the United Accounts per of the in United death deaths in for 30,000 States. 20 occurs One minutes. every suicide

family ethanol the male 45 or stressors, depression, behavior, a psychiatric PERSONS). mnemonic symptoms), violent history to include an suicide recent SAD Risk substance age psychiatric and factors suicide of (see years, than gender, abuse, a attempt, a history greater history a admission previous a institution, severe presence (major disorders of of psychotic

more of their virtue whereas more attempt succeed likely ↑ more Women are lethal to by men use suicide, of likely are methods. to

Dx:

Perform evaluation. psychiatric a comprehensive

previous Ask about history, attempts, and toward family ambivalence hopelessness. death,

available Ask means. look ideation, and plan, and directly intent, for about suicidal

against Tx: requires inpatient his will. A suicidality hospitalization even who endorses emergent patient Suicide risk on mood suicidal before return a antidepressant initiated may therapy patient’s depressed to after lifts. the ↑ is thoughts act energy can because

LUNG Neoplasms 469 of CANCER NODULES 469 Lungs 470 LUNG the

that asthma! is Beware—all not wheezes

URIs with suspected should of associated children and multiple be dyspnea. Asthma croup in episodes with

Characterized restrict air by cause airway diseases movement lung trapping. narrowing, often air and obstructive the in obstructive etiologies mnemonic of ABCT. The are described disease lung 2.15-2 lung 2.15-1 role contrast volume in Table the disease. illustrates lung obstructive 2.15-1 Figure and of disease; diagnosis of restrictive Figure with the measurements lung

muscle airway and ammation, hypertrophy. bronchial Reversible to mucous airway inﬂ 2° smooth plugging, hyperreactivity, obstruction

with tightness. chest wheezing, cough, and/or dyspnea, Presents episodic in worsen at or Symptoms the early night often morning.

expiratory paradoxus. prolonged I/E (↓ tachypnea, muscle pulsus possible (late sign), duration breath reveals accessory sign), tachycardia, ↓O2 and use, (late wheezing, hyperresonance, sounds ↓ ratio), Exam saturation

Mild respiratory ■ABGs: alkalosis. and hypoxia may respiratory and acute fatigue acidosis, impending hypoxia warrant and failure. an more Normalizing severe close respiratory as PCO2, exacerbation they in observation, indicate

E 2.1 R IGU 5-1. F in function Lung tests. interpretation volumes pulmonary of the

permission, with al. Gomella from (Reproduced, LG et 11th Reference, ed. Pocket Clinician’s New York: McGraw-Hill, 2006: Fig. 18-1.)

T 2.1 LE 5-1. AB vs. Obstructive a Restrictive FVC FEV1 volume forced second; = expiratory one Lung vital Diseasea forced capacity. = in

↑ FEV1/FVC; peak and ↓ fow lung capacity Spirometry/PFTs: (TLC). RV diminished is acutely; total

eosinophilia. Possible CBC:

ation. Hyperinf CXR:

Methacholine challenge: for is are but Tests normal hyperresponsiveness; bronchial useful when suspected. PFTs asthma still

allergens In avoid triggers. or potential any general, as 2.15-2 and (see is follows Tables 2.15-3): Management also

and include drugs, Asthma allergens, exercise, cold URIs, stress. air, triggers

2.1 E IGU R F 5-2. vs. lung Obstructive restrictive disease.

↑ volumes lung RV); Note: Obstructive (↑ normal. > lung ↑ < TLC, FRC, volumes normal restrictive disease, ratio. both and dramatically more is In FEV1 but in FEV1 are restrictive obstructive reduced, and obstructive resulting ↓FEV1/FVC in FVC reduced, disease, a

5-2. LE 2.1 AB T (β2-adrenoceptors). and Relaxes Asthma bronchial smooth β2-agonists Common muscle Medications Mechanisms Albuterol: Their acute Give during exacerbations. Long-acting for Salmeterol: agent prophylaxis. Beclomethasone, inactivate the for Inhibit factor inﬂ of prednisone: a transcription NF-κB, virtually all Corticosteroids cytokines; among agents. other ammatory TNF-α, synthesis the treatment are long-term of corticosteroids asthma. control Inhaled for first-line bronchoconstriction. muscarinic Muscarinic preventing Ipratropium: blocks receptors, Competitively antagonists Methylxanthines inhibiting causes ↓ hydrolysis cAMP ↑ by and bronchodilation Theophylline: phosphodiesterase, thereby cAMP levels. Likely limited of because is (cardiotoxicity, therapeutic-toxic Usage its index neurotoxicity). narrow vasoactive Prevents mediators cells. from Cromolyn of mast release exercise-induced for bronchospasm. Useful during asthma; Effective effective prophylaxis not the attack. acute for only asthmatic of an Toxicity rare. is pathway Zileuton: Antileukotrienes A 5-lipoxygenase inhibitor. Blocks of acid conversion arachidonic to leukotrienes. Montelukast, Blocks receptors. leukotriene zafirlukast:

2.15-3. TABLE

exacerbations). magnesium bronchodilating corticosteroids, use alone (never ipratropium β2-agonists asthma), inhaled agents are rst-line (short-acting Acute: (for for systemic O2, f severe therapy), PCO2 or acutely < a > low patients or threshold intubation for with 50 severe in in 50 cases Maintain mmHg PO2 mmHg.

peak management. to Chronic: and function fow, Measure (FEV1, ABGs) lung sometimes guide or Administer inhaled cromolyn, rarely, inhaled corticosteroids, and/ long-acting bronchodilators corticosteroids, systemic or,

Chronic Asthma Medications for of Treatment

No medications. Mild 2 ≤ 80% days/week nights/month daily ≤ intermittent ≥ 2 short-acting bronchodilator. PRN Daily persistent 80% 2 > but low-dose nights/month inhaled 1/day > corticosteroids. Mild ≥ < 2/week bronchodilator. short-acting PRN β2-agonists. Lowto 1 60–80% inhaled corticosteroids night/week long-acting Daily + > Moderate medium-dose persistent inhaled inhaled Continual, High-dose Severe + persistent 60% corticosteroids ≤ frequent long-acting β2-agonists. inhaled corticosteroids. PO Possible bronchodilator. short-acting PRN

theophylline. oral therapy. and leukotriene other to inhalant adjuncts are Montelukast antagonists

that to disease fbrosis, lead A in bronchi/bronchioles of and cycles remodeling, bronchi. the caused infection permanent and of by dilation infammation

and hemoptysis by Presents production, chronic accompanied or possible green frequent and bouts of cough halitosis. yellow dyspnea, sputum with

IBD. hypersensitivity SLE), infections localized autoimmune or aspergillosis), obstruction airway (foreign with a history (allergic of rheumatoid cystic (e.g., pulmonary disease TB), bronchopulmonary f (e.g., brosis, body, aspiration, Pseudomonas, Associated tumor), immunodefciency, Haemophilus, arthritis,

purulent reveals rales, wheezes, hemoptysis. Exam occasional rhonchi, mucus, and

a bronchovascular lines result and (parallel markings; bronchi ↑ peribronchial outlining dilated brosis); of ammation inf tram honeycombing. areas of lines as f CXR:

(mostly CT: ballooned Dilated cysts and the airways the at end High-resolution lobes). of lower bronchus ↓ FEV1/FVC shows a ratio. Spirometry

inhaled consider infections; for Antibiotics bacterial corticosteroids.

(cough control, bronchopulmonary Maintain hygiene postural drainage, physiotherapy). chest

severe for lung or lobectomy for Consider transplantation disease disease. localized

by with obstruction. airfow function lung ↓ Characterized follows: 2° Generally bronchitis emphysema, or chronic distinguished to which are as

3 Productive years. months for cough > year per consecutive two Chronic bronchitis: for

be may (panlobular). (centrilobular) and 2° that α1-antitrypsin airway Terminal deficiency to to Emphysema: or destruction dilation smoking

until Symptoms nonspecifc the disease is or advanced. minimal are

spectrum a the combination includes are The following of two the patients (most phenotypes): clinical

↓ sounds, minimal hypercarbia/hypoxia. breath cough, (“pink Emphysema puffer”): lips, Dyspnea, pursed late often have thin, appearance. a Patients wasted Pure exacerbations. reactive have patients to emphysematous episodes between tend few

inﬂ uenza cessation, 2° foreign pneumococcal and aspiration bodies Or Necrotizing pneumonia smoking to Chemical vaccines) corrosive

anticholinergics) (β2-agonists, Dilators

In respiratory COPD patients’ patients hypercapnia, O2 chronic drive. hypoxic may high suppress of concentrations with

for and 15 are COPD. to oxygen survival day titrated proven smoking to only in improve cessation > > patients hours a interventions with SaO2 90% the Supplemental

cough. with mild (“blue Cyanosis bloater”): productive bronchitis dyspnea; ■Chronic are rhonchi, Patients often overweight edema, peripheral signs with of early and hypercarbia/hypoxia. of breath accessory chest, sounds. classic chest muffed use for barrel Look wheezing, JVD, the and end-expiratory muscles,

a heart ↓ markings with thin-appearing and diaphragms, ated CXR: Hyperinﬂ fat and lungs, mediastinum. lung Figure (pathognomonic subpleural 2.15-3). or Parenchymal of also bullae blebs are seen (see emphysema)

(in DLCO ↓ or or normal ↓ ↓ (emphysema, PFTs: FEV1/FVC; normal asthma); ↑ emphysema). TLC FVC;

with respiratory acidosis or acute PCO2). Hypoxemia chronic (↑ ABGs:

Blood febrile. cultures: patient if is Obtain the

seen on infltrate the setting especially Gram productive if Consider cough, of in stain is CXR. fever sputum and or culture:

IV inhaled tiotropium), (ipratropium, Acute inhaled and exacerbations: corticosteroids, O2, antibiotics. +/− β-agonists (albuterol) anticholinergics may Severe beneft ventilation. cases noninvasive from in severe respiratory status. intubation impending or changes hypoxemia mental setting the or hypercapnia, Consider in of fatigue,

in inhaled resting O2 or of pulmonale, or 55%, Chronic: ≤ ≤ cor Smoking cessation, mmHg hypertension, hematocrit 55 is nocturnal hypoxia), setting or (if SaO2 PaO2 pulmonary a β-agonists, is the supplemental 89%, >

R 2.1 F 5-3. AB IGU E obstructive pulmonary Chronic disease.

bullae at large hyperlucent hyperinfated (B) upper and the narrow mediastinum, (A) and lungs, AP CXRs. Note AP lateral and f on diameter, diaphragms, ↑ with from (Reproduced, J al. et Stobo permission, and ed. Practice 23rd The of Principles Medicine, Lange, Appleton 1996: Stamford, CT: & 135.) inhaled corticosteroids. systemic (tiotropium), anticholinergics or Give pneumococcal u vaccines. ﬂ and

expansion. by Characterized result diseases a in ↑ lung and lung restrictive ↓ stiffness lung loss of compliance, lung Table Figure contrast 2.15-1 disease. lung obstructive 2.15-2 and restrictive with The of restrictive PAINT. the mnemonic etiologies in shown are disease lung

of of interalveolar characterized and/or disorders septum. the heterogeneous by group A inﬂ fibrosis ammation advanced lung in periphery spaces the disease, In develop cystic (“honeycombing”). disorders, Causes include interstitial disorders, pneumoconiosis, drugs, collagen vascular eosinophilic and pneumonias, syndromes. granulomatous idiopathic disease, pulmonary hypersensitivity

with nonproductive shallow, and cough. rapid a Presents exercise; dyspnea with breathing; inspiratory fne Patients or may right have fnger heart squeaks, or “Velcro-like” crackles, clubbing, failure. cyanosis,

(severe or Reticular, nodular, “honeycomb” disease). pattern; ■ CXR: ground-glass pattern

↓FVC, ■↓TLC, FEV1/FVC. is cause normal if ↓DLCO extrapulmonary), be (may the normal diseases indicated. Serum tissue connective markers if be clinically should obtained of

Supportive. exposure to agents. causative Avoid to or inf corticosteroids anti-inf respond other Some agents. ammatory ammatory/immunosuppressive diseases

noncaseating multisystem etiology characterized disease by granulomas. A unknown of often third European and arises Most African-American in decade Caucasians; commonly northern found in of females the or life. fourth most

malaise, with Presents and arthritis. dyspnea, loss, weight cough, fever, nodosum, be and kidney affected. The system, plaques), nervous skin eyes, may skin lungs, liver, heart, violaceous (erythema (see GRUELING Symptoms may be mnemonic).

lung of restrictive disease— Causes

empyema, (fibrosis, effusions, Pleural pneumothorax)

pus) hemorrhage, (edema, Alveolar

Idiopathic cryptogenic ammatory organizing interstitial lung pneumonias), Interstitial Inﬂ pneumonitis), (idiopathic disease (sarcoid,

myopathy) Neuromuscular phrenic nerve palsy, (myasthenia,

(kyphoscoliosis, spondylitis) Thoracic wall pregnancy, ankylosing obesity, ascites,

include (e.g., concentration O2 long-term bleomycin, disease nitrofurantoin, cause and radiation, to can busulfan, ventilators). that interstitial amiodarone, contribute Medications or high lung

stage are disease. the Radiographic fndings to used CXR:

node or noncaseating lung Biopsy: transbronchial/video-assisted Lymph granulomas. biopsy reveals biopsy thoracoscopic

Restrictive diffusion and or ↓ PFTs: pattern obstructive capacity.

hypercalciuria, hypercalcemia, levels nerve findings: cranial arrhythmias. alkaline ACE ↑ lymphopenia, nor Other sensitive c), defects, ↑serum specif (with involvement), phosphatase liver (neither

indicated for symptoms, are hypercalcemia, organ corticosteroids Systemic constitutional involvement. or extrathoracic

factors leading to to alveolar antigens exposure environmental thickening Risk granulomas. and include in and Types listed Table are 2.15-4. etiologies

after malaise, and Acute: Dyspnea, 4–6 fever, shivering, starting hours cough exposure.

ne rales. dyspnea; present progressive exam with reveals Chronic: Patients f bilateral

CXR shows (acute); is upper infltrate lobes (chronic). normal the in miliary nodular seen or fbrosis is

agents; to give ongoing ammation. to exposure Avoid corticosteroids inciting inf chronic ↓

T AB 5-4. LE 2.1 Hypersensitivity Pneumonitis of Antigens

lung moldy Spores of from Farmer’s actinomycetes hay. feathers, Bird fancier’s excreta, lung Antigens from serum. Mushroom actinomycetes from worker’s lung compost. Spores of grain. Malt Aspergillus Spores lung worker’s of clavatus in dust. handler’s lung weevil Grain Grain sugarcane. actinomycetes from Bagassosis of Spores conditioner of actinomycetes Air Spores lung from air conditioners.

small occupational exposure inhalation inorganic include prolonged dust particles. Risk of and factors

ndings criteria the and associated diagnostic outlines f pneumoconioses. 2.15-5 common with Table

triggers; Avoid supplemental supportive therapy O2. and

common most of form The interstitial pneumonia. idiopathic years. unrelenting occurring 5–10 death progression, with Has within an usually

dyspnea nonproductive cough. a and Exertional

Inspiratory and/or crackles clubbing exam. on

T LE 5-5. AB 2.1 of Pneumoconioses Diagnosis

pneumonia one the common Usual forms of of is interstitial most interstitial pneumonia.

linings, brake manufacture demolition, tile construction, shipbuilding. or of insulation, Asbestosis involving Work or after Presents years exposure. initial 15–20 fibrosis; pleural pleural Linear benign and disease. plaques indicative opacities CXR: at calcified bases are of interstitial lung risk ↑ risk smokers. of lung higher lung cancer; cancer mesothelioma in and (rare) of is mines. Coal underground miner’s coal in disease Work nodular upper lung cm) Small 1 (< CXR: zones. opacities in with Consistent restrictive disease. Spirometry: massive fibrosis. Progressive or silica. or pottery, quarries with mines Work in glass, or upper (< lung opacities Small 1-cm) in nodular zones. CXR: Eggshell calcifications. restrictive Consistent Spirometry: with disease. skin ↑ test. of annual TB; risk TB need massive fibrosis. Progressive in material Work electronics sites; high-technology aerospace, dental industries; such nuclear, and manufacturing. as plating dye plants; ceramics and facilities; foundries; fields CXR: Diffuse adenopathy. hilar infiltrates; corticosteroid treatment. Requires chronic Berylliosis Silicosis

CT: lung High-resolution with at the bases, Patchy often opacities honeycombing.

Restrictive PFTs: pattern.

diagnosis): confrm ammation, the Interstitial to Surgical required fbrosis, honeycombing. and in-f biopsy (usually

agents survival), corticosteroids, not (have been Options include lung shown antifbrotic and to transplantation. (azathioprine, agents improve cytotoxic cyclophosphamide),

and group diverse A of eosinophilia. disorders pulmonary eosinophilic characterized infiltrates by peripheral blood aspergillosis, allergic eosinophilic Löfﬂ er’s and syndrome, pneumonia. bronchopulmonary acute Includes

cough, dyspnea, Presents and/or fever. with

pulmonary CXR reveals peripheral eosinophilia; CBC ltrates. inf shows

infection underlying the identifed. cause or extrinsic of Removal of treatment if cause may is used if be identif treatment Corticosteroid no ed.

shunt, mismatch, impairment. O2 at inspired (important diffusion content altitudes), hypoventilation, (V/Q) ventilation-perfusion low include Causes right-to-left and

etiology. Findings depend the on and be chest status seen. tachypnea, shortness may altered of pain, ↓HbO2 cyanosis, breath, saturation, mental pleuritic

Pulse oximetry: Demonstrates ↓ HbO2 saturation.

look for To out or rule ARDS, an embolism. of atelectasis, and pneumonia) CXR: infltrative (e.g., process to pulmonary signs

PaO2 (PaCO2/0.8)] × gradient oxygen to PaO2). To (A-a) alveolar-arterial calculate FiO2 47) and − ABGs: − − the evaluate ([(Patm ↑ V/Q suggests impairment. An A-a a diffusion or gradient a mismatch Figure summarizes toward patients. hypoxemic approach 2.15-4 the

Is increased? PaCO2 Yes PAO2 Yes No Is increased? No Hypoventilation PaO2 −

PaO2 − PAO2 Is increased? O2? NoNo Yes PO2 low Is Yes correctable with

1. 2. High altitude ↓ FiO2

plus 1. mechanism HIGH-YIELD Shunt another Hypoventilation FACTS collapse COPD) (asthma, 2. Alveolar 3. edema) Intra-alveolar pulmonary filling (pneumonia, 4. Intracardiac shunt within shunt Vascular lungs 1. disease COPD) (asthma, Airways 2. disease Interstitial 3. lung 4. disease Alveolar disease 1. mismatch vascular V/Q Pulmonary respiratory drive 2. ↓ alone Neuromuscular Hypoventilation disease

2.1 R IGU 5-4. F E the of mechanism of Determination hypoxia.

DL Kasper with et al. from permission, (Reproduced, Principles Harrison’s ed. Medicine, 16th of Internal York: New McGraw-

2005.) Hill,

the underlying etiology. Address

Administer initiating before O2 evaluation.

is increasing on pressure ventilator, or If FiO2, saturation the by ↑ end-expiratory the positive I/E O2 (PEEP), patient a ratio.

Hypercapnic ↑ minute patients: ventilation.

↓lung failure refractory hypoxemia, noncardiogenic edema. with Acute and respiratory pulmonary compliance, be pathogenesis endothelial to is thought The injury. inhaled/ingested multiple triggers Common sepsis, pneumonia, trauma. transfusions, blood include aspiration, and toxins, is 30–40%. Overall mortality

acute-onset breathing, +/− with and causes cyanosis, hours) the and the rales, or Presents tachycardia tachypnea, hypoxemia exposure. fever, dyspnea, high-pitched setting systemic of of labored diffuse one in (12–48 infammatory are Additional as fndings follows:

1 Phase alkalosis. (acute injury): exam; possible respiratory physical Normal

A-a widening hours): (6–48 hypocapnia, gradient. oxygen Hyperventilation, 2 Phase

dyspnea, Acute tachypnea, Phase CXR diffuse ↓ on failure, scattered infltrates 3: Figure compliance, 2.15-5). rales, respiratory lung chest (see

F 5-5. R E IGU 2.1 a 2° to showing AP ARDS. CXR pattern filling alveolar diffuse

with et permission, (Reproduced, Kasper DL al. from Harrison’s Internal 16th Medicine, Principles ed. of McGraw-Hill, New 2005: 1497.) York: and to metabolic intrapulmonary Severe hypoxemia ↑ 4: respiratory unresponsive shunting; acidosis. therapy; ■ Phase

are for diagnosis (according Conference follows: ARDS as criteria Consensus defnition) American-European to The the

of respiratory Acute onset distress.

mmHg. PaO2/FiO2 ≤ ratio 200

on pulmonary Bilateral infltrates CXR.

(capillary atrial evidence left of mmHg wedge < origin No 18 of cardiac clinical or elevated pressure). pressure evidence no

no treatment. There standard is

to adequate and the perfusion maintain disease underlying prevent Treat damage. organ end

by induced injury by ventilation low tidal with ventilating Minimize volumes. mechanical

to achieve PEEP to and Use FiO2 titrate adequate oxygenation. and collapsed recruit alveoli PEEP 90% on or Goal SaO2 > mmHg ≤ > oxygenation FiO2 60 0.6. PaO2 is

patients ventilation, Table and 2.15-6). wean from extubation Slowly with follow trials (see

a 25 hypertension 15 mmHg). as mean pressure pulmonary = arterial of (normal defned > is Pulmonary mmHg It etiology either as (if the 1° classifed is

5-6. LE AB 2.1 T typically trial for weaning criteria they for given Ventilationa to are Extubation a from extubation. are Patients Criteria Mechanical ready meet a who determine these (T-piece) if

or unknown) is 2°. most 1° or women. young hypertension in pulmonary occurs often middle-aged heart failure following: the from or valve mitral include ■↑ causes of pressure venous disease. 2° pulmonary pulmonary hypertension The main left-sided congenital left-to-right 2° fow to blood pulmonary disease with ■↑ shunt. heart

2° lung disease COPD). chronic Hypoxic to vasoconstriction (e.g.,

Thromboembolic disease.

to lung disease. of vessels 2° structural pulmonary Remodeling

syncope exertion, symptoms with distention, right-sided on dyspnea of (edema, pain, abdominal JVD). CHF with Presents chest fatigue, exertion, and lethargy,

of disease, heart pulmonary cell a disease, COPD, interstitial Inquire about emboli. lung anemia, history emphysema, and sickle

(often palpable a heave. loud, split), parasternal a Exam systolic a S4, murmur, or ejection an reveals S2

CXR arteries. enlargement of central pulmonary shows

demonstrates RVH. ECG

signs the diagnosis the of may aid underlying and of right and show ventricular may in Echocardiogram right cause. heart catheterization overload

are O2, CHF Supplemental diuretics and anticoagulation, vasodilators, right-sided of present. if symptoms 2° pulmonary hypertension. Treat underlying of causes

pulmonary failure, the ↑ including and left Causes of heart vasoconstriction. veins, hypertension in hypoxic resistance include pulmonary disease, mitral valve

surgery cardiac of uid f include postpartum emboli), and etiologies (amniotic (fat Other status fracture disease (air emboli). embolic emboli),

tachycardia, suspicion a normal embolism. and/or CXR a bedridden raise Dyspnea, in of pulmonary and should patient hospitalized

pulmonary Occlusion blood a the vasculature of by clot. leg DVTs veins. emboli the in Ninety-f from of deep ve originate percent and leads right infarction, heart failure, hypoxemia. Often pulmonary to consists of the triad following: Virchow’s

obesity, central Immobility, ↑ venous Stasis: pressure. surgery, CHF,

injury: surgery, recent previous Trauma, DVT. Endothelial fracture,

factor Hypercoagulable coagulation disorders defciency, malignancy, S protein severe Leiden), OCP V Pregnancy/postpartum, C/protein use, burns. (e.g., states:

pain, cough, and, fever, rarely, with Presents hemoptysis. chest dyspnea, sudden-onset low-grade pleuritic

Pulmonary embolism:

alkalosis. respiratory resulting Hypoxia and with hypocarbia

tachycardia, Tachypnea, and fever.

Exam jugular reveal P2 failure. may right waves a and heart with A prominent loud

the swelling; calf. cords thrombosis: Venous Unilateral on

hyperventilation) 80 PO2 < ABGs: with alkalosis Respiratory (2° mmHg.

Westermark’s pleural (oligemia atelectasis, Hampton’s zone). may effusion, show Usually CXR: in affected but normal, hump sign lung infarct), (a the or wedge-shaped

ECG: most reveals sinus Not commonly tachycardia. diagnostic; in T lead of an III—is strain S a uncommon. triad an and with wave lead in inverted I, S1Q3T3—acute III, in classic right wave lead wave Q heart The

(spiral) embolism. CT Helical IV pulmonary Sensitive with contrast: for

segmental mismatch. May of V/Q areas scan: reveal embolism combination with probability are high) in and (low, designated or pulmonary clinical a are indeterminate, of Results interpreted with suspicion. reported

(see and 2.15-6). done invasive more today rarely gold standard, The Angiogram: Figure but

pulmonary patients pulmonary or in clinical for with intermediate or D-dimer: an useful but not it low out risk Sensitive in with alone at rule but embolism clot). patients test suspicion patients “rule-out” cannot a DVT specifc embolism clinical (a high of or suspicion, in DVT

a the the Can embolism. of ultrasound Venous that clot extremity: have given detect pulmonary may off lower Serial high have city. specif diagnostic ultrasounds

by Heparin: low-molecular-weight of or SQ. heparin unfractioned Bolus (LMWH) infusion weight-based heparin continuous followed

indefnitely). usually is persists given long-term months for Warfarin: the predisposing at anticoagulation, For factor (and then six unless least underlying given = Follow (goal INR 2–3).

anticoagulation if with DVT in is a Indicated patients recurrent while emboli if IVC lower contraindicated extremity documented filter: or for patients anticoagulated. experience

2.15-6. FIGURE embolus. Pulmonary

A the on is angiogram. evident pulmonary pulmonary artery defect flling in large

and of bleeding). massive in cases Thrombolysis: in failure only right or causing patients surgery DVT or (contraindicated instability embolism hemodynamic with Indicated heart recent pulmonary

and (less (most heparin, ambulation intermittent extremities compression SQ DVT early give effective), LMWH, pneumatic all Treat effective). patients; immobile the prophylaxis: of lower

or asymptomatic, patients shortness Often dyspnea, may with chronic of present cough, breath. and about history. smoking and inquire exposure Always

Determine and CXRs: progression, Serial nodule. location, the the of extent

Chest nodule. Determine nature, the CT: of nature and extent, infltrating the

45–50; enlarging margins. or very favoring smoking lesions; > > Characteristics of irregular absence malignancy; Age 2 rapidly history calcifcation irregular enlarging) or history; of size (unless new cm; calcifcation; carcinoma:

nodule Lung the based on history: clues

TB. Recent immigrant: Think

coccidioidomycosis. United From Think southwestern States: the

Think histoplasmosis. From Valley: Ohio the River

are cell Central and Squamous Small cancers lesions.

margins. < smooth 2 from size flms; 35; cm; benign calcifcation; a favoring Age old no ■Characteristics change < central/uniform/laminated/popcorn lesion:

at Surgical nodules is malignancy. for risk high resection for indicated every year. for can and nodules CT another with for three months be CXR then followed one months year or six every Low-risk diagnostic size indicated if the nodule procedure invasive ↑. An of the is

States. of death cause the in The cancer United leading bronchoalveolar (except smoke and exposure. asbestos Risk include tobacco radon or for factors carcinoma) follows: Types are as

cancer lung cell Small (SCLC):

Highly exposure. correlated cigarette with

Central location.

associated Neuroendocrine with Table origin; paraneoplastic syndromes 2.15-7). (see

are (intrathoracic extrathoracic liver, often brain, and found Metastases sites presentation as bone). on and such

cancer (NSCLC): metastasize. cell Non–small to likely Less lung

TAB LE 5-7. 2.1 Cancer of Syndromes Paraneoplastic Lung

peripheral common Adenocarcinoma: cancer; The lung location. most interstitial with multiple which production but with is and not associated prolifc is infltration, Includes associated carcinoma, smoking. nodules, sputum bronchoalveolar

in are smokers. Squamous location; cell seen Central 98% carcinoma:

Large with carcinomas: prognosis. a Least common; poor associated cell/neuroendocrine

weight wheezing, pain, hemoptysis, possible dyspnea, postobstructive loss, with pneumonia, cough, exam respiratory chest abnormalities atelectasis). (crackles, and Presents on

syndrome recurrent (obstruction Other (see the at SVC ptosis, venous 2.15-7). ndings paraneoplastic syndrome hoarseness of patients supraclavicular to apex cava and f Table engorgement); laryngeal anhidrosis) the many the nerve superior with involvement); (2° syndromes Pancoast’s include with (miosis, tumor of in vena lung; Horner’s

chest or CXR CT.

and brushing) guided) (CT lesions Fine-needle aspiration for (biopsy for lesions. peripheral or central bronchoscopy

lesion biopsy thoracotomy to the Thoracoscopic malignant. performed, found to open may is conversion with be be if

Unresectable. SCLC: ■ a initially rate radiation median always than but to Often recurs; chemotherapy NSCLC. survival responds has lower and diagnosis. of time the at usually Has metastasized

IIB, ■NSCLC: IB, IIA, IIIA). and in resection the Surgical (IA, is mainstay Chemotherapy early stages possibly patient’s tastases; is extent for lesion small and general presence The on treatment based and the function. cell size; the of resection lung of age, health, me-of lung Supple- cancer.

chemotherapy radiation surgery (depending with the or stage). ment on Palliative disease. symptomatic but appropriate chemotherapy radiation is for and/or unresectable

An of in space. accumulation ﬂuid pleural the abnormal Classifed follows: as

wedge pressure. to or capillary (PCWP) 2° ↑ Transudate: oncotic ↓ pulmonary pressure

permeability. to Exudate: vascular pleural ↑ 2°

both of causes lists possible the 2.15-8 Table and exudates. transudates

pleuritic chest Presents with pain, cough. and/or dyspnea, the percussion ↓breath over and effusion. sounds Exam reveals dullness to rub pleural A present. may be friction

TABLE 2.15-8. Causes Pleural Effusions of

Pancreatitis syndrome embolism Malignancy Pneumonia effusion) CHF (parapneumonic Cirrhosis disease vascular Pulmonary (rheumatoid TB arthritis, Collagen Trauma Nephrotic SLE)

tube necessitate Complicated drainage. chest effusions parapneumonic

pneumothorax: Presentation of

blunting. angle costophrenic shows CXR

other cm CHF. and clinical is > in with effusions of except decubitus effusions 1 for indicated bilateral evidence Thoracentesis view, new

criteria: it if an effusion The exudate Light’s meets is

is protein of ratio serum The 0.5 pleural > or to

to of LDH 0.6 > or is The ratio serum pleural

fuid LDH upper normal more serum LDH limit two-thirds Pleural the is than of

60. or is level a glucose (normal complicated the in setting effusion a of 7.6) stain a Gram A < 7.2 is of classifed pH parapneumonic or < or as culture pus The an of presence indicates empyema.

causing toward directed the underlying condition is the Treatment effusion. tube effusions Complicated require empyemas to parapneumonic addition in drainage therapy. chest antibiotic and

space the air that collapse. pulmonary of A in to collection can lead pleural blebs 1° follows: rupture Subtypes to pneumothorax: are found young (usually spontaneous subpleural of males). as thin 2° apical in tall,

subclavian P. pneumonia, jiroveci 2° line (thoracentesis, carinii) and to 2° pneumothorax: TB, bronchoscopy). factors (formerly mechanical placement, ventilation, positive-pressure COPD, Pneumocystis iatrogenic trauma,

one-way inspiration pneumothorax: space a defect trapping acts wall chest pleural Tension the or pulmonary during air during expiration. as air drawing A but valve, into and mechanical include positive-pressure trauma, penetrating ventilation. infection, Etiologies condition result recognized treated. Shock and the unless death and is immediately

chest pain and onset with of pleuritic unilateral acute Presents dyspnea.

tachypnea, breath or diminished absent Exam hyperreso sounds, reveals

5-7. E 2.1 R IGU F pneumothorax. Tension

the shift, of lower opposite lung, de Note AP diaphragm, the lung and collapsed hyperlucent tracheal lung CXR. feld, viation, mediastinal hyperexpanded on compression

compression cava. JVD fremitus, and ↓tactile to the superior of nance, vena 2°

tension the falling and deviation, pneumothorax presence in O2 tracheal distress, neck saturation, distended of ■Suspect veins. hypotension, respiratory

the the CXR and/or see pleural from a shows lung (best line retraction wall Figure 2.15-7). presence in chest of visceral end-expiratory flms; seen

Small spontaneously. pneumothoraces resorb may is helpful. Supplemental O2 therapy

symptomatic require pneumothoraces tube Large, placement. chest

intercostal needle chest midclavicular placement. Tension requires immediate decompression at followed by line) space tube (second the pneumothorax

enough to with hypernatremia, drink in status) infants, insensible a replace change water certain patients, mental free not (e.g., In those losses. intubated may patients

kidney, Diuresis causes— Dehydration 6 Diabetes Hypernatremia Disease sickle (e.g., (iatrogenic) insipidus The Docs D’s cell) Diarrhea

Serum 145 mEq/L. sodium > than Usually sodium to loss gain. rather due water

to the well polyuria with on (depending thirst or etiology). with oliguria as Presents as hypertonicity) (due

neurologic Neurologic deficits, seizures. focal weakness, and mental changes, include symptoms status

skin depletion. Exam signs volume and reveals of “doughy”

and volume clinical Assess urine osmolality. and by volume measuring status a conducting exam

↑aldosterone hypertonic Na+ Due feeds ADH). or saline/tube gain: to (suppresses Hypertonic

large Pure by volumes water insipidus; nephrogenic Due of central urine. or loss: characterized dilute to diabetes and Do respiratory dermal neglect losses. insensible not

high disease, Due with in DKA, glucose osmotic diuretics, GI intrinsic (mannitol, burns, loss: Hypotonic intake, losses f uid urea to ↓ (diarrhea), and renal protein feeds). diuresis

volume without 500 A renal of adequate replacement. maximally mOsm/kg) suggests ml/day) (> concentrated 800 free-water adequate minimal response (approximately urine

replace underlying oral depending or with volume hypotonic deficit D5W, causes and on Treat status. free-water the water, saline,

prevent to cerebral accomplished damage hours mEq/L/hr) Correction hypernatremia chronic gradually 0.5 to (> (≤ should neurologic 2° 48–72 hours) of edema. 36–48 over be

mEq/L. 135 < Serum sodium due Almost to ↑ always ADH.

present confusion, cramps, lethargy, and or nausea. hyporeﬂexia, may with asymptomatic be May muscle

brain seizures, or Can to herniation. coma, progress stem

exam). as clinical and by urine to (i.e., status volume osmolality well serum by categorized as Hyponatremia according can be is Osmolality as classified follows:

hypertonic High infusion mEq/L): (e.g., Hyperglycemia, 295 mannitol). (>

paraproteinemia (pseudohyponatremia). Normal Hypertriglyceridemia, (280–295 mEq/L):

Applies “nephrOSIS, the cases. (< of hyponatremia and Low by caused cirrhOSIS, 280 Hypervolemic ■ mEq/L): majority is cardiOSIS.” to listed 2.16-1. in ies etiolog Hypotonic are Table

2.16-1. are Table Specific outlined in treatments

pontine prevent Chronic and 72 central coma). to duration) be (no more (symptoms corrected hours’ (> include paraparesis/quadriparesis, than slowly hyponatremia 0.5 order should myelinolysis in dysarthria, mEq/L/hr)

5 > Serum potassium mEq/L. Etiologies as follows: are

draws, blood in blood delays fist samples, leukocytosis or sample of clenching analysis, Hemolysis extreme during thrombocytosis. Spurious:

type acidosis trimethoprim, IV (RTA). NSAIDs), spironolactone, hypoaldosteronism, triamterene, Renal drugs ■↓excretion: tubular (e.g., ACEIs, renal insufficiency,

lysis, tissue Cell (rhabdomyolysis), arginine, shifts: injury insulin digitalis, deficiency, acidosis, (e.g., exercise. Cellular β-blockers), drugs succinylcholine,

Iatrogenic.

be may ﬂaccid and vomiting, paresthesias. paralysis, or May asymptomatic exia, intestinal aref colic, with weakness, present nausea,

a repeat hyperkalemia draw. Confirm with blood plasma the leukocytosis In of extreme check setting or potassium. thrombocytosis,

a ECG waves; include Figure of T peaked QRS; wide and loss PR findings tall, prolongation; (see waves 2.16-1). P cardiac ventricular fibrillation, arrest. sine progress waves, and to Can

T LE 6-1. AB 2.1 Hyponatremia and Hypotonic of Treatment Evaluation

only cautiously and using patient hypertonic saline a and Consider to has use y. it if seizures due brief hyponatremia, replacement In most best normal instances, is saline uid. f the

arise treating What can rapidly? complication from hyponatremia dreaded too myelinolysis. Central pontine

cirrhosis, failure, nephrotic adrenal syndrome, insuff or 2° ciency. Renal Hypervolemic hypothyroidism, 3° CHF, insuff with ciency; diuretics; Water replacement consider replacement hypothyroidism. cortisol adrenal thyroid with restriction; renal failure, SIADH, oxytocin use. psychogenic polydipsia, Euvolemic drugs, Water restriction. adrenal 1° insuff diarrhea, Hypovolemic bleeding, dehydration, DKA, Diuretics spacing, vomiting, (especially third thiazides), ciency. Replete saline. normal volume with

FIGURE 2.16-1. ECG. on Hyperkalemia

renal due losses or Hypokalemia usually GI to is

digitalis heart monitored. the must digitalis sites a pump, is potassium if the be Na+/K+ sensitizes K+ toxicity Hypokalemia levels carefully because so and patient digitalis, on on the compete to same for

peaked PR include manifestations T and a waves, Electrocardiographic widened prolongation,

complex. QRS Cogan ed. MG. (Reproduced, 1st with Fluid and from permission, Electrolytes,

CT: Appleton Lange, 170.) 1991: Stamford, &

of (especially or 6.5 emergent Values > PR QRS) changes prolongation or ECG treatment. wide mEq/L require

the K C summarizes mnemonic treatment hyperkalemia. BIG The of

calcium membrane First give cell for gluconate cardiac stabilization.

to cells. bicarbonate potassium and temporarily Give insulin glucose into shift and/or

reuptake cellular promote (e.g., potassium. β-agonists of albuterol)

from and uids. diet potassium IV ﬂ Eliminate

from potassium to Kayexalate body. remove the

refractory severe, is or cases. renal for failure appropriate Dialysis with for patients

< potassium mEq/L. 3.6 Serum are Etiologies follows: as

Insulin, β2-agonists, Transcellular shifts: paralysis. periodic alkalosis, hypokalemic familial

suction. chronic abuse, NG losses: vomiting, GI laxative Diarrhea,

2° hyperaldosteronism, or or RTA excess syndromes, type (e.g., hypomagnesemia, thiazide), (defective mineralocorticoid Renal Bartter’s volume, (e.g., secretion), losses: ↓ circulating and gentamicin, Diuretics amphotericin), DKA, I loop distal polyuria. 1° Gitelman’s drugs H+

hypotension, weakness ileus, Presents cramps, rhabdomyolysis, with fatigue, and ascending paresthesias, or muscle paralysis. hyporeﬂexia,

urine may renal GI losses. distinguish spot or from Twenty-four-hour potassium

block arrest. additional show T U ST-segment to T-wave depression, the (an leading waves subsequent and cardiac AV wave wave), ECG and after fattening, may

RTA in acidosis. setting the Consider of metabolic

disorder. underlying the Treat

Oral repletion. and/or potassium IV Do exceed mEq/L/hr. not 20

as potassium deficiency Replace complicates this magnesium, repletion.

Monitor plasma and potassium levels ECG replacement. frequently during

10.2 calcium mg/dL. Serum > The causes hyperparathyroidism cancer, common (e.g., breast malignancy myeloma). and multiple squamous most carcinoma, cell are CHIMPANZEES. mnemonic causes Other in summarized are the

fatigue, groans (kidney (weakness, abdominal with stones), but may and labs, by psychiatric and (osteopenia, (anorexia, overtones present discovered asymptomatic Usually constipation), status). altered routine bones mental stones fractures),

short calcium, (PTHrP), a show albumin, ECG QT and Order hormone–related vitamin parathyroid (may interval). a PTH, phosphate, D, total/ionized peptide

to excretion. followed IV by calcium hydration ↑ furosemide

glucocorticoids, refractory Calcitonin, and for (e.g., or bisphosphonates calcimimetics, severe dialysis are cases. pamidronate), used reabsorption tubular thiazide calcium. of which ↑ diuretics, Avoid

< Serum mg/dL. calcium 8.5 idiopathic), pseudohypoparathyroidism. hypoparathyroidism and pancreatitis, malnutrition, Etiologies D hypomagnesemia, acute vitamin (postsurgical, include deficiency, DiGeorge’s consider syndrome absence (tetany of birth; infants, shortly shadow). In thymic after

muscle Presents convulsions. paresthesias, dyspnea, and tetany, with abdominal acral cramps, perioral and

occlusion sign) commonly seen and elicited by findings spasm that sign) arterial facial in spasm nerve the after BP tapping Facial severe from carpal are of a most are (Chvostek’s classic (Trousseau’s hypocalcemia. cuff

ionized Ca2+, an Order and Mg+, albumin, PTH, possibly calcitonin. patient the determine is removed. the the number review post-thyroidectomy, If operative note glands of to parathyroid

may ECG interval. a prolonged show QT

Causes hypercalcemia— of

vitamin other thiazides, D Sarcoidosis (e.g., and (e.g., vitamin Hyperthyroidism Excess A MEN parenteral 1) Iatrogenic Excess

Lose calcium. Loops (furosemide)

is of who following patient develops thyroidectomy. and hypocalcemia classic a A cramps tetany case

hypoalbuminemia; calcium. may check calcium falsely low be Serum ionized in

the Treat disorder. underlying

repletion. Magnesium

calcium severe symptoms. oral supplements; Administer give IV calcium for

1.5 mEq/L. magnesium < Serum ■↓intake: Malnutrition, TPN. follows: bowel are short as syndrome, Etiologies malabsorption,

kidney hypercalcemia, alcoholism, postobstructive diarrhea, drugs aminoglycosides, ATN, amphotericin), recovering ■↑loss: diuresis). Diuretics, (e.g., vomiting, losses (e.g.,

■ DKA, extracellular pancreatitis, volume expansion. ﬂuid Miscellaneous:

anorexia, Symptoms weakness. and vomiting, are and cramps, concurrent muscle generally hypocalcemia hypokalemia; to related nausea, they include

also seizures, confusion, arrhythmias. lethargy, severe In and reﬂ irritability, hyperactive tetany, symptoms may paresthesias, exes, include cases,

concurrent may and hypokalemia. show Labs hypocalcemia

reveal PR ECG and may intervals. prolonged QT

IV oral supplements. and

correct not will correction. and without hypocalcemia Hypokalemia magnesium

diagnostic for See disorders. acid-base Figure a 2.16-2 of algorithm

non–anion a that in gap secretion reabsorption H+ metabolic A net either or acidosis. to tubular HCO3 leads ↓ type (see is (distal) types Table RTA; form most IV main 2.16-2). three common There are of the

the function abrupt retention BUN. and to An of ↓ renal in creatinine leading

500 ↓ is urine cc/day) required for < not defined (oliguria, output ARF. as ARF categorized (see is as follows also 2.16-3): Table

↓ renal Prerenal: perfusion.

unit. Injury nephron within the Intrinsic:

Urinary Postrenal: obstruction. outﬂow before creatinine. be a kidneys in Generally, can significant and BUN both obstructed ↑ see must one

with the most common population patient Alcoholics are hypomagnesemia.

both Aspirin acidosis respiratory cause metabolic alkalosis. and a overdose (salicylate) can a

sign fatigue, a patient’s be respiratory goes from can it blood asthmatic requires gas of urgent If to intubation. alkalotic which an normal, muscle

pH pH Alkalosis < 7.4 Acidosis 7.4 >

alkalosis with Respiratory compensation –Weakening (early) ingestion acidosis sedatives –Chronic acidosis Respiratory –Opioids, of narcotics, Metabolic disease –Aspirin lung –Hyperventilation

E 6-2. IGU F R 2.1 acid-base algorithm Diagnostic disorders. for

–Vomiting use with alkalosis –Diuretic Metabolic –Antacid –Hyperaldosteronism compensation use

fatigue, include and malaise, of confusion, Symptoms oliguria, uremia nausea. anorexia,

acidosis an metabolic respiratory to urine pericardial asterixis, rate ↑ may 2° show volume ↓ edema and Exam output, from (compensation overload) a rub, hypertension, pulmonary or of

as follows: are symptoms Category-specific

reduced hypotension, membranes, stigmata mucous ↓ conditions. sweating, Prerenal: turgor, comorbid skin dry orthostatic Thirst, of axillary tachycardia,

contrast history Associated exposure with Intrinsic: or a NSAIDs), myeloma exposure myoglobin, (aminoglycosides, or media protein). drug (e.g., infection, to toxins of tea-colored and/or foamy Hematuria hypertension, edema may also urine, (from urine proteinuria), or be present.

nodules, Subcutaneous ischemia. reticularis, livedo Atheroemboli: digital

Postrenal: to disease, Prostatic and ﬂ pain. leading suprapubic output bladder ↓ distended urine pain, ank

electrolytes. Check serum eosinophils. WBCs, (see for urine the 2.16-4), casts Table and RBCs, Examine urine

20 1%, urine a gravity FeNa a < BUN/Cr 20, specifc suggests > < or ratio UNa An prerenal a 1.020, a > etiology.

ultrasound rule urinary obstruction. catheter renal A can out help and are occurs Ultrasound also as that identify in kidney chronic ↓ disease. with size, can kidneys

Patients with have volume. ARF may a normal urine

a that indicates An 1% etiology. < sodium, kidneys FeNa to suggesting trying the conserve prerenal are

TABLE 2.16-2. Renal Tubular Acidosis Types of

Potassium secretion cirrhosis, Defect Serum drugs Rickets, Furosemide, Complications cell or mineralocorticoid with Hereditary, anhydrase (lithium, Etiologies 1° kidney (carbonic (e.g., defects autoimmune drugs ciency High (Sjren’s inhibitors), osteomalacia H+ pH drugs such sickle of (most replacement, Treatment serum 5.3 to once or acidic NSAIDs), – K+ aldosterone SLE), (e.g., is excretion ciency multiple and pseudohypoaldosteronism 5.3 leading reabsorption amyloidosis, disease, Low def cystinosis), poisoning, as hyporeninemic disorders from and < low-potassium 5.3 (idiopathic Hereditary Aldosterone amphotericin) glucocorticoid patients and Urinary Hyperkalemia +/– heavy D ciency, or disease, Nephrolithiasis H+ in in myeloma, citrate hypercalciuria, syndrome, spironolactone, HCO3 common) amiloride, Na+ syndromes 5.3 def Potassium K+ > Low metal hypoaldosteronism reabsorption < citrate vitamin part syndrome heparin), Fanconi’s resistance, def initially; ACEIs, aldosterone def ciency diet

TABLE 2.16-3. Failure of Renal Causes Acute

interstitial Pelvic Retroperitoneal Nephrolithiasis Glomerulonephritis Prostatic necrosis scleroderma) surgery (HUS/TTP, f (ATN) Thromboembolism Renovascular tumors disease pelvic Acute/allergic Acute brosis Recent disease nephritis tubular

burns) NSAIDs) vasodilation Hypovolemia (↓ Systemic (ACEIs, ascites ARBs, with CO) Drugs artery Anaphylaxis (sepsis, burns) (hemorrhage, shock Cardiogenic dehydration, Renal stenosis Cirrhosis

2.1 AB T 6-4. LE on Acute in Microscopic Renal Findings Examination Urine Failure

Pyelonephritis amount cells, cell cells, but ATN disease Postrenal fnding, Hyaline “muddy-brown dysmorphic white Normal ↑ interstitial casts tubular nephritis, casts an atheroembolic Intrinsic eosinophils Glomerulonephritis casts, Intrinsic White cells, Prerenal cells White casts, Granular Intrinsic depletion red Allergic renal cast” volume cell suggests Red

prerenal and the distinguish FeNa renal from oliguria, failure intrinsic identify it can In with disease. patients help

renal cause a when renal of the unclear. intrinsic disease is Obtain biopsy only

drugs. nephrotoxic avoid electrolytes; and Balance ﬂuids

allergic acute In or interstitial adjust or medications. discontinue offending nephritis,

using the Dialyze (see mnemonic indicated AEIOU) if hemodialysis. Peritoneal should are not only considered for dialysis be patients for patients dialysis or stable. who hemodynamically long-term

hyperkalemia arrhythmias. leading acidosis; Metabolic to

(from Hypertension hypersecretion). renin

pulmonary overload edema. CHF and to leading Volume

Chronic K+, requiring metabolites. buildup may H+, prevent kidney the of toxic and phosphate, result, dialysis to disease

ethylene glycol) lithium, (salicylates, methanol, theophylline, Ingestions barbiturates,

pruritus, symptoms Uremic nausea, myoclonus) (pericarditis, bleeding, encephalopathy,

to due glomerulonephritis. mellitus diabetes and Most commonly hypertension, (DM), onset; autosomalrecessive etiology common seen children). Another form kidney (the disease tested more adult is polycystic is is is autosomal-dominant and form in the commonly

until “uremic patients uremia GFR vomiting, symptoms of delirium, pericarditis, gradually coma). seizures, but signs < nausea, and experience asymptomatic the uremic (anorexia, frost,” Generally 30,

following: Common derangements metabolic the include

BUN (↑ and Azotemia creatinine).

(hypertension, edema). Fluid edema, retention CHF, pulmonary

Metabolic acidosis.

Hyperkalemia.

of chronic Anemia disease erythropoietin production). (↓

phosphate to (↓ excretion; vitamin production leading osteodystrophy). impaired renal D Hypocalcemia, hyperphosphatemia

control ACEIs/ARBs to CKD. hypertension have the progression of shown and ↓ been

follows: is as pharmacotherapy Additional

chronic anemia Erythropoietin of for disease. analogs

Na+/K+/phosphate intake. Fluid restriction; low

D) vitamin (1,25-OH renal phosphate calcitriol Oral binders and osteodystrophy. for

renal hemodialysis, therapy includes peritoneal and replacement transplantation. Renal dialysis,

the summarize used 2.16-5 of mechanisms effects action of Figure diuretics. commonly Table 2.16-3 side and and

LE AB 2.1 T 6-5. Diuretics Action Side Mechanism of Effects and of

anhydrase tubule. Acetazolamide inhibitors Proximal convoluted Carbonic Na+/ H+ exchange. H+ anhydrase, carbonic reabsorption, block Inhibit ↑ acidosis, sulfa metabolic Hyperchloremic allergy. agents tubule. Osmotic urea Mannitol, Entire tubular ↑ osmolarity. fuid CHF Pulmonary edema anuria. due to and Henle. ethacrynic bumetanide, Furosemide, torsemide loop acid, Ascending of agents Loop Inhibit transporter. Na+/K+/2Cl– Water alkalosis, allergy ↓Ca2+, K+, acid, loss, hyperuricemia). sulfa ↓ ethacrynic metabolic (except ototoxicity, chlorothiazide Distal convoluted agents Thiazide HCTZ, tubule. Na+/Cl– transporter. Inhibit uric acid, ↓ ↑ metabolic K+, loss, ↓Na+, pancreatitis. ↑ alkalosis, ↑Ca2+, allergy, Water glucose, sulfa triamterene, Spironolactone, Cortical collecting K+-sparing amiloride tubule. agents channel block Aldosterone (spironolactone); sodium amiloride). (triamterene, antagonist receptor gynecomastia antiandrogenic K+; ↑ effects, (spironolactone). Metabolic acidosis; including

straight agents limbH2O ascending tubule(+PTH) medulla antagonists2 Inner 2 (+ADH) Acetazolamide 3 Loop descending Glomerulusconvoluted Cortex Proximal Thin K+ medulla 1 4 limbThick Thiazides5 5 2 3 Aldosterone ADH ascending 4 2Cl−Ca2+ 6 Henle H2O limbNa+ Outer of Thin 2 K+ agents Osmotic Loop tubule tubule (e.g., ? Mg2+ H2O 1 (+aldosterone) Diuretics furosemide) antagonists6 (mannitol) 4 E IGU R 2.1 6-3. F Overview diuretics. of

BG. permission, with from Katzung (Reproduced, Basic ed. & Clinical Pharmacology, 10th McGraw-Hill, Fig. New 2007: York: 15-1.)

inﬂammation, A disorder called glomerular of also glomerulonephritis. may present Proteinuria 1.5 < is g/day. but usually be Causes summarized in are Table 2.16-6.

urine), The hematuria and findings macroscopic/microscopic hypertension, edema. are oliguria, classic cola-colored (teaor and hematuria, the patient hypertension, has oliguria.

and mild shows proteinuria. UA hematuria possibly

BUN Patients have and GFR with creatinine. a ↓ elevated etiology. should ANCA, anti-GBM ANA, be Complement, the determine to measured levels and underlying antibody

useful evaluation. be biopsy Renal histologic may for

LE 2.1 AB 6-6. T Syndrome Causes of Nephritic

2–6 be with Postinfectious but weeks prior). (usually nephropathy A seen associated glomerulonephritis (Berger’s group disease) Immune any can IgA recent with Classically infection, infection streptococcal β-hemolytic complex most with GI The or common respiratory infections. associated upper type; seen young in Commonly seen in purpura. may Henoch-Schlein be males; hypertension, urine. Oliguria, edema, cola-colored teaor microscopic or persistent Episodic gross hematuria hematuria. weeks titer; that uorescence. lumpy-bumpy 6–8 serum Low ↑ASO after normalizes C3 presentation; immunoﬂ Normal C3. Supportive. and children adults recovery. have complete a most Almost all Glucocorticoids ACEIs select patients for with proteinuria. in patients; disease end-stage progress (ESRD). cases of 20% renal to Some vasculitis. Pauci-immune Granulomatous granulomatosis respiratory and inf with the Wegener’s ammation of kidney tract necrotizing hematuria, respiratory sinus weight and hearing Fever, symptoms. disturbances, loss, hemoptysis. Cavitary and lead lesions pulmonary to bleed of Presence response). immune c-ANCA (cell-mediated segmental shows with Renal few on glomerulonephritis immunof deposits biopsy uorescence. necrotizing immunoglobulin and corticosteroids cytotoxic High-dose agents. relapses. Patients have tend frequent to Goodpasture’s in glomerulonephritis syndrome disease is pulmonary males in hemorrhage; syndrome Anti-GBH Alport’s Rapidly mid-20s. incidence with their peak progressing age. years in Hereditary boys of 5–20 presents glomerulonephritis; respiratory possible dyspnea, Hemoptysis, failure. Asymptomatic with hematuria eye associated disorders. and deafness nerve hemosiderin-f sputum; lled anemia; iron def infltrates CXR. in pulmonary uorescence; immunof on anti-GBM deposits on ciency macrophages Linear splitting on microscopy. GBM electron pulsed Plasma therapy; steroids. exchange ESRD. to May progress renal Progresses failure. to transplant. may Anti-GBM recur after nephritis

and, with and uremia hypertension, salt dialysis. restriction, and diuretics, water ﬂuid necessary, if overload, Treat

reducing useful in inﬂ corticosteroids cases, In ammation. glomerular are some

3.5 and generalized hypoalbuminemia, as g/day), (≥ edema, hyperlipidemia. proteinuria Defined DM, from as all systemic one-third such SLE, result or cases diseases of Approximately amyloidosis. Table 2.16-7. summarized Causes in are

LE 2.1 TAB 6-7. of Syndrome Nephrotic Causes

cause change Minimal children. of syndrome disease nephrotic common most in The 2° Idiopathic hematologic NSAIDs etiology; include causes malignancies. and thrombotic infections Tendency events. toward and processes microscopy cortices. electron lipid-laden renal Light shows fusion with of foot epithelial normal; microscopy appears excellent prognosis. Steroids; HIV obesity. IV use, glomerulosclerosis Focal infection, segmental Idiopathic, drug typical a The with is patient uncontrolled young African-American hypertension. male in Microscopic sclerosis hematuria; shows tufts. capillary biopsy cytotoxic ACEIs/ARBs Prednisone, ↓ therapy, to proteinuria. nephropathy The common nephropathy Caucasian in adults. most Membranous causes malignancies in patients (especially includes complex > disease. tumor and of solid 60 years age) immune 2° syphilis, with malaria, and Associated gold. HBV, deposits to membrane. IgG granular and “Spike-and-dome” the basement appearance due C3 at of and Prednisone disease. cytotoxic for severe therapy Two diffuse forms: nephropathy nodular hyalinization glomerulosclerosis and Diabetic lesions). (Kimmelstiel-Wilson characteristic controlled poorly or evidence long-standing, retinopathy with Generally have neuropathy. DM of matrix. ↑mesangial Thickened GBM; for type type blood for ACEIs DM. DM ARBs of sugar; and Tight control 2 1

LE TAB 2.1 6-7. Syndrome of Nephrotic Causes (continued)

types WHO nephritis I–VI. Classifed Lupus as and nephritic. Both nephrotic renal severity determines overall The prognosis. disease often of Proteinuria SLE be RBCs UA patients. or during found of on may evaluation immune complex proliferation; Mesangial deposition. subendothelial and/or subepithelial cytotoxic may disease therapy Prednisone and slow progression. and most 1° the amyloidosis dyscrasia) cell common. (plasma or are 2° (infectious infammatory) Renal a inf chronic Patients multiple arthritis, or may myeloma (e.g., TB). rheumatoid disease have ammatory Nodular f EM amyloid with reveals stain. Congo glomerulosclerosis; brils; red birefringence apple-green and melphalan. Prednisone transplant may Bone multiple marrow used myeloma. be for nephropathy syndrome. be Membrano-proliferative nephritic also Can is bacterial associated subacute cryoglobulinemia, with SLE, endocarditis. Type I HCV, and years 8–30 at Idiopathic age. is of present form progression Slow renal failure. to membrane. basement double-layered “Tram-track,” Type deposits; C3; types mesangial nephritic and have serum of all type deposits II by I factor. way low subendothelial C3 three has and may agents help. cytotoxic Corticosteroids

protein. are in the hypoalbuminemia, ↑ to of permeability hyperlipiduria nephrotic hyperlipidemia, glomerulus edema, due in to initial and syndrome Proteinuria, the

generalized with urine. and Presents edema foamy and ascites may develop. dyspnea cases, severe In

an predisposition well risk ↑ and susceptibility for infection to ↑ hypercoagulable have to venous states with thrombosis as embolism. a Patients pulmonary as

lipiduria. proteinuria g/day) 3.5 shows UA (≥ and

albumin hyperlipidemia. shows g/dL) 3 (< Blood and chemistry ↓

workup for include should causes. Evaluation 2°

etiology. the definitively to is used biopsy Renal underlying diagnose

■ judicious and Treat restriction, therapy, salt protein and antihyperlipidemics. diuretic with

etiologies. for medications may certain be Immunosuppressant useful

renal progression disease scarring. the of proteinuria ↓ diminish and renal patients ACEIs with in

vaccine Vaccinate Streptococcus pneumococcus ↑ infection. (PPV23), are at pneumoniae risk as of 23-polyvalent with patients

calculi. Renal calcium may cystine calcium uric Stones and also be commonly Figure struvite, acid, 2.16-8 or but 2.16-4). are most oxalate (see phosphate, Table (allopurinol, low intake, chemotherapy, deficiencies, uid include factors a urinary history, Risk loop RTA pH medications diuretics), alkaline hypocitruria), specific postcolectomy/ I enzyme postileostomy, associated and family f and (due hyperparathyroidism. type gout, to Most males. in common older

pain severe, of with nausea or colicky onset may Presents with ank that to and f acute testes radiate the vulva is associated and vomiting.

who unable to shift to get position and still). opposed frequently with Patients those are comfortable (as peritonitis, lie

urine UA microscopic altered gross pH. hematuria may and show (85%) an or

that radiopaque stones of radiography) KUB but miss stones will are radiolucent. identifies the (kidney/ureter/bladder 10%

TABLE 2.16-8. Types Nephrolithiasis of

Which calculi”? with bacteria are associated “staghorn Proteus. organisms such Urease-producing as

hyperparathyroidism. phosphate hypercalciuria most common The calcium oxalate/ Calcium 83% are idiopathic causes 1° and urine. Alkaline Radiopaque. diuretic. and dietary protein restriction, thiazide sodium Hydration, hyperoxaluria to of risk ↓calcium lead intake (can osteoporosis). Avoid ↑ and an (Mg-NH4 phosphate” Proteus). “triple 9% -PO4) or with Struvite organisms Associated (e.g., urease-producing Form calculi. staghorn urine. Alkaline Radiopaque. Hydration; surgical staghorn treat UTI present; stone. removal of if turnover Uric high purine and with chemotherapy). 7% acid states defciency, gout, xanthine Associated oxidase (e.g., Acidic < 5.5). urine (pH Radiolucent. which in purine Hydration; with and the dietary is – HCO3 restriction citrate, urine liver; alkalinize converted allopurinol. to acids Due Cystine certain defect in and a renal to amino ornithine, arginine). lysine, (COLA—cystine, 1% of transport crystals. Hexagonal Radiopaque. dietary alkalinization of penicillamine. restriction, urine, sodium Hydration,

2.16-4. FIGURE Nephrolithiasis.

kidney, midportion with (arrows) the the nephrolithiasis. 1-cm over two of calcifications left consistent dense projecting shows KUB MY, with Chen permission, from Pope (Reproduced,

Ott DJ. Jr., TL Basic ed. Radiology, 1st New 2004: 243.) McGraw-Hill, York:

the stones. abdominal kidney diagnosis for standard CT gold the of Noncontrast scans are

for should also radiation patients, from renal (ultrasound Consider a obstruction avoided). whom is preferred be look in ultrasound pregnant CT to for

be if to contrast the stone. of confirm is below used filling An the lack there a IVP can diagnosis

initial Hydration treatment. are the analgesia and

shock-wave nephrolithotomy, with ureteroscopy. be lithotripsy stones Kidney < mm 5 extracorporeal percutaneous through in treated (ESWL), pass in diameter diameter cm < the 3 can can urethra; retrograde or stones

prophylaxis include hydration; composition. Preventive measures dependent on stone is additional

as the renal by the Characterized spleen, and pancreas. in well dilation of the cysts tubules, as cystic presence liver, of progressive by forms two as The follows: are major dominant (ADPKD): ■Autosomal

common. Most

30 until age. asymptomatic > are years patients Usually of

by will One-half ADPKD 60. requiring age dialysis patients of have ESRD

↑ family aneurysm, especially in with of a patients with an Associated history. risk cerebral

Autosomal but more Less common severe. (ARPKD): recessive young children few may and hypertension; first to death failure, years infants with of in Presents in lead life. renal and portal the fibrosis, liver

are the common and hematuria most Pain presenting symptoms. or calculi. rupture, pain from of cyst renal localized result Sharp, infection, may passage

include valve mitral and berry findings cerebral hepatic aneurysms, hypertension, prolapse. cysts, diverticulosis, Additional

abdominal on kidneys have large, exam. may palpable Patients

common) CT or Based (most on ultrasound scan. be the bilateral enlargement visualized. and renal renal parenchyma, present will Multiple cysts throughout will be ADPKD2 available. linkage by for analysis and is ADPKD1 DNA Genetic testing

and Prevent of progression to ↓ the rate ESRD. complications cyst UTIs prevent is Early management to infection. renal of critical renal to hypertension-induced is ↓ (ACEIs, necessary ARBs) control BP damage.

Dialysis and manage transplantation patients ESRD. are renal with to used

develops patient aneurysm! a If headache, sudden-onset, rule ruptured known must from with out hemorrhage you ADPKD severe a subarachnoid berry a

Dilation renal calyces. of the tract. 2° obstruction Usually occurs to of urinary obstruction is often junction. the pediatric ureteropelvic the at In patients, may be BPH, due calculi. renal In adults, or to tumors, aortic it aneurysms, ux. Can be urinary reﬂ also caused ﬂow vesicoureteral and by high-output

present May with may and or pain, abdominal urine ank/back UTIs. ﬂ asymptomatic, pain, ↓ be output,

■ calyces of ureter. the or renal and/or CT detect dilation to Ultrasound scan renal 2° of creatinine failure. and provide ■↑ BUN evidence

laser use calculi causing wave sound or obstruction; correct any are if lithotripsy Surgically obstruction. anatomic

across if tube obstructed pressure obstruction. the stent urinary and/or placement the area nephrostomy appropriate is to be percutaneous outﬂow of tract Ureteral of urinary the not sufficiently placement cleared may tract relieve Foley lower BPH). required or (e.g., catheters suprapubic obstruction tract for be may urinary

chronic Left from poor very prognosis. or leads urinary a obstruction to acute and hydronephrosis hypertension, has failure, sepsis, untreated, resulting renal or

older boys < obtained A years 5 girls with should UTIs. be with UTI, age or rst of with pyelonephritis recurrent presenting their f or VCUG girls UTI, febrile in rst their of with f all and < UTI years age 3

into ↓ testicular risk Bringing the scrotum of cancer. the testes the not does

urine kidneys. from to ureters projection Retrograde the bladder of and the leading insufficient Often urine during tissue, the caused tunneling of ureters restriction submucosal of ﬂow by into retrograde bladder contraction. bladder to ineffective neurogenic due meatal to valves, or a posterior stenosis, May bladder. or be urethral also urethral as Classified follows:

(grades ureteral No or dilation. pelvic renal Mild refux I–II): Often spontaneously. resolves

dilation to with (grade Ureteral refux associated III–V): caliceal severe in blunting Moderate cases. severe

recurrent in UTIs, childhood. with present typically Patients ultrasound Prenatal may identify hydronephrosis.

to of a (VCUG) at sites to ux. reﬂ the abnormalities Obtain cystourethrogram classify grade detect ureteral and voiding insertion

MAG-3) to can (DMSA Nuclear function. used renal scan be renal or evaluate for

Treat aggressively. infections antibiotics if reﬂ months daily prophylactic age; otherwise until resolves. with ux Treat or TMP-SMX < mild 2 of reﬂux (amoxicillin nitrofurantoin)

high-grade (ureteral with for to persistent prophylaxis. is generally with or while for (III pyelonephritis reﬂux children on V) breakthrough reserved those reimplantation) Surgery ESRD. renal scarring to Inadequate progressive and can lead treatment

of Failure testes the descend the or of scrotum. into one to both fully risk birth a weight Low factor. is

and associated oligospermia, with infertility. syndromes), prematurity, Bilateral congenital malformation cryptorchidism is Noonan syndromes (Prader-Willi, malignancy. ↑ risk with testicular of Associated an

into palpated sac be be (vs. retractile and the scrotal anywhere gentle the abdomen. or may canal the The testes inguinal testes) cannot manipulated along with pressure in

3 descend months Orchiopexy (most testes will 6–12 age by spontaneously by of months).

testicular If to later, treat with discovered risk the cancer. orchiectomy of avoid

of outlines and treatment 2.16-9 scrotal etiologies, the Table diagnosis, presentation, swelling.

Found middle-aged 10–25% men. and of elderly in neurologic), dysfunction). as fill or psychological, failure arteriogenic), (e.g., failure to store to initiate failure to Classified endocrinologic, (e.g., veno-occlusive (e.g., or cancer, Risk factors TCAs, and DM, radiation heart diuretics), injury. cord prostate hypertension, atherosclerosis, surgery (e.g., disease, β-blockers, SSRIs, for include medications spinal

make rarely should complaint, volunteer physicians this specific Because inquiry. a patients

disease), medication life Ask factors peripheral and psychological risk use, stressors. (diabetes, vascular changes, about recent

between with present, early-morning of (i.e., is distinction nonorganic) psychological dependence presence is and and ED (if partner). nocturnal it The or based one situation on on occurring the organic erections only

6-9. AB 2.1 LE T Diagnosis Differential Scrotal Swelling of

the processus Painless vaginalis. causes Hydrocele Varicocele of Remnant venous pampiniform (“bag worms”). the of of Dilation plexus

asymptomatic; Usually transilluminates.

or scrotal Asymptomatic vague, with aching presents pain. the Affects the right. testicle often left than more

position. disappear in the supine May

transilluminate. Does not

and indicated. rarely Lab are workups radiologic

for inguinal if testicular hernia an is Obtain concern ultrasound cancer. there or

Ultrasound.

patent an (indicates unless processus is to inguinal present vaginalis, or beyond hernia). none of hernia hydrocele age ↑ risk which leads 12–18 persists Typically for months

through a or ligation, makes be via or interventional testis up embolization total or symptomatic If of may volume, surgically 40% radiology. with varicocelectomy if < treated

AB T LE 6-9. 2.1 Swelling Differential Diagnosis (continued ) of Scrotal

of usually ux. the epididymis, STIs, and/or from prostatitis, Infection ref

of Twisting testicular infarction. cord, leading the possible spermatic ischemia to and

enlarged presents epididymal Typically those affects testicle(s), fever, > tender/ thickening, and of years scrotal pyuria. 30 tenderness, age; erythema, with

sign). scrotal elevation Pain with ( may Prehn’s ↓

presents the intense, same Typically scrotal sign). elevation remains years those or of ↑ acute-onset affects < with ( scrotal age; that 30 with pain Prehn’s

dizziness. Pain by nausea/vomiting and/or is often accompanied

seen. Loss is cremasteric of refex also

(pyuria). UA, culture Neisseria Culture gonorrhoeae, or E. Chlamydia. often coli, shows

fow ↑blood Doppler ultrasound to shows testes. to normal

f Doppler shows ultrasound ow testes. ↓blood to

ultrasound is wait a clinical surgery!) immediately (If do not there to and testicular for high proceed suspicion torsion, for

uoroquinolones); pain. NSAIDs; support for Antibiotics scrotal f (tetracycline,

detorsion. Attempt manual

testicle often surgery salvage testis six unsalvageable of hours is ischemia). (the to Immediate after

prevent of Orchiopexy future testes to both torsion.

Shoot”: “Point system Parasympathetic nervous erection; the mediates system ejaculation. mediates nervous and The Sympathetic

small tone, Evaluate hypogonadism dysfunction sexual extremity (e.g., neurologic 2° ■ and lower (e.g., loss characteristics). of testes, for sensation) for anal

Testosterone abnormal. levels and may gonadotropin be

result levels, as prolactin prolactin androgen activity. ↓ can Check in elevated

partner. psychotherapy therapy and sex or involving with Patients psychological appropriate with ED exercises from benefit the discussion may

Oral (PDE5) (Cialis) cGMP-mediated and the smooth are sildenafl (Viagra), and relaxation action that (Levitra), phosphodiesterase-5 of blood inhibitors ﬂow corpora in in tadalaf result muscle prolonged ↑ vardenafl l cavernosa.

is patients for Testosterone of testosterone levels. for therapy pituitary useful is patients testicular with it a or discouraged normal hypogonadism with origin;

alternatives inﬂatable injections, implantation prostaglandin surgical of PDE5 pumps, intracavernosal are prostheses for fail Vacuum and or penile therapy. patients semirigid who

Enlargement is part 80. process a of age of is prostate of the in seen and > that normal the by aging 80% men presents > in of Most years men commonly age. 50 can in BPH retention, bladder UTIs, and urinary renal damage time. over calculi, result recurrent and kidney hydronephrosis,

incomplete symptoms: weak fullness. bladder retention, Obstructive Hesitancy, urinary stream, emptying, stream, intermittent

opening Irritative hematuria. Nocturia, incontinence, daytime symptoms: frequency, urge

the texture. rubbery prostate is enlarged On DRE, with a uniformly is the cancer or If lesions, should has prostate irregular be hard suspected.

evaluate Conduct to screen DRE suspicious, cancer. a are findings if for prostate for masses;

infection culture to and hematuria. rule urine Obtain out UA a and

renal levels uropathy creatinine out obstructive and insufficiency. rule Measure to

longitudinal monitoring. BPH testing and recommended not cystoscopy PSA are for

5α-reductase of muscle (e.g., inhibitors includes in well the α-blockers Medical (e.g., dihydrotestosterone. as the as inhibit prostate and finasteride), production which neck, bladder smooth relax therapy terazosin), which

resection open symptoms. Transurethral to for severe or prostatectomy moderate prostate is the (TURP) appropriate patients with of

second in cause and of men cancer death lung in the cancer common leading (after The men cancer). most family a Risk factors history. and age advanced include

symptoms with constitutional due bone obstructing in urine and a pain (e.g., metastases, asymptomatic, retention, to lymphedema of back due the force ↓ may obstructive urinary present as as the to stream) well but Usually symptoms, metastases. with urinary

may DRE induration. of a or palpable area an reveal nodule detectable exam. Early usually on carcinoma not is

suggests prostatitis. prostate tender A

contraindication to sildenaf l? are absolute What drugs an (the combined Nitrates lead to ↓ ischemia). effect of can BP myocardial

central on most be not zone of DRE. (periurethral) may the and commonly detected prostate occurs in BPH the

is The of major orthostatic hypotension. side α-blockers effect

1. causes in death men: Leading cancer of cancer Lung 2. Prostate cancer 3. 4. Colorectal cancer Pancreatic 5. cancer Leukemia

to An be or BPH, trauma, elevated due UTI, PSA carcinoma. may prostatic prostatitis,

DRE is after cancer. annual recommended method 50 age the screening prostate for An

4 by clinical ng/mL). and/or Suggested findings a (> ↑PSA markedly

diagnosis biopsy, which ultrasound-guided typically Definitive is made shows with transrectal adenocarcinoma.

scores the the of is Tumors the (from most which to are dysplastic system, histologic 1 highest two 5) the (10 grade). by samples graded sums Gleason

bone scan metastases or osteoblastic for an show and CXR ↑ (metastatic Look density). with lesions bone at with diagnosis. of 40% metastatic disease patients Fully present

progress. prostate as is cases to slow controversial, many of are cancer Treatment is on the choice risk. aggressiveness the based Treatment patient’s tumor of the and mortality

elderly best for be tumors. low-grade waiting approach may the patients Watchful with

impotence. or and brachytherapy are an associated with external Radical of (e.g., ↑ radiation beam) incontinence risk therapy and/or prostatectomy

post-treatment is used a controversial for to evaluate disease patients to recurrence. while screening follow as test, PSA,

disease and orchiectomy, metastatic chemotherapy. agonists, ablation with GnRH (e.g., ﬂutamide) androgen Treat

have > All years an should DRE. annual males of 50 age in cancer. in first-degree earlier African-American Screening with relative should those and a males with prostate begin

Screening with is utility PSA controversial. common, remains its but

tumor tract; usually malignant and common urinary transitional second frequent The most urologic cancer a the cell carcinoma. the most of seventh decades. and the Most in sixth prevalent during males chronic in factors include meat benzene derivative). treatment Risk and diets (a with rich cyclophosphamide, exposure smoking, dye occupational to schistosomiasis, and fat, aniline

most symptom. the presenting hematuria common Gross is

symptoms, be such dysuria, urgency, also but Other the asymptomatic in early and seen, may are urinary most frequency, stages as patients of disease.

biopsy is diagnostic. with Cystoscopy

microscopic); dysplastic hematuria cytology show often cells. (macroor shows may UA

tract as as filling. IVP upper urinary defects the well can in bladder examine

which to and with scan metastases. tools important CT, ■MRI, define are invasion and bone

depends mucosa. Treatment the spread of bladder beyond extent the on

chemotherapy. situ: Intravesicular in Carcinoma

resection transurethral chemotherapy BCG Superf with Complete intravesicular cancers: cial or or mitomycin-C (the TB vaccine).

recurrent high-grade Large, chemotherapy. Intravesicular lesions:

local for for metastases: cystectomy are or deemed Radical for cystectomy poor those candidates as without cancers Invasive radiotherapy unresectable who well radical disease. with as patients

metastases: Invasive alone. distant Chemotherapy cancers with

tumors kidney). of from all epithelial tubular adenocarcinoma of the (~80–90% malignant An cells the bone. Tumors the vein renal to IVC can and can spread and lung along metastasize to include kidney disease ESRD, and Risk cystic smoking, Hippel– Lindau von gender, acquired male disease. obesity, in factors

and include f f Presenting pain, hematuria, signs a palpable ank mass. ank weight with can loss Metastatic malaise. and present disease

other symptoms. fever patients or Many constitutional have males vein; gonadal IVC). empties left empties the blockage directly renal in the the of gonadal Left-sided vein, which into right seen left to varicocele tumor into (due vein may the

polycythemia Anemia in 5–10% but is presentation, common to erythropoietin be at ↑ of seen due production patients. may

CT complex and/or solid characterize renal mass cysts to tumor). or the Ultrasound (usually

disease. resection localized curative in be Surgical may

are radiation from chemotherapy or Response 15–30%. rates only been cell and inhibitors tumor for kinase have promising the the tyrosine (sorafenib, cell approved treatment proliferation, Newer FDA angiogenesis have carcinoma. renal results of recently shown and sunitinib), which by ↓

triad. is renal ank and f mass, cell carcinoma all of palpable triad pain, 5–10% of hematuria, The components but a ank only with present classic the three f

neoplasms. group heterogeneous A of cells, are tumors 95% testicular virtually Some malignant. derive from all of and germ associated with in of an both ↑ is neoplasia risk Cryptorchidism testes. Klinefelter’s factor. a syndrome also risk is most in common males cancer age. of is Testicular years malignancy 15–34 the

β-hCG men = choriocarcinoma. in

painless with the enlargement most often Patients present testes. of

Most and occur between 50 and a seminomas between years incidence have ages cancers peak 40 age. 30, of 15 but testicular

Testicular ultrasound.

to and abdominal/pelvic evaluate CXR metastasis. for CT

monitoring in treatment response. diagnosis useful markers Tumor and for are

in is always seminomas. of in 10% choriocarcinoma β-hCG and is elevated elevated

tumors. (AFP) sinus α-fetoprotein elevated particularly endodermal tumors, often cell sac) germ in (yolk is nonseminomatous hepatocellular also It elevated is in hepatoblastoma, neuroblastoma. and carcinoma,

Radical orchiectomy.

exquisitely to respond also Seminomas and radiosensitive chemotherapy. are

Platinum-based is cell chemotherapy nonseminomatous for germ used tumors.

acute be a with trauma can the ABCDE. mnemonic the of steps The management patient underlying remembered all airway by by turn conditions impair treating respiration, other over in impair takes followed and support precedence support providing conditions and circulatory that respiratory treating treatment, patency Establishing circulation. providing that followed

Airway:

or Start face O2 cannula conscious by supplemental mask nasal for patients. with to maneuver in a patient. tongue the an unconscious reposition Use jaw-thrust used be but a unstable possible, can where maneuver it A C-spine. resort chin-lift should as be requires of last avoided the as potentially movement An ventilation. oropharyngeal facilitate or airway nasopharyngeal bag-mask may

< injury maxillofacial fires). [GCS] intubation with or in in Scale apnea, Perform 8), or (e.g., status inhalation patients depressed Coma significant impending airway significantly (Glasgow trauma mental compromise

whom cannot patients significant Perform is airway be a (cricothyroidotomy) intubation there who in impractical. intubated or making surgical in maxillofacial trauma,

cleared the spine spine cervical studies. stabilization/immobilization appropriately and in until patients trauma exam through is Maintain radiographic to concern delay never However, this management. allow airway

Breathing:

Thorough the pneumothorax, massive airway hemothorax, death: cardiac five cardiac identify tension pneumothorax, pulmonary and exams immediate thoracic causes and obstruction. tamponade, open will of

side decompression (absent and needle tension on the pneumothorax hypoxemia) breath needed. shock sounds in affected identified, If is is combination immediate with line, by space placement midclavicular a 18-gauge tube. chest a the This at is accomplished the intercostal into by 16to of followed second angiocatheter placing

identified, open applied immediately. If must pneumothorax be dressing an is occlusive to development only the tension pneumothorax. secured three of sides be This on prevent must

cc return tube through 2–4 defined hours. or hemothorax 200/hour > 1000 Massive as > is chest immediate and for blood of diagnosed placement is > bleeding. by site The resuscitation surgery to is followed massive volume of repair the treatment hemothorax for the fixation ﬂail supportive, is chest wall. by followed of treatment for surgical The chest

Circulation:

direct Apply wounds. actively any pressure bleeding to

Place IV antecubital a in 16-gauge each fossa.

ﬂuids NS) or 3:1 repleted Isotonic are ratio (LR in (ﬂuid to a loss). blood continue of 1–2 ﬂuid adults; repletion and indicated. then as in L a recheck Start bolus with vitals

with may 2 the ﬂuid, RBCs be patient isotonic of first If packed indicated. transfusion the remains after or L tachycardic hypotensive

think engine. V6 the remember To Glasgow Scale, 4-eyes, Jackson-5, Coma assigned response, for points five motor for eye verbal for response, response. six can Four points points be and

shock tamponade. have trauma Patients chest may and with cardiac signs and hypotension, are sounds. JVD, relevant heart mufﬂed The bedside ultrasound. This with can diagnosed be necessary. immediate tamponade pericardiocentesis is diagnosed, is an If

Disability/Exposure:

with is quantified GCS. (CNS dysfunction) the and Disability assessed

completely and the both patient status assessed Exposure on of injury be the front and the and requires temperature that back disrobed for body. is a warm once the covered the done, blankets. Hypothermia bleeding; worsen can should common with is problem be patient trauma exam and in

Once examination. full stable, conduct is the patient a

tamponade, (FAST) For abdominal trauma a with scan. do patients suspected or unstable hemoperitoneum sonography for focused of the bladder pericardium. spaces right kidney Douglas), checked Four pouch left posterior and the (the between to are and spleen splenorenal for (the between pouch), in and (Morrison’s the the recess), blood: liver kidney immediate consultation requires management; for hemopericardium operative immediate requires surgical pericardiocentesis. Hemoperitoneum

ordered the Radiology on should of assessment. studies be patient basis the consciousness of A loss be status. for CXR a with depressed trauma, all with CT all ordered mental patients patients is should needed for thoracic and or head C-spine for with depressed is neurologic CT or tenderness, all pain patients or neck A mental needed findings, status.

a been urine unstable Foley has it patients if receiving injury in urethral (e.g., catheter output surgery). major necessary hemodynamically patients, ruled ﬂuid or After resuscitation, place is to patients out, undergoing monitor

should and suspicion Pertinent the be intoxication labs medical injury, history. of on of OD, or based mechanism ordered past

made be pulses. basis palpated A of SBP of rough can estimate on the femorals and to mmHg, of of SBP correspond of radials an 80 mmHg. Carotids roughly an 70 to to mmHg, 60 SBP SBP an

on trauma penetrating depend of the of treatment and evaluation and The injury. extent location the

early. Intubate

shock surgical hemorrhage active with for from Immediate wounds. neck and patients exploration ongoing mandatory is

true considered neck violate penetrating are that wounds trauma. the All platysma which to according injured into 2.17-1). divided and varies neck three The is (see Figure zones, zone is treatment

the the of and based on surgeon. individualized injuries, the preference trauma location Diagnostic workup the of suspected wound, is ultrasound, CT of esophagoscopy, and angiography, of arteries, contrast esophagography, may include aorta the carotid/cerebral scan tests the or angiography Appropriate or without neck bronchoscopy. Doppler CT with

tamponade, open obstruction. massive ﬂ patients chest, hemothorax, ail Immediately for airway evaluate pneumothorax, pneumothorax, cardiac and trauma tension

FIGURE 2.17-1. of the Zones neck.

LW. with from permission, Way (Reproduced, Diagnosis Current 10th ed. Surgical & Treatment, & 223.) Appleton CT: 1994: Stamford, Lange,

described thoracic immediate above. penetrating assessment treatment Unstable with injuries the require followed by patients injuries intubation of life-threatening and precise of of chest unclear. is may bilateral be tubes nature placement the injury if Empiric needed

that patient arrest, arrested leading thoracotomy for with indicated chest penetrating be arrival. Open patients provided in before trauma ED the or shortly may the to cardiac

tamponade further impaled objects such as OR, place Leave to any loss. the may until the is blood objects patient taken in

pneumothorax, disruption, pneumothorax, esophageal massive chest, and Beware hemothorax, open tamponade, tension aortic cardiac injury. diaphragmatic ﬂail tear, of

trauma a previously stable suspect suddenly air If embolism. chest dies, patient

aortic trauma after murmur suggests diastolic new chest dissection. A

not does absence out of injury. The rule abdominal pain an

usually patients immediate laparotomy, be conservatively cases. although select wounds managed in stable can Gunshot require exploratory

hemodynamically signs wounds patient with or evisceration in immediate a Stab exploratory unstable or a peritoneal require in laparotomy. patient

patient warrant followed observation. stable by wounds a close a inpatient hemodynamically scan or in CT Stab FAST

and neurovascular critical; assessment check pulses, motor is sensory function, function. ■Complete

vascular patients Arteriography for and management required surgical with are suspected injuries.

injuries repair. require generally surgical Nerve

antibiotic of most not important irrigation debridement, treatment the are therapy, wound steps contaminated wounds. in tissue and Early the do prophylaxis. and tetanus antibiotics However, administer

injuries, is point coup-contrecoup from and A the impact bleed site injury across causes the a impact. noted at of rapid head which deceleration of in both

imaging). pressure the medial able from CT. Lenticular on push shape lens away Bleed in skull, the the is meningeal artery to from is shape head on dura hematomas: causing Epidural (the higher arterial the bleeds herniation rapidly death. expand cannot lines cross can These suture and cause but and then they classically immediately become comatose. of and after after injury interval” Patients which consciousness loss the have “lucid a have

veins. bridging of dural the from Follow the the hematomas: of result skull shearing and curve Subdural can bleeds cross suture lines. These In subdural hematoma child until abuse constitutes a pediatric coupled retinal proven patient, a with otherwise. hemorrhages more death. hematomas These cause still epidural slowly bleeds accumulate can than but They chronically present (immediate), (weeks). (days), subacutely acutely may or

and ejection high-speed accidents, from vehicle The injury classic deceleration from is cause (e.g., motor vehicles, a falls heights). rapid the complete scene), adventitia. aortic ED hematoma disruption at the in rupture patients have contained seen die rapidly is within who fatal Since are the (85% usually a with aortic the common proximal arteriosum. most to is just Laceration ligamentum

widened CXR knob, cm), and the of the stem pleural mediastinum a main and to bronchus. loss right, reveals of (> deviation 8 Immediate esophagus aortic left depression of cap, trachea the

evaluation prior to (TEE) surgery. transesophageal and/or CT echocardiography

gold evaluation. is for Aortography standard the

trauma surgery defect Basic repair. for (ABCs); management emergent

inward two fractured segment points, the more adjacent causing ﬂail of ribs inspiration. with paradoxical or at ■Three movement

child suspected limbs, in rib the of Other fractures, and spiral abuse fractures bruises, bucket-handle are fractures. signs

and Marfan’s to predispose all Ehlers-Danlos a syndrome syndrome, aortic wall. syphilis, weak

and scapular, first is disruption with and Aortic fractures. rib, often second sternal associated

Referred to due shoulder sign: due rupture). on diaphragmatic to the pain irritation (classically Kehr’s left spleen

abnormal Hx/PE: Presents crepitus wall movement. with chest and be of Abnormal pain. may because wall appreciated splinting is not the patient movement chest if

Dx: saturation, CXR, help. clinical, blood O2 gases and although Primarily may

narcotic analgesia. Tx: O2, treat in severe needed ventilation, to and support, cases. intubation be Respiratory mechanical including hypoxemia may the wall Surgical fixation is needed. chest generally of

complication compromise underlying contusion. due Cx: is to pulmonary a Respiratory

The are commonly blunt following trauma. and organs liver injured abdominal most spleen the Symptoms tachycardia, and are loss signs peritonitis. blood include with hypotension, of consistent and present. fractures injury or lower liver spleen rib are when Suspect

blow a Pancreatic epigastric after injury). be rupture should suspected (handlebar direct

Diaphragmatic or may penetrating rupture with occur trauma. blunt diagnose difficult to missed. often and It is present; may the in may sign radio-graphs be thorax. viscera Kehr’s abdominal demonstrate

including renal injured and are most kidneys pedicle with trauma, the injuries laceration, injury. organ in GU contusion, fracture, commonly The

be scan, scan blunt abdominal stable In the CT hemodynamically with FAST trauma patients, exams. Survey diagnosed serial abdominal section), and 2° can (see

intra-abdominal or with In hemodynamically immediate blunt unstable treated bleeding. trauma to look injury abdominal should organ be patients, for laparotomy exploratory

from after Most occur as accidents high-speed such vehicle motor falls commonly traumas or heights. Require immediate orthopedist their attention the owing by potential. to life-threatening

unstable compression. pelvis upon an with May present

pelvis Pelvic x-rays a confirm the define the scan better of will the a patient, CT injury. of in extent fracture; may stable

an shock exsanguinating hypotension is present, likely. and If are hemorrhage and BP can In be to today) antishock perfusion. field, maintain used rarely used the organ trousers; adequate MAST (military

in or, Consider vessels, external embolization hemodynamically pelvic patient, emergent internal fixation, a stable fixation. of bleeding blood early. Give in Hemorrhage of 50% in death results patients.

injuries injury. associated Pelvic with urethral be can of lack high-riding, urethral It the prostate. meatus; “ballotable” blood is prostate; a at by a suggested or

Foley performed retrograde placed. is present, to urethrogram a must be a If before rule out injury catheter

explore a or hematoma. pelvic retroperitoneal Never and Follow hemoglobin with hematocrit. serial

in summarizes arrhythmias cardiac of the 2.17-1 acute management basic Table an setting.

-1. 2.1 AB T LE 7 Arrhythmiasa,b Management Cardiac of

to victims every 30 CPR breaths arrest compressions all 2005, two Updated puberty. after for in is

→amiodarone epinephrine J 360-J → → epinephrine. with shock Unsynchronized shock → 360-J or shock shock 360 lidocaine 360-J → →

of the be dose may second given epinephrine. frst in place of or Vasopressin sotalol ventricular lidocaine, or used tachycardia. be Amiodarone, may procainamide, stable for

empiric provide cause the underlying the vasopressin; (see search simultaneously mnemonic) for 5 and and treatment. H’s Epinephrine T’s 5 or Give for bradycardic atropine only. PEA

electrical unstable, synchronized If cardioversion. perform

with stimulus). stable, (Valsalva massage, vagal maneuvers carotid cold or control rate sinus If maneuver,

up by to maneuvers, β-blockers). three adenosine followed (calcium If of give other AV-nodal [CCBs] blocking channel resistant or blockers doses agents to

perform cardioversion at electrical If 100 J. synchronized starting unstable,

duration diltiazem or > β-blockers stable, rate and control with hours. If 48 is if anticoagulate

otherwise, hours; performed is may the cardioversion must anticoagulate TEE conversion. Elective < duration or perform if to prior be clinician 48

Wolff-Parkinson-White ECG. is give blockers nodal (δ if evidence not there syndrome Do on of waves)

and symptomatic, dopamine, If glucagon. and epinephrine, consider atropine give

pads, present, pacemaker at Mobitz third-degree is II bedside. and atropine transcutaneous or the heart block have place If may hemodynamically pacemaker transvenous required be for unstable patients. A temporary

all In CPR be of should minimized. disruptions a cases, CPR before a a drug, shock ately, given should administration of be a for CPR be resumed or or rhythm. After pulse checking fve immedi and cycles of should

of defbrillator. monophasic above assume electricity a listed Doses b 150–200 on Maximum biphasic more energy usually tors modern brilla is output def J.

and Epinephrine atropine. Asystole Ventricular tachycardia Atrial activity ventricular Pulseless utter tachycardia (SVT) (PEA) electrical fbrillation brillation/f or Supraventricular pulseless Bradycardia f

of Possible causes PEA—

The and 5 5 H’s T’s

Pulmonary ion: Thrombosis: Thrombosis: Tension Hypoxia pneumothorax Tamponade: Coronary metabolic Cardiac Hyper/Hypo: Hypovolemia Acidosis OD, Hypothermia Tablets: other ingestion K+, Drug Hydrogen

require many etiologies Acute-onset abdominal pain potential and intervention. immediate may has surgical or medical a of generally origin. visceral pain diffuse focal Sharp, etiology; pain is commonly (organ) parietal implies (peritoneal) dull, abdomen. acute identifies Figure causes of common the 2.17-2

in complete OPQRST. the a history, Obtain elements the including indicated mnemonic

symptoms). any (including for Obtain period, gynecologic pregnancy, and menstrual full STD a last history females a there for low disease with inﬂammatory threshold If tenderness, pain cervical treat pelvic should (PID). has motion abdominal a to be female

severe exam. sudden leads rigidity abdominal pain, diffuse, onset to on of with Perforation usually

pain. onset acute of Obstruction severe, colicky to leads radiating, emesis. Patients obstipation may of or complain bilious

ammation pain. (over leads hours) of constant, to Inﬂ gradual onset 10–12 illdefined

bowel ■Anorexia, Associated following: vomiting, etiologies. hematochezia, the habits, in changes GI and symptoms include suggest melena nausea,

of severe,Abrupt, pain Rapid onset Mesenteric ulcer excruciating thrombosis,

Intermittent, pain,Gradual, crescendo steady with pain free intervals colicky

acute cholecystitis, cholangitis, Acute

bowelAppendicitis, Small

2.17-2. FIGURE abdomen. Acute

location in of and acute the character the pain are helpful differential diagnosis The of abdomen. with from permission, (Reproduced, Way LW. Treatment, Diagnosis & Surgical Current ed. 10th CT: Lange, 444.) Stamford, 1994: Appleton &

pneumonia. Fever cough and suggest

pyuria, angle point costovertebral to GU etiology. a Hematuria, and tenderness

pancreatitis, PUD, or pathology. with bowel mesenteric meals, consider disease, ischemia, If biliary associated

porphyria. indicate history pain or Mediterranean acute fever familial family may A abdominal of intermittent

necessary. shock, exploratory impending peritoneal signs, or laparotomy If shock is emergent present, is pregnancy positive otherwise. until A of setting a ectopic proven is β-hCG in the shock ruptured pain a patient aneurysm Abdominal is until in or otherwise. shock an proven (AAA) aortic ruptured plus syncope abdominal older

exam—is and, a women, exam stable, If a the complete physical is rectal a mandatory. in patient exam—including pelvic

urine and differential. UA, or with a lipase, serum CBC Obtain β-hCG, electrolytes, amylase, LFTs,

suspected CXR Consider perforation a for or pulmonary pathology. be CT for and specific. may sensitive but is useful obstruction, more AXR used renal to CT abscess, and is AAA, appendicitis, diagnose pathology. obstruction, stones, diverticulitis, other the for pathology. best gallstones is diagnosing tool gynecologic and Ultrasound unstable and diagnose can Bedside hemoperitoneum patients. aortic in ultrasound (FAST AAA views) and

surgical must Hemodynamically have emergent unstable patients management.

Foley monitor management IV (to status, labs. placement output status), include In serial placement, vital with ﬂuids, may of NPO sign NG and abdominal stable monitoring and and ﬂuid patients, expectant exams a catheter urine tube serial

of signs perforation Give patients antibiotics or broad-spectrum all to sepsis. with indicated and such for infectious also cholecystitis, diverticulitis, be processes may as patients Antibiotics with pyelonephritis.

cross unstable and patients. Type all

obstruction inciting the The lumen event infection. appendiceal with is of inﬂammation subsequent and Rising and compromise the of appendix, ischemia, to pressure intraluminal possible necrosis, leads vascular perforation. (35%), carcinoid and tumor foreign (e.g., fecalith hypertrophied (55–65%), parasites. Etiologies tumor), lymphoid include body, tissue Incidence is age), peaks are (most and years ratio 10 in between early 30 the male-to-female the and of 2:1. teens patients

at with hours periumbilical to Presents leads lasting RLQ McBurney’s dull pain that point. sharp 1–12 pain

with and fever. low-grade nausea, (“hamburger sign”), presents anorexia Also vomiting,

Rovsing’s that are and tests be signs . may obturator, Psoas, insensitive

remembers If exact pain patient of think onset, the perforation. the moment

Pneumonia can right left pain. present or quadrant upper as abdominal

out All an pelvic pregnancy rule and test a ovarian to and patients with acute torsion. a exam require pregnancy, ectopic female abdomen PID,

spine point is from iliac anterior one-third the McBurney’s distance the located to the superior umbilicus. of

a wants than eat, “Hamburger If other to patient consider appendicitis. diagnosis sign”: a Anorexia is 80% for specific appendicitis.

sign: extension hip Psoas leading to of Passive the pain. RLQ

the to exed Passive pain. sign: internal RLQ hip of Obturator leading rotation ﬂ

LLQ sign: to pain. palpation of Rovsing’s Deep the leading RLQ

guarding, fever) is perforated possible, pain appendix, hypotension, count, (e.g., but WBC rebound, signs ↑ relief will In peritoneal develop. ultimately partial

misdiagnosis Children, women, and retrocecal presentations the mortality. have atypical result and may that pregnant in those elderly, appendices may with ↑

clinical by Diagnosed impression.

mild with (11,000–15,000 WBCs. few a fever, UA shift, for and RBCs and/or leukocytosis with cells/μL) left Look

imaging no is necessary. the If unequivocal, clinical are studies diagnosis Otherwise, following: include the studies

KUB: of Fecalith psoas or loss shadow.

appendix. Ultrasound: noncompressible Enlarged,

ﬂuid; (95–98% enlarged Periappendiceal scan appendix. stranding CT with contrast or sensitive):

and be receive patient with NPO should IV anaerobic and antibiotics should and The hydration gram-coverage.

is treatment. open the laparoscopic appendectomy definitive Immediate or appendicitis abdomen If is complete found, exploration performed. the is not of

until a afebrile Perforation: patient antibiotics by count; with Administer normalized should closed delayed the 1° closure. is the WBC wound be

with should and be an performed percutaneous 6–8 weeks antibiotics appendectomy Treat elective Abscess: broad-spectrum drainage; later.

second children. cause The leading death in of treated burn Serious setting. an should ICU in be patients tissue or and of be Burns depth are destruction: by categorized electrical, chemical, can thermal

is First epidermis involved. the Only degree: area capillary painful not blisters refill but and and erythematous, present, The is is are intact. sunburn. a like Looks

the are Second and partial epidermis thickness degree: involved. The of dermis blisters The is are present. area and painful,

tissues The the degree: Third full are and of involved. the deeper dermis, potentially thickness epidermis, and area is white, The painless, charred.

significant may skin visible, with burns. be not especially electrical destruction deep but may present obvious Patients with wounds,

a assess exam and for lung airway thorough injury. inhalation to Conduct

in with monoxide assume carbon injury. Always poisoning inhalation patients

and closed-space with carpets Consider burning poisoning cyanide textiles. in fires

Assess the ABCs. If compromise intubate. is airway impending,

monoxide Be vigilant and injury, poisoning. shock, for carbon inhalation carboxyhemoglobin and CXR Obtain a a level.

BSA) percentage involved. the of body (% Evaluate area surface

tetanus, IV Supportive ulcer measures; stress prophylaxis, and analgesia. narcotic

of on additional formula secondand using urine 1 losses repletion critical; to insensible the Parkland adjust maintain burns, third-degree least ﬂuid at repletion is cc/kg/hr output. For basis the of

silver no with may of Topical be associated PO/IV used prophylactically; benefit or mafenide however, there and corticosteroids. use sulfadiazine is proven the antibiotics

or latter with Shock the to Pseudomonas due likely and most gramcocci. superinfection,

Criteria transfer a burn include the following: center to for

of burn > BSA. 5% Full-thickness

BSA. burn Partial-thickness > 10%

areas feet, joints). Any over critical (face, fullor burn major partial-thickness hands, genitals, perineum,

inhalation Circumferential chemical, or lightning electrical, burns; injury; injury.

rehabilitative Any needs. care psychosocial special or

“rule Use adults: estimate BSA the 9’s” % in to of

% first Parkland 24 formula: in × BSA. the Fluids weight ×patient’s kg hours = for 4 of the 50% hours and remaining eight uids over hours. following ﬂ first the 16 the over Give 50%

The fever: 5 postoperative of W’s

Wind: Atelectasis,

patients. 40% in Occurs postoperative all of early Water, catheter fever short-term anticoagulation, spirometry, antibiotics and use, “Wind, postoperative DVT when indicated, (e.g., compression and Wonder incentive ambulation, Wounds, preand Walking, ■↓ risk drugs.” of the the Remember postoperative stockings). prophylaxis with mnemonic Foley

are before β-hemolytic postoperative or Clostridium day streptococci to unlikely are infectious Fevers involved. unless be 3

pneumonia body C) < F accompanied infection, Water: neurologic mental Wonder ■A 95° Walking: Drug DVT by temperature drugs: status abscess Wound Wounds: deficits. and UTI (35°

2.17-2. TABLE Shock Types of

uid third Hypovolemic repletion, with dehydration burns. blood Trauma, inadequate loss, f spacing, a with ratio. uid-to-blood) solution in 3:1 blood (e.g., LR (f NS) or and isotonic ↓↓↑Replete mitral CHF, 40% heart structural function). arrhythmia, left VSD), disease regurgitation, (severe Cardiogenic (> of Ml ventricular possible. and if ↓↑↑Identify treat cause the dobutamine or dopamine with (if hypotensive) inotropic (if not Give as hypotensive). such support pressors pulmonary massive tension embolism. pneumothorax, Obstructive Cardiac tamponade, pneumothorax, thrombolysis. of the underlying cause: pericardiocentesis, decompression ↓↑↑Treat Bacteremia, especially gram-organisms. ↑↓↓Administer antibiotics. broad-spectrum (CVP) Measure and CVP pressure fuid until 8. central venous = give Then pressors give or (dopamine norepinephrine). cultures to possible. antibiotics of administration prior if Obtain food stings, medication, Bee allergies. diphenhydramine. ↑↓↓Give severe, If administer epinephrine. 1:1000 wedge capillary pulmonary pressure. = PCWP a peripheral PVR vascular = b resistance.

clothing. windy the or and from the patient cold remove wet Remove environment patient mild with or In cases, water. rewarm the blankets warm a ﬂuids. In heating or blanket, IV patient need oxygen, the more warm warmed may cases, severe (e.g., patients, invasive cardiac lavage, bypass). NG In or rewarming pleural lavage, unstable necessary or be bladder may thaw frostbite, the patient the methods. If affected same areas has with the need thawing. will narcotic analgesia for Patients

and fibrillation. atrial the ECG slow for arrhythmias such as bradycardia Monitor Osborn wave is stereotypic J the The sign wave). (aka acid-base and monitor balance. electrolytes Also

has efforts been Do until not warmed. the stop patient resuscitation

104° C), stroke. heat body F A possibly from > (40° temperature

water, wet blankets, cold ice. Cool patient and the with prevent to convulsions. benzodiazepine a Consider drug such causes of as or infection fever reaction. out Rule

syndrome locations. in hypoxemic seen or inhalation, ventilated poorly automobile appliances smoke old been exhaust, to who have patients A barbecues, poisoning in exposed

Presents headaches. cherry-red confusion, hypoxemia, and with skin (rare), seizures Coma cases. in severe occur or

may Chronic ﬂ nausea, generalized symptoms with low-level and exposure ulike myalgias, headaches. cause the symptoms Ask about in same living in house. others

wheezing, facial inhalation Suspect presence hairs, in carbonaceous or smoke burns, hoarseness, the singed of nose sputum.

smokers). and an 10% level and is nonsmokers in < < carboxyhemoglobin Check 5% in (normal serum ABG

elderly with the an disease. and of ECG history a Check in cardiac patients in

and carboxyhemoglobin until Treat O2 with levels. to 100% normal asymptomatic falls

or with CNS hyperbaric with from carbon cardiac Use or pregnant of monoxide those for hemoglobin. patients, facilitate those ↑ ischemia, nonresponders, signs carboxyhemoglobin displacement to severely O2 of

since with obstruction. can or early upper may airway complete intubation, airway edema smoke rapidly burns inhalation require to lead Patients

interactions 2.17-3 that outlines Table setting. commonly encountered are in drug reactions and a clinical

and summarizes Table in intoxications. 2.17-4 overdoses antidotes encountered for commonly treatments and substances dose of treat is with common Narcan. is If unresponsive, patient to a a it empirically

and suspected hyperthermia ruled syndrome Malignant (NMS) hyperthermia. be should any neuroleptic out malignant of in case seen after after hyperthermia be halothane exposure, and Malignant would NMS neuroleptic. a Both with conditions dantrolene. are treated

poisoning, normal. patient’s monoxide carbon is saturation oxygen the In usually as is the molecule. read hemoglobin pulse is by normal oximeter saturated because a carboxyhemoglobin This

AB 2.1 T LE 7 -3. Reactions Drug and Interactions

Barbiturates, phenytoin, Induction griseofulvin. rifampin, quinidine, of enzymes P-450 carbamazepine, grapefruit, sulfonamides. enzymes Cimetidine, INH, Inhibition P-450 of ketoconazole, erythromycin, theophylline, warfarin, phenytoin, metoprolol, P-450 nifedipine, barbiturates. Benzodiazepines, amide enzymes anesthetics, Metabolism quinidine, propranolol, by CCBs. risk of amiodarone, Quinidine, toxicity digoxin cimetidine, ↑ phenytoin. ASA, sites albumin-binding Competition for Warfarin, quinidine, chemotherapeutic Blood Ibuprofen, agents. methyldopa, dyscrasias pyrimethamine, patients Hemolysis (INH), chloramphenicol. G6PD-defcient isoniazid nitrofurantoin, in ASA, ibuprofen, Sulfonamides, primaquine, Create Estrogens, use, Alcohol Digitalis, “Some Drugs Ethosuximide, sulfonamides. Knockers.” Stevens-Johnson Cimetidine, chronic syndrome Awesome Excellent Gynecomastia Ketoconazole: Spironolactone, Tetracycline, sulfonamides. Photosensitivity amiodarone, quinidine. methyldopa, SLE Procainamide, penicillamine, INH, chlorpromazine, hydralazine, Drug-induced

2.17-4. TABLE c Specif Antidotes

N-acetylcysteine. Acetaminophen for ingestion endoscopy Acid/alkali to stricture. Upper evaluate Atropine, Anticholinesterases, pralidoxime. organophosphates agents Antimuscarinic/anticholinergic Physostigmine. mercury, dimercaprol. gold Succimer, Arsenic, Glucagon. β-blockers care. dialysis, supportive Urine Barbiturates alkalinization, activated (phenobarbital) charcoal, Flumazenil precipitate Benzodiazepines (can withdrawal).

2.17-4. TABLE Specifc (continued) Antidotes

Black methocarbamol. widow Calcium gluconate, bite O2. Carbon 100% monoxide hyperbaric O2, gold arsenic, lead, Copper, Penicillamine. nitrate, sodium sodium nitrate, thiosulfate. Cyanide Amyl Normalize Mg++, Ca++, (for Fab. avoid but or lidocaine torsades), giving K+ Digitalis antidigitalis Heparin sulfate. Protamine Pyridoxine. INH salts Iron Deferoxamine. CaEDTA, dimercaprol. Lead Succimer, ethylene gluconate calcium glycol dialysis, Methanol, glycol. for fomepizole, ethylene (antifreeze) EtOH, Methylene Methemoglobin blue. Opioids Naloxone. Salicylates Urine charcoal. alkalinization, dialysis, activated diazepam TCAs seizures; lorazepam for Sodium for monitor arrhythmias. cardiac for prolongation; or QRS bicarbonate Theophylline charcoal. Activated Consider repeat doses. streptokinase tPA, acid. Aminocaproic FFP. K, Warfarin Vitamin

select of Table effects side drugs. 2.17-5 the outlines major

Drug Withdrawal of Management

Table summarizes and 2.17-6 common drug symptoms withdrawal treatment.

signs Table key the and symptoms 2.17-7 deficiencies. of vitamin summarizes

2.17-5. TABLE Effects Side Drug

effects. Cough, proteinuria, taste rash, angioedema, ACEIs changes, teratogenic livedo Ataxia, reticularis. Amantadine Aminoglycosides necrosis). tubular Ototoxicity, nephrotoxicity (acute bradycardia. hypotension, Amiodarone AV Acute: block, f bluish deposition arrhythmias, leading pulmonary peripheral Chronic: deposition. brosis, hypo-/hyperthyroidism, corneal discoloration, to Amphotericin anemia. bone suppression, nephrotoxicity, Fever/rigors, marrow parkinsonism, dyskinesia, akathisia, tardive NMS. Antipsychotics acute dystonic reaction, Sedation, (e.g., of Azoles enzymes. Inhibition fuconazole) P-450 anemia. megaloblastic AZT Thrombocytopenia, AV of block, masking impotence, bradycardia, Asthma CHF. exacerbation, hypoglycemia, β-blockers Sedation, respiratory dependence, Benzodiazepines depression. of malabsorption medications. vitamins and resins Bile acid upset, Gl CCBs Peripheral constipation, depression. cardiac edema, P-450 agranulocytosis, liver enzymes, toxicity. Carbamazepine of anemia, aplastic Induction syndrome, Chloramphenicol baby anemia. Gray aplastic acoustic Nephrotoxicity, nerve Cisplatin damage. and Dry headache hypertension. mouth; severe rebound Clonidine Clozapine Agranulocytosis. myopathy, (acute), easy mineral (chronic). immunosuppression, Corticosteroids loss, skin, thinning bone Mania, hyperglycemia of bruising, cataracts cystitis. Myelosuppression, hemorrhagic Cyclophosphamide or Gl junctional changes, yellow tachycardia (e.g., SVT). visual disturbance, arrhythmias Digoxin Doxorubicin Cardiotoxicity (cardiomyopathy). depression. Ethyl alcohol CNS dysfunction, Renal in rupture damage children; tendon adults. Cartilage in Achilles Fluoroquinolones Furosemide Ototoxicity, nephritis, hypokalemia, gout. Gemf brozil in LFTs. reversible Myositis, ↑

TABLE 2.17-5. Side Effects (continued) Drug

Halothane hyperthermia. malignant Hepatotoxicity, hyponatremia, HCTZ hyperuricemia, Hypokalemia, hypercalcemia. hyperglycemia, inhibitors reversible HMG-CoA in ↑ LFTs. reductase Myositis, SLE. Hydralazine Drug-induced Retinopathy. Hydroxychloroquine B6), G6PD hemolysis hepatotoxicity, seizures def of Peripheral with ciency. P-450 (prevent in pyridoxine/vitamin with INH inhibition enzymes, neuropathy overdose, tyramine reaction, meperidine). serotonin MAOIs (with Hypertensive syndrome Methanol Blindness. Hepatic fbrosis, pneumonitis, Methotrexate anemia. SLE. drug-induced Methyldopa Coombs’ test, Metronidazole metallic taste. dysfunction, reaction, Disulfram vestibular f Niacin Cutaneous ushing. headache, tolerance. tachycardia, Hypotension, Nitroglycerin Drug-induced Penicillamine SLE. Hypersensitivity Penicillin/β-lactams reactions. Phenytoin toxic (in gingival Nystagmus, teratogenic diplopia, effects. arrhythmia hirsutism, doses), hyperplasia, ataxia, hypotension. Prazosin First-dose Drug-induced SLE. Procainamide aplastic anemia. Propylthiouracil Agranulocytosis, de Quinidine (headache, pointes). tinnitus), torsades Cinchonism thrombocytopenia, (e.g., arrhythmias Reserpine Depression. enzymes; secretions. orange-red of Rifampin P-450 Induction body metabolic alkalosis hyperventilation Fever; diaphoresis, with gastritis. and dehydration, acidosis; Salicylates respiratory hemorrhagic if with syndrome MAOIs. taken sexual Anxiety, dysfunction, serotonin SSRIs

TABLE 2.17-5. Effects Drug Side (continued)

hyperthermia, Malignant Succinylcholine hyperkalemia. anticholinergic effects, Sedation, TCAs coma, seizures arrhythmias. and discoloration, distress. Gl syndrome, Tooth Fanconi’s Tetracyclines photosensitivity, anemia, Trimethoprim Megaloblastic leukopenia, granulocytopenia. acid Valproic tube rare fatal to neural Teratogenicity defects; hepatotoxicity. leads syndrome” allergy). (histamine an not man Vancomycin ototoxicity, release; “red Nephrotoxicity, Severe Vinblastine myelosuppression. paralytic neuropathy, Vincristine ileus. Peripheral

AB LE 7 2.1 T -6. Withdrawal of and Treatment Symptoms Drug

(6–12 hours). Tremor Alcohol hours). hypertension, (within Tachycardia, agitation, seizures 48 tachycardia, death autonomic leading to hypertension, DTs—severe and delirium, 2–7 (within instability Hallucinations, possibly days). Mortality 15–20%. is folate, most (do withdrawal, Benzodiazepines massive doses); not def affect cient). for thiamine, replacement and hallucinations; but multivitamin haloperidol are require (can alcoholics depression. delirium, Barbiturates cardiac tremor; and Anxiety, seizures, respiratory Benzodiazepines. seizures, insomnia. Rebound Benzodiazepines tremor, anxiety, Benzodiazepines. for Monitor DTs. hyperphagia, hypersomnolence. Cocaine/ Depression, amphetamines Supportive treatment. lead activity, causing β-blockers α hypertension). unopposed pure Avoid (may to Opioids piloerection, stomach lacrimation, Anxiety, fulike diarrhea, yawning, rhinorrhea, fever, nausea, insomnia, mydriasis. symptoms, cramps, or severe moderate for NSAIDs mild clonidine, to for buprenorphine, Antiemetics, methadone muscle relaxers, symptoms. symptoms; and

2.17-7. TABLE Def Functions and ciencies Vitamin

Vitamin blindness, skin. A dry Night cardiomyopathy, Vitamin high-output edema), (thiamine) Wernicke-Korsakoff dilated CHF, Beriberi (polyneuritis, B1 syndrome. Vitamin corneal stomatitis, cheilosis, B2 vascularization. (ribofavin) Angular Pellagra (diarrhea, dermatitis, Vitamin dementia). B3 (niacin) enteritis, Vitamin (pantothenate) alopecia, ciency. Dermatitis, B5 insuff adrenal during administration Convulsions, B6 of (pyridoxine) Vitamin required hyperirritability; INH. neuropathy, paresthesias); combined B12 optic (e.g., glossitis. neurologic Macrocytic, megaloblastic (cobalamin) degeneration, Vitamin anemia; symptoms subacute wound C poor anemia, bruising, (e.g., Scurvy swollen gums, Vitamin healing). Rickets hypocalcemic in children adults (soft bones), tetany. Vitamin in (bending D bones), osteomalacia ↑ E RBCs. Vitamin fragility of K Neonatal PT aPTT, normal Vitamin ↑ BT. and hemorrhage; enteritis. Biotin Dermatitis, eggs raw of or ingestion Can use. caused antibiotic by be Folic United States. defciency acid common the The vitamin most in symptoms. without Sprue; anemia macrocytic, megaloblastic neurologic hyperirritability exacerbation choreoathetoid hypocalcemic leading tremors, to tetany, Weakness, movement. cramps, muscle Magnesium CNS of Keshan disease Selenium (cardiomyopathy).

atrial ﬂutter. Classic finding ECG in unstable Definition angina. of Antihypertensive proteinuria. with patient for diabetic a cardiac Beck’s tamponade. for triad transmission. that AV slow node Drugs to pruritus. and ushing leads ﬂ Hypercholesterolemia that treatment (HOCM). obstructive Murmur—hypertrophic cardiomyopathy

insufficiency. Murmur—aortic

Murmur—aortic stenosis.

Murmur—mitral regurgitation. stenosis. Murmur—mitral atrial ﬂutter. fibrillation and Treatment atrial for

Treatment ventricular fibrillation. for 2–4 complication Autoimmune occurring post-MI. weeks murmur drug border. sternal at JVD use the with and IV holosystolic left Treatment? Diagnostic test cardiomyopathy. for hypertrophic

inspiration. 10 systolic A in with of > BP fall mmHg in Classic pericarditis. findings ECG of Definition hypertension. of Eight correctable causes surgically hypertension.

“Sawtooth” waves. P at rest. is or is worsening, new, Angina occurs ACEI. distant sounds, JVD. and Hypotension, heart digoxin, β-blockers, channel blockers. calcium Niacin.

Valsalva maneuver border with ↑ Systolic sternal that murmur heard and lateral the ejection along standing. Diastolic, decrescendo, sitting is heard high-pitched, (handgrip ↓ up; murmur best maneuver). with blowing preload that ↑

radiates with (Valsalva ↑ that to Systolic the ↑ preload crescendo/decrescendo maneuver). neck; murmur carotids. the Holosystolic axillae radiates to or that murmur

late, murmur. low-pitched midto Diastolic, unstable, If cardiovert. rate β-blockers. or chronic, control If stable channel with blockers calcium or

Immediate cardioversion. pericarditis, ESR. syndrome: Dressler’s ↑ fever, replace existing heart tricuspid Treat failure and the valve.

(showing left obstruction). wall ow and Echocardiogram thickened outﬂ ventricular

(seen tamponade). Pulsus paradoxus in cardiac

diffuse ST-segment Low-voltage, elevation.

> BP three 140/90 two weeks separate on occasions apart.

aorta, hyperthyroidism, syndrome, disease, syndrome, stenosis, artery unilateral coarctation of Cushing’s the Renal renal Conn’s hyperparathyroidism. parenchymal pheochromocytoma,

pulsatile mass of abdominal a bruit. Evaluation and aneurysm. surgical repair aortic for of abdominal Indications Treatment syndrome. for coronary acute

metabolic is syndrome? What

Appropriate diagnostic test?

to heart 85% angina with can of 50-year-old man exercise predicted A rate. maximum

A left unstable with 65-year-old bundle osteoarthritis woman severe branch and block angina. has diabetes. patient LDL in Target a with

of testing. Signs ischemia stress active during ECG MI. findings suggesting

Coronary territories MI. in

has at A elevation. young patient with ST-segment rest angina enzymes Cardiac normal. are associated with Mls. Common symptoms silent for diagnostic embolism. The pulmonary test of effects reverses agent heparin. the An that

coagulation by The parameter warfarin. affected exercising. A family young with sudden death dies history a of patient collapses while and

prophylaxis Endocarditis regimens.

due ischemia peripheral of vascular disease. P’s The to 6

Virchow’s triad. The in hypertension most cause young common women. of common cause young The most men. in of hypertension

CT. Abdominal ultrasound and

5.5 enlarging, rapidly or > ruptured. symptomatic, cm,

heparin. O2, Morphine, ASA, sublingual β-blockers, nitroglycerin, IV

proinﬂ prothrombotic states. HDL, ammatory obesity, high hypertension, resistance, low insulin or Abdominal triglycerides,

with ECG. Exercise stress treadmill

echo). Pharmacologic dobutamine test (e.g., stress

< 70. ↓ on Angina, ECG, or changes BP. ST-segment ischemia), ﬂattened means Q ST-segment (depression and elevation waves, waves. T

posterior inferior circumﬂex/oblique, septum (LAD/diagonal), (PDA), RCA/marginal), (LAD/diagonal). (left Anterior wall angina. Prinzmetal’s

altered CHF, status. and shock, mental scan. V/Q Protamine. PT. cardiomyopathy. Hypertrophic

gentamicin and before and after. amoxicillin pulselessness, pallor, poikilothermia. paresthesia, Pain, paralysis,

hypercoagulability, Stasis, endothelial damage. OCPs. EtOH. Excessive

appearance. “Stuck-on” scales with silvery-white plaques margins. sharp Red and a cancer; with translucent common skin is The lesion a type pearly-colored and telangiectasias. most surface papule of the

Honey-crusted lesions. with history lower painful presents red, with a a of febrile swollen, patient diabetes extremity. A

Nikolsky’s sign. Nikolsky’s sign.

A of 55-year-old on neck. the back patient obese patches presents with dirty, velvety the Dermatomal distribution. Flat-topped papules. Iris-like lesions. target contact or where occurring in A linear into pattern jewelry. lesion with areas comes in clothing a characteristically skin

Christmas-tree patch, with Presents a herald pattern. broken-off, presents with with alopecia of annular patch A an hairs. 16-year-old stubby

a scaling, back; prep and lesions KOH on chest “spaghetti-and-meatballs” appearance. has ﬂat Pinkish, the a melanoma. of of characteristics Four nevus suggestive

can from sun to A exposure squamous lesion that carcinoma. premalignant cell lead “Cradle acnes changes cap.” petal.” “Dewdrops with androgen levels. rose and Associated in a on Propionibacterium

Seborrheic keratosis. Psoriasis. carcinoma. cell Basal

Impetigo. Cellulitis.

Pemphigus vulgaris. pemphigoid. Bullous Acanthosis nigricans. fasting blood diabetes. rule glucose to out Check Varicella zoster. Lichen planus. Erythema multiforme. Contact dermatitis.

Pityriasis rosea. autoimmune Alopecia (an areata process).

versicolor. Pityriasis

variation, irregularity, border Asymmetry, color and diameter. large

keratosis. Actinic

of 1° varicella. Lesions Seborrheic dermatitis. antifungals. Treat with Acne vulgaris.

A painful, mucocutaneous vesicular recurrent of surfaces. eruption

anogenital the predominantly thinning of Inﬂammation postmenopausal in epithelial and women. area,

on cancer. degrees second skin or type Exophytic most common of the varying the nodules ulceration; scaling with skin of

Herpes simplex.

sclerosus. Lichen

Squamous carcinoma. cell

type. patient’s of introduced a is study when aware treatment the a Bias into clinician

introduced lengthens from a the earlier screening disease Bias time detects to and death. diagnosis thus when

if status, predicted in rate variation want by If but infant geographical status socioeconomic know a affects mortality socioeconomic is to you then most infant _____. location is mortality

true The is _____. positives by the of the of disease number divided number with patients

_____ tests to negatives rule Sensitive used a false few have are disease. and

who reactivity used (except screening with is test have those PPD because people a a anergic) as are will most TB

PPD. sensitive or specific? Highly

as prevalence SLE—higher or diseases such Chronic incidence?

such prevalence as inﬂuenza—higher or Epidemics incidence?

or survey—incidence Cross-sectional prevalence?

or prevalence? study—incidence Cohort

or Case-control study—incidence prevalence?

consistently gives are test results Describe but that identical wrong. a results, the

study. between a Difference a cohort and case-control

bias. Observational

bias. Lead-time

variable. Confounding

Sensitivity.

Out.

Highly for sensitive TB.

Higher prevalence.

Higher incidence.

Prevalence. and prevalence. Incidence Neither. low reliability, High validity.

(OR). ratio incidence, calculate to odds and/or studies relative be Cohort risk (RR), can used can be used calculate to an Case-control studies OR.

risk? Attributable

risk? Relative

Odds ratio?

needed to Number treat?

cancer you screening patients In early? initiate which colorectal do

of cause the in men. from men death common common in The most most and cancer cancer The cases of within percentage the SD one mean? of SDs? Two Three SDs?

Birth rate? rate? Fertility

rate? Mortality Neonatal mortality rate?

mortality Postnatal rate?

rate? mortality Infant

Fetal mortality rate?

mortality rate? Perinatal

mortality rate? Maternal

a of the The rate disease disease IR – in in incidence a of (IR) unexposed. exposed

not IR a ÷ the exposed factor those to in particular of disease a a exposed. IR population The of

exposed. to compared risk likelihood disease exposed factor to have those who of among The been a a individuals not

group). in in group rate ÷ untreated treated (rate 1 –

cancer (FAP)/hereditary relatives have Patients of years colorectal or and who polyps those adenomatous cancer. with polyposis adenomatous age) those familial with nonpolyposis colorectal first-degree IBD; 60 (< (HNPCC); with

causes men, deaths. cancer more cancer is common lung in but cancer the most Prostate

68%, 95.4%, 99.7%.

of one per population 1000 births Number year. in live

age) (15–44 births one Number 1000 years in females of live year. per of

of one population deaths per in year. Number 1000

in per days to 1000 Number from year. one deaths 28 birth births live of

one births 1000 one 28 per Number year from to days live in year. of deaths

Number birth in of of to + year. live from per year one mortality) age one 1000 (neonatal births postnatal deaths

to one from per deaths of weeks’ births gestation total 1000 20 in year. Number birth

weeks’ one 1000 of year. births deaths of from in one Number 20 gestation month per life total to

per deaths Number to year. in during 100,000 postpartum pregnancy days 90 one live of births

continue they sign Once or must True patients treatment. giving false: consent, statement a

preeclampsia. requires 15-year-old girl pregnant hospitalization for A required? consent Is parental

a patient MRI he/she A refers facility an at owns. for doctor a

Involuntary reasons? which for be can psychiatric hospitalization three undertaken

or false: nonbeneficial nonindicated withholding True one. to is ethically Withdrawing similar a treatment a

treating futility? When physician the can of a patient on continue grounds to a refuse

a child is in An accident. serious eight-year-old but parents are transfusion, emergent not She her requires present.

Conditions must in which overridden. be confidentiality

what commitment isolation for for medical reason? Involuntary undertaken may be or treatment

religious on 10-year-old child epilepticus, status treatment but refuse parents presents grounds. her A in

discovered asks son be her about not told his A recently that cancer. mother

False. at time. their any minds may change Patients situations Exceptions to include patients without of emergency capacity. and the decision-making requirement informed consent

No. of the is Parental treatment necessary medical minors. pregnant consent not for

interest. Conﬂict of

danger gravely disabled to provide or to needs). to a others, danger The a basic self, patient is for (unable

True.

treatment, goals of care. will and maximal failing, is achieve there already not intervention the given for is a rationale intervention When treatment failed, no has

Treat immediately. implied in emergency Consent is situations.

certain child intentions; and contagious parties; harm abuse. to suicidal threat of Real diseases; third elder

health TB). (e.g., active serious danger treatment When a represents to public noncompliance

immediate life. threat an disease Treat child’s the because represents the to order. a Then court seek

withhold from told. to requests patient case be only the not therapeutic physician privilege information the in the if can A of rare or patient patient. the from patient’s information withhold to cannot family A require physician the

ultrasound for cholecystitis. equivocal is Diagnostic modality used when

factors Risk cholelithiasis. for

arrest during Inspiratory of palpation the RUQ.

of with cause of common patients surgery. The history most abdominal SBO no in

of The a with in most SBO cause surgery. abdominal common history patients of

causing key organisms diarrhea: Identify

Jewish pain watery meals. diarrhea after with presents A and 25-year-old man bowel lesions his fistulas shows tibias. nodular Exam the between on and and skin

of colon risk cancer. disease Inﬂammatory of colon the with ↑

IBD. manifestations of Extraintestinal

IBD. Medical treatment for

tears. between Mallory-Weiss and Difference Boerhaave

triad. Charcot’s

Reynolds’ pentad.

hepatic encephalopathy. Medical treatment for

scan. HIDA

female, Fat, atulent. fertile, forty, ﬂ

in cholecystitis. seen acute sign, Murphy’s

Hernia.

Adhesions.

Vibrio, coli E. cereus Mycobacterium Salmonella avium Isospora, aureus O157:H7 Bacillus Cryptosporidium, S. complex HAV

Crohn’s disease.

Crohn’s). colitis than Ulcerative (greater risk

Uveitis, sclerosing 1° pyoderma cholangitis. erythema spondylitis, ankylosing gangrenosum, nodosum,

exacerbations. agents steroids during acute and 5-ASA

mucosa; esophageal Boerhaave—full-thickness Mallory-Weiss—superficial tear esophageal in the rupture.

of the in RUQ and pain, setting fever/chills cholangitis. ascending jaundice,

and changes, suppurative mental cholangitis. Charcot’s ascending shock status plus with triad

intake, lactulose, ↓ rifaximin. protein

patient management step the a First in bleed. an of acute GI with

four-year-old presents child and jaundice with oliguria, diarrhea. illness an following A petechiae, bloody with Most likely diagnosis and cause?

Post-HBV treatment. exposure

drug-induced causes of hepatitis. Classic

bilirubin, obese dark phosphatase, woman elevated alkaline urine, A stools. and with pruritus, 40-year-old clay-colored elevated

highest direct, Hernia or risk with of femoral? incarceration—indirect,

relieved presents history with forward. that sitting of to back alcohol radiates boring pain 50-year-old epigastric with abuse man the A and by is a Management?

ABCs. Establish the

due E. to (HUS) Hemolytic-uremic coli H7. O157: syndrome

immunoglobulin. HBV

rifampin, pyrazinamide), (INH, medications acetaminophen, TB and tetracycline.

Biliary obstruction. tract

Femoral hernia.

the lipase. and Confirm elevated pancreatitis amylase of diagnosis acute with ﬂ “tincture uids, O2, NPO analgesia, give IV the time.” of and and patient Make

causes anemia. microcytic Four of

anemia man elderly asymptomatic. microcytic is An hypochromic, with Diagnostic tests? of Precipitants crisis with G6PD in hemolytic deficiency. patients

The inherited hypercoagulability. common of cause most bleeding The disorder. inherited common most common The most hemolytic anemia. inherited hereditary Diagnostic for spherocytosis. test RBC Pure aplasia. café lait associated microcephaly, Anemia thumbs, spots, radii with pancytopenia. absent hyperpigmentation, diffuse au and and that viruses and lead Medications aplastic anemia. to

disease, anemia. TICS—Thalassemia, Iron of Chronic Sideroblastic deficiency, and anemia

occult and cancer. sigmoidoscopy; suspect test Fecal blood colorectal

drugs, fava Sulfonamides, beans. antimalarial

Factor V Leiden mutation. von Willebrand’s disease. Hereditary spherocytosis. test. Osmotic fragility anemia. Diamond-Blackfan Fanconi’s anemia.

EBV. HIV, sulfonamides, parvovirus Chloramphenicol, hepatitis, agents, radiation, B19, chemotherapeutic

distinguish to How vera polycythemia. 2° from polycythemia

purpura Thrombotic pentad? (TTP) thrombocytopenic

HUS triad? TTP. Treatment for

children. idiopathic purpura thrombocytopenic Treatment in (ITP) for

D-dimer, following the in fibrin and hematocrit. DIC: Which split of are platelets, ↑ fibrinogen, products,

PTT and eight-year-old hemarthrosis and with with boy PT ↑ normal bleeding presents time. An Diagnosis? Treatment?

time. or normal and ↑ dental normal presents and surgery prolonged with bleeding ↑ with menses, girl after PT, bleeding 14-year-old PTT, A Diagnosis? Treatment?

pain. man A presents African-American bone with 60-year-old Workup multiple myeloma for reveal? might cells. Reed-Sternberg loss, night weight with fever, presents 10-year-old sweats. A boy and mass. an mediastinal shows Exam anterior

Suspected diagnosis? normal ↓ Microcytic capacity ↑ ↓ with anemia or iron-binding (TIBC), total and ferritin. serum iron,

serum anemia iron, TIBC. ferritin, and Microcytic ↓ ↓ ↑ with An with lymphadenopathy, presents isolated lymphocytosis. man splenomegaly, and 80-year-old fatigue, Suspected diagnosis? lymphoma The CLL. equivalent of (CML). chronic A complication late, life-threatening of leukemia myelogenous rods Auer on blood smear. with associated DIC. subtype AML

low vera ↑ and have normal mass, have but erythropoietin hematocrit polycythemia should levels. O2 RBC and Both saturation

Neurologic Renal RN”: Thrombocytopenia, “FAT dysfunction, Anemia, Fever, abnormalities.

renal and acute failure. Anemia, thrombocytopenia,

antiplatelet large-volume corticosteroids, plasmapheresis, drugs. Emergent

IVIG Usually may resolves require spontaneously; corticosteroids. and/or

elevated; platelets, are and split ↓. products D-dimer fibrinogen, and hematocrit are Fibrin

IX factor VIII A) or or supplements.

FFP, with desmopressin, disease; cryoprecipitate. or von treat Willebrand’s

skull Jones of the x-ray Monoclonal on bones. lesions proteinuria, and long “punched-out” Bence gammopathy, Hodgkin’s lymphoma. lymphoma. Non-Hodgkin’s

disease. chronic of Anemia

anemia. Iron deficiency leukemia Chronic lymphocytic (CLL).

lymphoma. lymphocytic Small crisis pancytopenia). pain, Blast bone (fever, splenomegaly,

(AML). myelogenous Acute leukemia M3.

lysis in changes Electrolyte syndrome. tumor AML M3. for Treatment bleeding. with satiety, 50-year-old early presents man and A splenomegaly, Cytogenetics t(9,22). show Diagnosis? Heinz bodies?

disorder the in platelet a ↓ with autosomal-recessive GPIIbIIIa and aggregation. platelet receptor An defect

in Virus sickle anemia. cell with patients aplastic anemia with associated

onset anemia cell sickle A pain. of 25-year-old bone African-American with sudden has man pain of Management crisis?

A of significant morbidity cause patients. thalassemia in Treatment?

↑ uric ↓ acid. ↑ phosphate, Ca2+, ↑ K+, Retinoic acid. CML.

G6PD Intracellular inclusions deficiency, in thalassemia, and seen postsplenectomy.

Glanzmann’s thrombasthenia.

Parvovirus B19.

severe, if and, analgesia, transfusion. O2, hydration,

Iron deferoxamine. use overload;

common most three The origin of of (FUO). causes unknown fever

symptoms streptococcal Four pharyngitis. signs of and A not complication by altered infection that of of treatment nonsuppurative streptococcal infection. is 1°

to are patients organisms. particularly these Asplenic susceptible specimen bacteria of UTI. diagnose on clean-catch The a number a to

to UTIs? is Which population healthy susceptible

fever, cough, from presents California night A malaise, and sweats. patient with or Arizona Diagnosis? Treatment?

Nonpainful chancre.

A muffin” is infection? congenital characteristic “blueberry rash what of

and autoimmune cancer, Infection, disease.

lack of exudate, erythema, Fever, pharyngeal tonsillar cough. glomerulonephritis. Postinfectious

organisms—pneumococcus, meningococcus, Encapsulated

uenzae, Haemophilus inﬂ Klebsiella.

105 bacteria/mL.

Pregnant women. of group because complications. Treat aggressively this potential

Coccidioidomycosis. B. Amphotericin

syphilis. 1° Rubella.

Meningitis in neonates. Causes? Treatment?

Meningitis in infants. Causes? Treatment?

LP? to be What always done should prior

CSF findings:

PMN predominance Low glucose,

lymphocytic glucose, Normal predominance

days. into regional lymphadenopathy; a with with 7–10 pruritic papule evolves Initially eschar presents after black a Treatment?

Findings syphilis. in 3°

disease. 2° Characteristics of Lyme

Cold agglutinins.

his his plaques A of and the white soft tongue presents man throat. with 24-year-old on back Diagnosis? Workup? Treatment?

HIV-positive (formerly P. at CD4 pneumonia Begin Pneumocystis an what in carinii) count? prophylaxis patient jiroveci Mycobacterium prophylaxis? avium–intracellulare (MAI)

factors pyelonephritis. for Risk

postchemotherapy. Neutropenic nadir

Erythema migrans.

endocarditis. for physical Classic findings

in Aplastic disease. sickle cell crisis

seizures. Ring-enhancing with CT lesion brain on

Listeria. Group coli, strep, B E. ampicillin. gentamicin with and Treat

uenzae. H. Pneumococcus, meningococcus, inﬂ with and vancomycin. Treat cefotaxime

ICP; papilledema. for look ↑ Check for

Cutaneous anthrax. ciproﬂ penicillin with G Treat or oxacin.

gummas, aneurysms. Argyll paresis, aortitis, Tabes dorsalis, Robertson general aortic pupil, root

Bell’s palsy, myocarditis. Arthralgias, migratory polyarthropathies,

Mycoplasma.

Candidal thrush. should test. include HIV Workup an oral suspension. nystatin Treat with

≤ (with TMP-SMX); MAI for (with 200 clarithromycin/azithromycin). jiroveci 50–100 ≤ P. for

indwelling stones. anomalies, vesicoureteral catheters, anatomic reﬂux, Pregnancy, kidney 7–10 days.

Lyme of Lesion 1° disease. Fever, lesions, Osler’s murmur, Janeway Roth’s nodes, splinter spots. heart hemorrhages,

Parvovirus B19. (cysticercosis). Taenia solium

Name the organism:

women Pregnant with pets

pneumonia Alcoholic with

and symptoms. smoker who man A a and heavy is presents new 55-year-old cough a ﬂulike a drinker with shows silver organisms; of stain stain no shows sputum rods. gram-negative Gram What diagnosis? the is

man joint palsy. Bell’s middle-aged with presents bilateral acute-onset and A monoarticular pain did diagnosis, likely get the and it? he how What is Treatment?

develops A three patient heart prosthetic after a valve. receiving weeks endocarditis organism What suspected? is

pneumonia. Legionella

doxycycline. disease, Ixodes tick, Lyme

S. or aureus epidermidis. S.

Back with standing the relieved that and of exacerbated and hips. is by walking hyperﬂexion sitting pain and

the in hand Joints rheumatoid in arthritis. affected

Joint and pain the over worsen day the course are rest. stiffness relieved and that of by

for Genetic child disorder multiple mistaken associated and with abuse. fractures commonly

improves over the activity of stiffness at Hip with pain and worsens that rest. along day and the with course back Diagnostic test?

Arthritis, young men. urethritis and in conjunctivitis, Associated organisms?

joint red MTP sudden, drinking excruciating of has 55-year-old night pain after first man wine. a A chronic Diagnosis, treatment? workup, and

Spinal stenosis.

MCP joints; joints DIP PIP are and spared.

Osteoarthritis.

Osteogenesis imperfecta.

Suspect ankylosing spondylitis. Check HLA-B27.

arthritis. (Reiter’s) Reactive Shigella, Chlamydia, and Salmonella, Campylobacter, Associated with Ureaplasma.

Gout. seen joint negatively aspirate. crystals ﬂuid Needle-shaped, birefringent are on treatment allopurinol with Chronic or probenecid.

Rhomboid-shaped, crystals on uid positively birefringent aspirate. joint ﬂ arms with woman cannot and shoulders she elderly stiffness her presents An lift the pain and her hips; head. of above ESR. Labs anemia and show ↑

An pain. boy 13-year-old knee active anterior has Diagnosis? Bone fall fractured hand. is an a outstretched on in fracture. of Complication scaphoid with radial humeral nerve damage suggesting fracture. Signs gait, young calf waddling A muscle weakness, child muscles. pronounced presents with proximal and in skin breech found is to on position was born A her asymmetric have exam. newborn first-born folds who female Diagnosis? Treatment? An African-American boy presents limp. onset of 11-year-old sudden with obese Diagnosis? Workup? malignant tumor The of 1° common bone. most

Pseudogout.

rheumatica. Polymyalgia

Osgood-Schlatter disease. radius fracture). Distal (Colles’ Avascular necrosis. thumb drop, Wrist loss of abduction. dystrophy. muscular Duchenne

of the Developmental dysplasia hip. a abduction. If to Pavlik harness severe, maintain consider

Slipped capital epiphysis. femoral lateral view. frog-leg and AP

Multiple myeloma.

and conjunctival headache severe with periorbital tearing Unilateral, erythema. for Prophylactic treatment migraine.

pituitary most The tumor. common Treatment? acute presents aphasia? A with of What type “broken speech.” patient 55-year-old vascular distribution? What lobe and

The cause most SAH. common of

that does hyperdensity the A crescent-shaped on not cross midline. CT interval. history A for significant an intervening initial lucid status altered with mental Diagnosis? Most source? likely Treatment? SAH. findings CSF with

headache. Cluster

Antihypertensives, anticonvulsants. antidepressants, Prolactinoma. Dopamine (e.g., bromocriptine). agonists aphasia. Broca’s Frontal MCA left distribution. lobe,

common berry Trauma; aneurysm. is most second the veins torn. Subdural hematoma—bridging

hematoma. Epidural artery. Middle meningeal evacuation. Neurosurgical

RBCs, ICP, Elevated xanthochromia.

dissociation. Albuminocytologic

patient’s fast nystagmus into water Cold a phase side. ear, the of and toward is opposite the the ﬂushed is Normal pathologic? or

metastases the The brain. common most 1° sources of to

children accused be ADHD. inattention of in confused who seen with in May are class and The neoplasm. presentation intracranial frequent of most in The years). children common seizures cause most of (2–10

seizures cause in common The years). most adults young (18–35 of epilepticus. medication for status First-line Confusion, confabulation, ophthalmoplegia, ataxia. is for endarterectomy? an carotid % lesion indication What common causes The of dementia. most Combined and disorder. UMN LMN with Rigidity and stiffness facies. tremor masked resting and mainstay Parkinson’s of therapy. The Treatment for Guillain-Barré syndrome. moodiness behavior. altered choreiform progress stiffness Rigidity by and that and movements, to accompanied angioma. A mental six-year-old V2 ipsilateral with with seizures, the retardation, as a and stain distribution leptomeningeal girl well as port-wine in presents

lait au Café spots skin. on hyperorality, hypersexuality, Hyperphagia, and hyperdocility. a myasthenia May be to administered gravis. to diagnose symptomatic patient

Guillain-Barré a ↑ in CSF without count). significant in protein cell (↑ syndrome

Normal.

kidney, breast, tract. (melanoma), skin Lung, GI Absence seizures.

Headache. febrile seizures, trauma, idiopathic. Infection,

tumor. brain withdrawal, alcohol Trauma,

benzodiazepine. IV a due of to thiamine. Wernicke’s deficiency encephalopathy percent is stenosis Seventy if symptomatic. the multi-infarct. Alzheimer’s and ALS. disease. Parkinson’s Levodopa/carbidopa. or plasmapheresis. IVIG disease. Huntington’s

syndrome. Sturge-Weber symptomatically. Treat focal of affected resection the cerebral lobe. Possible

1. Neurofibromatosis type Klüver-Bucy (amygdala). syndrome Edrophonium.

causes bleeding. of third-trimester 1°

complete and Classic ultrasound gross of hydatidiform mole. appearance mole. pattern complete of a Chromosomal pregnancy fetal containing tissue. Molar placental of Symptoms abruption. placenta previa. Symptoms of be When exam a placenta vaginal performed previa? suspected with should teratogenic with Antibiotics effects.

of the pelvis. Shortest diameter AP

given lung to maturity. accelerate fetal Medication postpartum of common hemorrhage. The cause most Treatment postpartum for hemorrhage. for (GBS) Typical prophylaxis. antibiotics group B streptococcus

fails blood A after marked C-section patient an with lactate loss. to emergency ruptured; gestation; no membranes Uterine cervical bleeding 18 at os products expelled; open. weeks’ bleeding cervical 18 no os weeks’ closed. expelled; Uterine products at gestation;

previa. abruption Placental placenta and

on ultrasound. Snowstorm appearance on “Cluster-of-grapes” examination. gross 46,XX. Partial mole. Continuous, painful vaginal bleeding. painless Self-limited, vaginal bleeding. Never.

sulfonamides. Tetracycline, ﬂ uoroquinolones, aminoglycosides, between promontory the and pubis. the midpoint Obstetric conjugate: symphysis sacral of the

48 Betamethasone dexamethasone × or hours. atony. Uterine fails, oxytocin. that give Uterine massage; if penicillin IV ampicillin. or

necrosis). pituitary (postpartum syndrome Sheehan’s

abortion. Inevitable

Threatened abortion.

no to D&C. estrogen-progesterone Cause normal amenorrhea prolactin, response a challenge, of and of history with syndrome. ovarian for Therapy polycystic

to ovulation. used Medication induce with postmenopausal a in Diagnostic presents who bleeding. woman step vaginal required

ectopic pregnancy. for treatment medical of Indications

Medical for options endometriosis. Laparoscopic in findings endometriosis. most an The for location common ectopic pregnancy. diagnose a follow to How leiomyoma. and Natural of leiomyoma. history a vaginal ↑ and patient patches has vagina cervix. in discharge petechial upper the A and Treatment vaginosis. bacterial for The most common cause bloody nipple of discharge. that against Contraceptive protect methods PID. cancers? estrogen Unopposed in contraindicated which is with PID with RUQ recent A presents pain. patient nipple. Breast malignancy presenting as and burning, erosion itching, the of

women ovarian cancer. history screening Annual with for strong family a of A woman or leaks urine 50-year-old when laughing coughing. Nonsurgical options?

loss. A urine woman unpredictable 30-year-old has is Examination normal. Medical options? of Lab menopause. values suggestive common of most cause female infertility. The

syndrome. Asherman’s

loss OCPs. and Weight Clomiphene citrate. biopsy. Endometrial

3.5 cm at < of weeks’ 6 gestation. ectopic unruptured pregnancy Stable, < GnRH OCPs, danazol, agonists. powder “Chocolate burns. cysts,” oviduct. of Ampulla the Ultrasound. menopause. after Regresses vaginitis. Trichomonas

Oral metronidazole. or topical papilloma. Intraductal contraception. OCPs barrier and cancer. receptor– or Endometrial estrogen breast Fitz-Hugh–Curtis Consider syndrome. disease. Paget’s

transvaginal CA-125 and ultrasound.

stress for estrogen, Kegel exercises, incontinence. pessaries

(metaproterenol) or for Anticholinergics β-adrenergics (oxybutynin) urge incontinence.

↑ serum FSH. Endometriosis.

with mass Nontender associated abdominal elevated and HVA. VMA

type most tracheoesophageal of (TEF). common The fistula Diagnosis?

Not to contraindications vaccination.

rule shaken baby Tests to out syndrome.

has meconium A ileus. neonate

after Bilious emesis first hours within feeding. the

A two-month-old baby presents emesis. with nonbilious projectile are the steps appropriate management? in What

The immunodeficiency. common most 1°

a has breaks. An rash infant as and of fever onset fever high for? What at risk he is

immunodeficiency? the is What

has infections. A boy respiratory chronic Nitroblue . is tetrazolium test

eczema, and has IgA. high A levels child thrombocytopenia, of

Pseudomonas boy A has life-threatening four-month-old infection.

disease. treatment for Kawasaki Acute-phase

and for hyperbilirubinemia. mild unconjugated Treatment severe

of status emesis, and mental onset dysfunction liver taking aspirin. after changes, Sudden

has child red of A light reﬂex. loss Diagnosis?

Neuroblastoma.

TEF (85%). with atresia Esophageal distal tube. to NG pass Unable fever, current antibiotic low-grade prematurity. and/or and illness Mild therapy,

Ophthalmologic MRI. and exam, CT, disease. CF or Hirschsprung’s Duodenal atresia. metabolic abnormalities. Correct correct stenosis pyloromyotomy. pyloric with Then Selective IgA deficiency. seizures (roseola Febrile infantum).

IVIG artery inﬂammation aneurysms. to aspirin and High-dose coronary prevent fever; for

or exchange transfusion Phototherapy (mild) (severe).

syndrome. Reye’s

Suspect retinoblastoma.

a Vaccinations six-month visit. at well-child Tanner six-year-old in 3 a stage girl. with airways epidemics of Infection winter in and spring. small Cause RDS. neonatal of A condition red stools. associated with “currant-jelly” disease hypertension. heart 2° A causes congenital that for treatment First-line otitis media. causing pathogen croup. The most common a swollen and skin belly. child small and is has A peeling his age for homeless

an with X-linked syndrome self-mutilation, gout, and choreoathetosis. mental Defect in retardation, girl has “machinery newborn A murmur.” a continuous

PCV. HBV, Hib, IPV, DTaP, puberty. Precocious bronchiolitis. RSV

deficiency. Surfactant Intussusception. aorta. Coarctation of the × Amoxicillin 10 days. type virus Parainﬂuenza 1. malnutrition). (protein Kwashiorkor

HGPRTase (purine with syndrome problem Lesch-Nyhan deficiency). salvage

arteriosus ductus Patent (PDA).

depression. for pharmacotherapy First-line

Antidepressants hypertensive associated crisis. with

Galactorrhea, impotence, menstrual and libido. ↓ dysfunction,

a left after has paralysis in her crash. car girl boyfriend arm A 17-year-old dies No is cause found. medical

defense the Name mechanism:

child. A her yells angry husband at who is her at mother

a A pedophile enters monastery.

grisly woman describes calmly A murder. a

to A bed. 10-year-old begins wet hospitalized his

rigidity, rhabdomyolysis. fever, Life-threatening muscle and

Amenorrhea, abnormal female. bradycardia, a young and in body image

SSRIs. MAOIs. dopamine antagonist. Patient on

Conversion disorder.

malignant syndrome. Neuroleptic Anorexia.

man episodes diaphoresis, fear A going of of palpitations, has and recurrent 35-year-old crazy.

side most The clozapine. of effect serious

of 21-year-old ﬂattened withdrawal, months worsening affect, three A grades, concrete and has thinking. social man

side effects of Key antipsychotics. atypical

receives lifter weight haloperidol and IV sideways. complains deviated are his eyes young that A Diagnosis? Treatment?

withdrawal alcohol to seizures. of Medication a with in avoid history patients

A 13-year-old and a family violence of history boy toward theft, vandalism, pets. has

and growth, head interaction. girl social has ↓ dyscoordination, ↓ truncal A five-month-old

speech. hasn’t for slept $20,000 gambling, agitated, patient is and has A lost pressured days, Diagnosis? Treatment?

bender, a disability. and neck a a fender permanent wears minor After requests man brace

no analysis A hypoglycemia; blood nurse C-peptide. presents with in severe elevation reveals

jail, in cocaine his and to patient being losing job, child not A continues after support. paying use

A violent nystagmus. patient horizontal has and vertical

as detached from a her woman or was body. outside frequently child who A abused of feels

passengers rub intense against on a urges has man A body unsuspecting to bus. repeated, his

uncontrollable one schizophrenic develops year for and A haloperidol patient tongue takes movements. Diagnosis? Treatment?

no unexpectedly and life. country, across the man has name, memory ﬂies takes a of new prior A his

disorder. Panic

Agranulocytosis.

disorder schizophrenia months of (diagnosis requires of ≥ symptoms). 6 Schizophreniform prolongation. QT Weight gain, type 2 DM, (oculogyric Acute dystonia crisis). benztropine with or diphenhydramine. Treat

Neuroleptics.

Conduct disorder.

disorder. Rett’s

mania. Acute Start (e.g., stabilizer a lithium). mood

Malingering.

Factitious (Munchausen syndrome). disorder

abuse. Substance

Phencyclidine (PCP) intoxication. hydrochloride disorder. Depersonalization

Frotteurism paraphilia). (a

Tardive dyskinesia. consider clozapine). (e.g., or haloperidol and antipsychotic discontinue another ↓ risperidone,

Dissociative fugue.

DVT. factors Risk for

exudative for effusion. Criteria exudative of effusion. Causes

of transudative effusion. Causes

indicate? may ACE, and lymphadenopathy ↑ on hilar noncaseating CXR, lateral granulomas, hypercalcemia. Dyspnea,

↓ PFTs showing FEV1/FVC. PFTs showing FEV1/FVC. ↑ CXR. Honeycomb pattern on Diagnosis? Treatment?

for syndrome. Treatment SVC asthma. Treatment for persistent mild, exacerbation. COPD Treatment for

Treatment for chronic COPD.

disorder pulmonary in embolism. Acid-base

lung (NSCLC) cancer hypercalcemia. cell associated with Non–small associated with cancer SIADH. Lung related cancer exposure. to cigarette Lung highly A with tall breath. male presents of white shortness acute

Diagnosis? Treatment? tension of Treatment pneumothorax.

injury, triad). Stasis, and (Virchow’s endothelial hypercoagulability

0.6. > > pleural/serum protein 0.5; LDH Pleural/serum capillaries. leaky Think of and with viral pulmonary pancreatitis. Malignancy, infection, or bacterial embolism infarct, TB,

intact of Think capillaries. protein-losing or disease, and liver CHF, enteropathy. kidney Fatigue failure. respiratory and impending

Sarcoidosis.

pulmonary disease asthma). Obstructive (e.g., pulmonary disease. Restrictive Diffuse pulmonary interstitial fibrosis. Supportive care.

help. Steroids may Radiation. Inhaled β-agonists and corticosteroids. inhaled bronchodilators, corticosteroids antibiotics, cessation. with smoking taper, O2, or vaccines. O2, corticosteroids, cessation, anticholinergics, pneumococcal ﬂu and systemic Smoking inhaled home β-agonists, hypocarbia (respiratory Hypoxia alkalosis). and carcinoma. cell Squamous

cell Small lung cancer (SCLC). SCLC. Spontaneous pneumothorax. regression. Spontaneous

O2 helpful. be may Supplemental thoracostomy. Immediate needle

in an carcinoma pulmonary isolated Characteristics favoring nodule.

pulmonary capillary Hypoxemia and edema pulmonary wedge pressure. normal with

asbestos Sequelae of exposure.

infection with of ↑ risk what silicosis? hypoxemia. Causes of

edema. Classic pulmonary for findings CXR

calcification Age larger margins. to lesions 45–50 of films; in new > calcification; irregular 2 comparison or or cm; years; old > size absence irregular

ARDS.

(mass fibrosis, (pleural Pulmonary mass). field), lung in mesothelioma plaques, bronchogenic pleural carcinoma

Mycobacterium tuberculosis.

Right-to-left V/Q diffusion mismatch. low defect, tension, hypoventilation, O2 inspired shunt,

vessels, hilar peribronchial appearance Kerley cuffing. and and B perivascular Cardiomegaly, “bat’s-wing” prominent shadows, lines, pulmonary of

tubular associated H+ Renal secretion and (RTA) abnormal nephrolithiasis. acidosis with

associated abnormal with RTA rickets. and HCO3

defect. associated aldosterone with RTA “Doughy” Differential skin hypervolemic of hyponatremia. signs. Chvostek’s and Trousseau’s of causes The hypercalcemia. common most T-wave ﬂattening U waves. and QRS. T Peaked widened and waves for treatment hypercalcemia. First-line moderate of a < 1%. in FeNa patient with ARF Type with hematuria. acute-onset pain 49-year-old A ﬂank presents man and common nephrolithiasis. of type most The mass a 20-year-old and presents with hematuria. palpable ﬂank man A bilateral cysts. with enlarged shows kidneys Ultrasound brain Associated anomaly?

(distal) I RTA. Type

II Type RTA. (proximal) Type (distal) IV RTA. Hypernatremia. nephritic Cirrhosis, syndrome. CHF, Hypocalcemia. hyperparathyroidism. Malignancy and Hypokalemia. Hyperkalemia. IV (furosemide). hydration diuretics and loop Prerenal. Nephrolithiasis.

Calcium oxalate. aneurysms Cerebral (autosomal-dominant PCKD). berry

Hematuria, and hypertension, oliguria.

hyperlipiduria, Proteinuria, hyperlipidemia, and hypoalbuminemia, edema. most The form syndrome. of nephritic common common The glomerulonephritis. most of form deafness. with Glomerulonephritis Glomerulonephritis with hemoptysis. of casts in cell urine Presence red sediment. sediment. Eosinophils urine in casts urine lipiduria). and (seen crosses with Maltese in sediment Waxy asterixis, and a Drowsiness, nausea, rub. friction pericardial man 55-year-old diagnosed cancer. A with prostate is

Treatment options?

Low serum osmolality. high in of presence urine specific gravity the of SIADH? Treatment and Hematuria, ﬂank pain, palpable ﬂank mass. Testicular AFP. associated with cancer β-hCG, most common cancer. testicular of The type cancer. histology of most The bladder common Complication rapid correction of overly of hyponatremia. type ingestion occurs what in disorder? acid-base Salicylate of Acid-base seen commonly pregnant disturbance in women. lead Three systemic that syndrome. diseases nephrotic to normal hematocrit, suggest? erythropoietin O2 level, saturation elevated Elevated and urinary and male irritative obstructive with symptoms. 55-year-old presents A Treatment options?

syndrome. Nephritic Nephrotic syndrome.

glomerulonephritis. Membranous (Berger’s IgA disease). nephropathy syndrome. Alport’s Wegener’s Goodpasture’s granulomatosis syndrome. and Glomerulonephritis/nephritic syndrome. interstitial Allergic nephritis. Nephrotic syndrome.

in renal patients Uremic syndrome seen with failure.

and/or suppression. surgical androgen Wait, radiation resection, Diabetes insipidus.

demeclocycline. Fluid restriction, (RCC). Renal cell carcinoma Choriocarcinoma. type cell tumor. germ a of Seminoma, carcinoma. Transitional cell myelinolysis. Central pontine alkalosis to 1° acidosis due stimulation. Anion respiratory respiratory gap central and alkalosis. Respiratory SLE, and DM, amyloidosis. evaluate other or RCC tumor; erythropoietin-producing with

CT scan. Likely BPH. (TURP). surgical or include terazosin, no intervention finasteride, treatment, Options

autonomic of and cause instability, that syndrome rigidity, symptoms. extrapyramidal may drugs hyperthermia, muscle Class of

Side effects corticosteroids. of

Treatment DTs. for acetaminophen overdose. for Treatment for overdose. opioid Treatment overdose. for benzodiazepine Treatment syndrome neuroleptic hyperthermia. Treatment malignant malignant for and hypertension. for Treatment malignant atrial fibrillation. Treatment of tachycardia. of supraventricular Treatment

Causes drug-induced of SLE.

anemia with megaloblastic Macrocytic, symptoms. neurologic megaloblastic anemia Macrocytic, symptoms. without neurologic

with and presents patient ﬂushed coma. A burn skin cherry-red is SaO2 but normal, is carboxyhemoglobin elevated. Treatment?

or urethral high-riding prostate. meatus in the Blood injury. to Test out rule urethral or of dissection. disruption evidence Radiographic aortic

abdomen. acute for indications in patients surgery Radiographic with

syndrome). (neuroleptic Antipsychotics malignant

bruising, skin, mania, immunosuppression, myopathies. thin easy osteoporosis, Acute Benzodiazepines. N-acetylcysteine. Naloxone. Flumazenil. Dantrolene.

Nitroprusside. rhythm control, Rate conversion, anticoagulation. and adenosine. other stable, If unsuccessful, or control rate stimulation; carotid massage vagal with consider if

quinidine. procainamide, hydralazine, INH, penicillamine, methyldopa, chlorpromazine, B12 deficiency.

Folate deficiency.

pregnant. the or poisoning if or patient O2 is O2 with CO with Treat hyperbaric 100% poisoning severe is

rupture Bladder urethral injury. or

cystourethrogram. Retrograde

main left cap, stem loss aortic mediastinum pleural deviation tracheal (> depression 8 knob, the of bronchus. right, to cm), of Widened

space-occupying (angiography). distention, diaphragm, mesenteric contrast, Free of extravasation occlusion under lesion (CT), air the severe bowel

in infections. most organism common burn-related The repletion of in Method patients. ﬂuid burn calculating patient. a trauma Acceptable output in urine output urine stable in a patient. Acceptable waves. Cannon “a” shock. neurogenic of Signs Signs of ICP ↑ triad). (Cushing’s

resistance (PCWP), capillary peripheral CO, (PVR). wedge pulmonary pressure vascular ↓

↑ PCWP, PVR. ↑ CO,

PVR. ↓ ↓ CO, PCWP, of shock. Treatment septic cardiogenic shock. of Treatment shock. Treatment hypovolemic of of Treatment anaphylactic shock. ARDS. treatment Supportive for air embolism. Signs of

Trauma series.

Pseudomonas.

formula. Parkland 50 cc/hr. cc/hr. 30 block. heart Third-degree and bradycardia. Hypotension bradycardia, and Hypertension, abnormal respirations. Hypovolemic shock.

obstructive) (or Cardiogenic shock. anaphylactic Septic or shock. Fluids antibiotics. and (e.g., dopamine). Identify pressors cause; cause; Identify blood repletion. and ﬂuid 1:1000. epinephrine or Diphenhydramine Continuous airway pressure. positive was dies. patient trauma chest who stable with A suddenly previously chest, AP/lateral AP C-spine, AP pelvis.

review courses Step and is USMLE to database for books, examination recommended This marketed medical books, section the CK. commercial science studying a sample of students review 2 clinical Test Current Approximate Copyright Price, Format the the of the Year, Number we list the the the First editor), (or of Pages, the of the List and Number each For book, Edition, Publisher, the Title Code, the ISBN the Author the book, book, Questions. of for the describe style Comments utility Most entries also that include studying. Summary each of book and a receives Finally, Rating. each book are into to surgery). six sections as comprehensive sorted OB/GYN, and as corresponding into psychiatry, books clinical neurology, the well pediatrics, (internal disciplines The medicine, a section each then finally Title. Rating, are by books Within by arranged section, by and first Author,

in-depth more with edition USMLE database 100 revised, 2 than software. Step For the been seventh First Aid has on and review books the books for of completely this comments summary CK, of grades detailed scale student rating with A reﬂects different the letter six evaluations. as Each receives rating book follows: a

in exam. overall the meant preparing to Rating Step CK usefulness 2 book reﬂect for of is the The USMLE the based factors, a including: This on is of number

cost of book the The

of the readability text The

accuracy and The appropriateness of the book

number The sample and quality questions of

questions quality to sample of written answers The

quality of (e.g., photographs) diagrams, appropriateness the The and illustrations graphs,

is not text the of length (longer better) necessarily The

The of other discipline number books in same available and quality the

Step of the The USMLE CK on exam discipline 2 importance the

quality 2 rating USMLE Step the that for not other of the purposes the book does for Please CK the reﬂect reviewing than note exam. books are with boards low not preparation. but well informative for are and ratings written Many ideal clinical avoided variety We textbooks the wide or have the available commenting on listing general also sciences. of in

across on of country. schools surveys of the formal from and results medical are medical of informal students the based hundreds Evaluations cumulative on consensus The represent but and may large feedback particular overall been opinions ratings a limited summary there student any range a have opinion, book. comments of or

data Please are because: that listed note subject change to the

change frequently. Publishers’ prices

bookstores additional markup. charge Individual often an

out frequently, updating come varies. of editions New and the quality

be same another reissued book through publisher. The may

database we to encourage that Contribute,” their faculty review science medical of and students update We (see opinions books “How these our p. clinical actively so may ratings submit xv). to and submit ask our new and in In that books clinical including authors editions for of evaluation. included and review we science publishers review copies database, books, not addition, also courses, as tutorials, suggestions new ﬂash the Web Internet or useful for solicit that alternate be We for preparing computer-based review of in modes commercial study of such books may sites. and cards, examination, reviews

ratings, in publisher. inﬂuence including the book, this the opinion or of No reﬂects the material brought will publisher. corrected be if the through omissions the of All gladly to the errors and authors attention

2006, Lippincott 546 & pages, Williams 3rd ISBN ed., 9781405105095 Wilkins,

with medicine. various the format, key information concise A in outline book presented packed fields across of Very Pros: high yield. nice tables charts. Makes and of use and review. quick study last-minute for Good Useful well, pocket. fits the as on and in wards a print. Small Cons: topics. tremendously covers detailed, but Not many books More explanation. required for in-depth are further lacks but good, comprehensive detail. Summary: A review, some

2nd & pages, Belfus, 2004, 15 Hanley Includes in test 750 ed., 350 questions vignette-style blocks. ISBN 9781560536109 Questions real and based good case are questions. Pros: offer a boards approximation of Questions but terse high-yield explanations adequate. are cover and topics, laboratory associated images Many findings. questions and also include who require may Cons: an review topics. be for not certain in-depth those of Explanations adequate mock format. Summary: vignette-type exam questions Excellent in

ed., Belfus, 9781560536086 ISBN 2nd Hanley pages, 2004, 250 &

Typical answers by with and Secrets-series questions format, specialty. organized many concise A Pros: review topics. high-yield of good smears, Makes photos, blood images, of and radiographs. patient use including clinical common clinical that diagnose and pearls Gives clinical presentations. help differentiate Cons: clinical the questions on be Contains wards. posed simply vignettes; might that lists no follow 2 format. CK Does not Step Expensive. that by Content with other of Brochert. books overlaps a “downtime.” formal substitute page excellent through tests. for during to or periods review brief book Summary: not Does practice An of book a stresses quick, easy relevant A format. in that portable topics

Review Test/750 q $39.95 $39.95 $35.95 Review

CK Cases Aid 2 the Review First $41.95 USMLE Step for

ed., 272 exam. of vignettes Step McGraw-Hill, 9780071464116 2 for 2006, A high-yield CK 1st pages, ISBN LE the clinical review provide Cases format. high-yield detailed to are easy-to-follow and topics Pros: an answers in arranged diagnosis, likely and Emphasizes the next step, initial most management the answers. given or treatment. either Some Cons: topics are only brief covered not Summary: case presentations A vignette-style as boardsrelevant on a text answers, review. review with but emphasis sufficient stand-alone and not for good

topics, high-yield many of Step by spe-cialty. Mosby, review comprehensive A 2007, ISBN 2 3rd B+Crush organized 352 9781416029762 ed., BROCHERT pages, good key emphasis on Pros: points. Places easy The conversational is style read. to use Makes good of charts diagrams. and books. topics surgical in Covers similar than more depth Cons: Not compre-hensive. practice no questions Contains vignettes. or for preparation. to sufficiently detailed be Step alone CK 2 used Not Summary: and review solid topics. tested key frequently of A points practice be tests. other Should review with and supplemented material probably specialty by McGraw-Hill, USMLE pages, 9780071494007 exams. 2 Step along ed., Q&A: Review CHAN B+Lange practice 2008, $39.95 organized comprehen-sive 6th questions 440 two with Review ISBN with is good, coverage topics. question high-yield Pros: broad of content Overall illustrated. Well Cons: Vignettes with brief, explanations. short are detailed more CK Step questions Some 2 than questions. actual are questions Well suited of Summary: on high-yield virtue review spe-cialty review focused topics. by to overall good the buy for of A questions. number Step B+Lange McGraw-Hill, 288 GOLDBERG ISBN USMLE Tests: q test 2005, 3rd Practice questions. pages, 9780071446167 ed., Test/1000+ 2 $44.95 Comprehensive all ques-tions topics. Pros: A covering high-yield great source of pathology. ra-diographs Many clinically of questions relevant and include photographs explanations. Offers adequate boards Some are Cons: reﬂ vignette and format. questions do style not ect not some but questions reﬂect A do questions on of that compilation focus style. still material, high-yield boards not good test Summary: supplemental of good source questions. A q Test/900 $44.95

2 USMLE Review NMS Step Test/900 $46.95 CK for q

A Lippincott 654 Williams review Wilkins, format. 2006, question-and-answer pages, 9780781765220 in 3rd comprehensive ed., & book ISBN presented and Pros: CK similar the Step clear, topics, coverage broad 2 format that in Offers concise, of actual high-yield exam. to of a Complete explanations. the Cons: needed for boards. Questions detailed than are more or Lacks illustrations images. Step A good with on exam. actual the detailed may but be format those than content, more questions of Summary: questions source and CK–style appropriate 2

surgery, psychiatry, Step A color set Williams case OB/GYN, supplement. & Lippincott Vignettes: neurology, and 2 Wilkins; along the specialties, internal pediatrics, ISBN 256 clinical Clinical 9780781763639 Bundle emergency KIM various scenarios at-las medicine, pages, an containing B+Underground of 4th with medicine, 2007, in-cluding extensive ed., and epidemiology, focus by diseases. Well points: associated pathogenesis, management, complications, organized Pros: portable texts. Small, for Not Cons: best a as comprehensive; review. used supple-ment Organized easy-to-read Summary: vi-gnettes. and clinical not to supplement a sufficient it-self. by Excellent but studying, as economical nine-volume volumes. than individual More purchase set the to format, by Step-Up VAN organized test A typical to & Step ed., 2nd 9780781771566 the system. Wilkins, KLEUNEN pages, Lippincott ISBN 2007, of Step 2 $159.95 B+Step-Up 2 USMLE 352 CK review series Review Williams quick boards with page resource the review information or-ganizing margins. facts the and Pros: isolated A many tables concise in and but Not organization. a exam of most topics very good serves source study covers as Cons: boards detailed, CK for 2 with com-prehensive review fea-tures. Summary: A good, Step quick-study many exam the Review $39.95

review McGraw-Hill, comprehensive GOLDBERG B Outline pages, A clini-cal book Step 2 ISBN with 9780071451925 boards Review: by chapters ed., 650 5th 2006, organized USMLE discipline. Lange comprehensive topics Pros: of review coverage clinical A extensive in-depth an source with and each. organized, of review low-yield topics. some Cons: Covers figures, Includes or relatively tables. few images, Step Summary: re-view for A the single-source, CK solid, exam. comprehensive 2 Simple CARL B−USMLE Step Review the 2006, exam. 2 MedMaster, CK for ed., ISBN 356 3rd Step topics 9780940780729 of $41.95 2 Ridiculously review pages, A Made general out-line discussions. in tables Presented brief and format with quick Pros: review. A might Useful ophthalmol-ogy, in overlooked—e.g., dermatology, and that be ENT. areas otherwise for Helpful last-minute review. lists. details substantive in does memorization provide tabular not aids but The the of format Cons: too found it Some simple. have alone for used but re-view. Highlights Summary: should topics, be not high-yield most Review $29.95

Kaplanmedical.com

A of a test Step bank. for review, programs online including CK 2 compilation large topic be Questions to Pros: simulate the randomly or arranged by real exam. can timed Tests boards are conditions. to simulate an questions in of number Includes vignette format. extensive The boards of reﬂects questions content test. the level national and reports average are each the question. now for text Explanations the thorough, identify weak students points. and to Allows strong Very expensive. Cons: for watch Online be periods of extensive time. can difficult lectures to good of be questions but may many. A source the thorough with price prohibitive Summary: explanations, for

USMLERx.com

2600 test 2 Qmax A questions. CK bank with Step more than well Step faculty done experts. by who Written then on CK Pros: students have 2 the reviewed by exam; Offers highly comprehensive explanations. resource newer Cons: A still that evolving. is bank A Summary: source. great question excellent from New, feedback been thus students far. has but

USMLEWorld.com

with A bank more than questions. 2000 test Kaplan Similar bank. the to test well-written Pros: questions with Features explanations. than Cheaper Kaplan. the an tend Questions this exam, those find advantage students but preparation. on difficult actual many than be more to during Cons: Some questions are picky. overly Kaplan. is questions than An Summary: that excellent cheaper source of

USMLEasy.com

and comprehensive than questions explanations. 3300 bank test with more A in Similar the above. bank question described style to Kaplan Pros: of Features a number large questions. Mimics format. CBT the than Kaplan. Cheaper is free often through Access medical libraries. actual more obscure those Cons: Questions appearing exam. than can the on be PreTest review Questions of with overlap the of series books. those shelf for in fair A be source that preparation review, may questions Summary: good of especially exams. for clerkship supplemental

comprehensive in-ternal A Medicine to of AGABEGI topics in organized and Lippincott in tested Wilkins, A−Step-Up review commonly pages, an 2nd ISBN ed., 560 9780781771535 format. diseases Williams medicine, & 2008, outline and a and interpreting x-rays, an exam appendix Includes on atlas ECGs, find-ings. color physical synthesize Very diagrams tables informative comprehensive, Pros: with information. to and help being that Includes occasional the discussed. topic correlate vignettes clinical with are page. facts included in margins to the Quick remember each of Very Cons: lengthy. 2 Geared toward CK more preparation review. than clerkship Step A the lengthy detailed but and exam. good be CK 2 wards, the packed for may too useful for that Summary: is with Step information book A medicine NIRULA of 9780781781695 Review review A−High-Yield 2006, Internal Lippincott core ISBN outline Williams $42.95 & ed., 3rd format. internal Wilkins, in 128 pages, Medicine Pros: on high-yield and Focuses symptoms. diseases A easy quick read. and Cons: comprehensive. Not and no index. has Lacks illustrations many review for quick in A Summary: fast allows that format re-petitive a presented good, and reading. a primary as study a source. used supplement, not Best as $26.95 Review

Aid Clerkship Medicine Review First the $42.95 for

high-yield review A pages, ed., diseases. and of 9780071448758 2005, 416 symptoms 2nd McGraw-Hill, ISBN and organized mnemonics. algorithms, is diagrams, comprehensive good well symptom with by that Pros: review A illustrations, scenarios, suited in prefer readers not who text May Cons: information form. be to arranged May be certain topics. too for basic its for review excellent, who of prefer those medicine concise Summary: An format.

Clinical Medicine Review $22.95 Vignettes: Underground Emergency

review & 2007, Lippincott pages, vignette–based ed., ISBN 4th of 256 Wilkins, emergency topics. A medicine 9780781768344 clinical Williams Well by management, and complications, diseases. pathogenesis, Pros: focus organized epidemiology, associated points: Vignettes’ and links Atlases. illustrated, “minicases” Clinical the Basic Underground Well Color to and Clinical Science high-yield includes and used as comprehensive; supplement. best Cons: a Not studying. organized and An easy-to-read Summary: to supplement

Internal Vols. Vignettes: Medicine, Clinical Underground II I and

ISBN 9780781768351, & Williams 9780781768368 ed., 2007, 4th pages 256 Lippincott Wilkins, each,

vignette–based topics common clinical review in medicine. of internal A management, focus Well epidemiology, Pros: by complications, organized points: and diseases. pathogenesis, associated questions. boards-style the Vignettes mirror of presentation a Cons: Not best as used supplement. comprehensive; organized Summary: supplement An to studying. and easy-to-read

Williams pages, 2006, & ed., 425 9781405104913 2nd Wilkins, ISBN Lippincott

compendium A by cases of and arranged followed questions answers. vignette-type symptom, related by series. the An excellent Pros: to companion Blueprints cases. Focuses on high-yield a to read Easy of and good review with management. illustrations nice Not comprehensive; for review. a as Cons: use supplement to 2 Better than to the clerkship CK suited Step exam. preparation Summary: organized An supplement. and easy-to-read Adds clinical correlates the to Blueprints series. the with used Blueprints text. Best

Belfus, 2004, pages, A ISBN Hanley ed., 4th Secrets series. typical 9781560533870 608 question-and-answer of & text the great relevant deal Covers of Pros: a information. clinically given Concise pearls, aids. with are memory tips, and answers Cons: lengthy and review. for detailed Too USMLE review. Summary: a Not focused wards appropriate May use. for be more

q $39.95 Test/200 $22.95 $29.95 each Review Review

BERGIN presented standard Lippincott B pages, & Recall-series organized A question-and-answer Recall 832 3rd Medicine by specialty. book review Wilkins, ed., 9780781794145 Williams ISBN format, 2007, in medical broad Pros: of topics. a Addresses clinical range high-yield self-quizzing. Presented format that in good a is for detail. Appropriate level of Cons: time significant requires Contains or images; vignettes no commitment. exam. simulates not rounds, on ques-tions on CK asked the those Step 2 Style wards than in that style may be conducive to Written Summary: a more boards preparation. to supplement Best to a other resources. as used CATERINO Emergency ISBN collection Publishing, 250 emergencies Blackwell of B short, summaries 2003, ed., $39.95 1st and 344 tests, pages, Medicine in Review disposition. diag-nostic A differential 9781405103572 A Page of treatment, etiology, of medical In diagnosis, one-page terms discussed presentation, and Pros: yield. high Concise in ER. emergencies Covers seen of variety wide a the and crowded Cons: somewhat The confusing. text is diagrams. or no images Contains during Step the be not 2 but for clerkship, review. for medicine Summary: emergency appropriate use Good may CK Review Blueprints by pages, CHANG Wilkins, 2006, of A Williams B Medicine ISBN Cases questions 437 and vignette-type answers. 2nd & arranged 9781405104951 by symptom, Clinical followed compendium $34.95 ed., cases Family in related Lippincott Pros: to series. companion An excellent Blueprints the cases. high-yield on Focuses to illustrations a review read management. and Easy with of nice good used Cons: best Not for supplement as compre-hensive; review. a and organized easy-to-read An supplement. Summary: Blueprints to correlates series. clinical Adds the Best Blueprints the if text. used with $34.95 q Test/200

of diseases 200 and 2001, tests, reviews One-page Medicine ISBN B epi-demiology, Elsevier, diagnosis, Pearls 249 Internal pages, etiology, prognosis. ed., signs/symptoms, diagnostic 2nd than discussed treatment, by 9781560534044 HEFFNER differential more common information concise diseases. on review and Pros: fast of A high-yield diagrams. images crowded any without or onto Text is page one Cons: but be for exam. study comprehensive CK Summary: not Step for the 2 wards, quick on enough Useful the may A SHINAR Blueprints 276 ed., hundred Wilkins, Williams 2 Review ISBN Q 9781405103893 Two Step Medicine & 2nd questions. Lippincott 2004, vignette-style B $41.95 pages, & Pros: companion A to Blueprints the series. nice Focuses high-yield topics. on follow. to easy are Explanations re-view. for a comprehensive; as Not supplement best used Cons: given Expensive; the cost book. few includes of the questions organized An Summary: easy-to-read supplement. and Blueprints series. the clinical correlates Adds to B pages, of review high-yield Test/200 9780071448734 Aid ISBN the McGraw-Hill, and q for STEAD Medicine symptoms Clerkship diseases. First $19.95 Emergency 2006, ed., A 416 2nd comprehensive review; by diagrams, good well algorithms, organized scenarios, symptom illustrations, Pros: with mnemonics. and A be information prefers in form. Cons: arranged text the suited May reader to who not for high-yield An Summary: sufficient a of nice for review of for preparation, topics excellent but Step not the emergency exam. CK stand-alone 2 review 2 CK medicine presentation and Step in Blueprints organized of and A common 9780781788700 symptoms. internal ed., diseases ISBN Review medicine, Medicine 5th $42.95 Lippincott YOUNG B text 2009, & Wilkins, by 448 pages, Williams common review Includes a ex-planations. question-and-answer section with for review easy A Pros: concise well-organized, that reading. makes symptoms for helpful. Differential are diagnoses and good diagrams. Contains charts Cons: few Offers illustrations. Contains and be are purposes. to for too some broad some simplistic testing details, and useful superﬂuous areas illustrated, for review boards Summary: medicine. a Poorly good primary internal but $38.95 q Review/Test/100

Test/500 Medicine PreTest $26.95 q

by 2006, ed., question-and-answer pages, A format 11th subspecialty. medical organized ISBN 9780071455534 356 McGraw-Hill, areas. by helps subspecialty Organization readers Pros: pinpoint weak a vignette-style substantial with explanations. Offers of detailed questions number the questions Many are Cons: are exam. for and boards more detailed geared shelf toward than more needed the illustrations. Few review source challenging of questions. solid Summary: A

neurology & A and 9780781796859 of ed., a Williams DRISLANE exam. pages, brief A−Blueprints 2009, in symptom disease ISBN 256 Lippincott Neurology with 3rd by Wilkins, review a Pros: remaining Reviews discipline high-yield of easy follow. complex topics to while images, tables, use good of and Makes diagrams. the CK. both found 2 to Step Questions the those exam exam and shelf in on are similar Cons: Lengthy. 2 material of review and the exam. high-yield An Step the CK wards for Summary: excellent neurology. pages, ANSCHEL ed., of ISBN 9780071597920 Neurology Review McGraw-Hill, 352 review B+PreTest question-and-answer A 2009, $37.95 7th of Pros: vignettes. topics neurology good cov-erage clinical thorough of a with Offers number topics appropriate Places explana-tions answers. common thorough emphasis on and of head common might Good interpreting for be practice CTs/ that tested. MRIs needed be for more de-tailed may Cons: the boards. than Some questions review questions Summary: of may for be boards source A neurology, detailed rapid test too for of review. good but Test/500 q $26.95

Lippincott KIM & vignette–based 2007, Clinical Wilkins, in 256 9780781768375 Williams Vignettes: Neurology A B+Underground pages, ed., high-yield review ISBN topics neurology. clinical of 4th complications, Pros: organized by epidemiology, pathogenesis, focus points: Well associated diseases. and management, Well supplement, treatments. includes a “minicases,” links up-dated and to color and atlas illustrated, Cons: as best used a review. for comprehensive; supple-ment Not easy-to-read An and organized supplement Summary: to studying. review dedicated neurology. a Lengthy of for $22.95 pages, format. Neurology Lippincott ed., & 2003, Review MILLER question-and-answer 9780781745888 Recall ISBN B Williams 377 2nd Brief Wilkins, it Reviews Pros: self-quizzing. many important facts, for useful making Cons: Not a comprehensive review. lacks Lengthy and illustrations. integrated. not Concepts are stand-alone a Sum-mary: of for not review Good resource this concepts, topic. for high-yield some but $36.95 Review

ROLAK book Secrets-series presented 480 review 2004, pages, ed., 4th B 9781560536215 Elsevier, in Neurology format. A ISBN Secrets question-and-answer topics. A Pros: many concise review high-yield of of use clinical Makes good images. clinical Cons: be of on vignettes; that Contains wards. posed might offers questions the lists instead, no Lacks information. structured and out format, leaves a important lengthy. expensive Relatively and reference book. Not a or Overall, good study, does and substitute formal for review a self-quizzing not for content but practice tests. Summary: boards for More review. than clerkship appropriate for Cases 9781405104944 390 pages, & B Clinical SHETH $45.95 by Williams symptom, Vignette-type by ques-tion and followed in 2006, organized 2nd cases Wilkins, ed., answers. related Lippincott Neurology ISBN Review Blueprints series. the sub-specialty Blueprints Pros: excellent to companion An Focuses high-yield cases. on a management. Easy of to read, and il-lustrations nice good review with Not Cons: a comprehensive; as supplement. best used illustrations. Offers few read. Organized to and easy Summary: Adds to correlates Blueprints series. clinical the $29.95 Review

Wilkins, Gynecology and 368 pages, tables A−Blueprints Lippincott 5th & review text 9780781782494 ed., Williams with Obstetrics CALLAHAN 2008, and in A ISBN illustrations. a Includes with exam short explanations. classic text, diagrams, topics and Pros: with clear strong high-yield emphasis Places concise illustrations. on many Makes for easy reading. and 2 clinical CK Appropriate clerkship preparation. both Step for Some enough. not some detailed Cons: topics overly are detailed, are while and choice a wards preparation. Overall, for good Summary: boards 418 Williams $38.95 pages, arranged Cases Vignette-type in 9781405104906 Lippincott and Gynecology followed cases ISBN & Review/Test/100 ques-tions symptom, CAUGHEY Obstetrics related Clinical q by 2006, and A−Blueprints by ed., answers. 2nd Wilkins, the An Blueprints excellent to Pros: se-ries. companion high-yield cases. on Focuses review a read, good and to management. Easy of with illustrations nice as Not comprehensive; a best Cons: used supplement. organized sup-plement. Summary: and easy-to-read An Blueprints correlates to series. clinical the Adds A− $29.95 q Test/200

Clinical Underground Review Vignettes: $22.95 OB/GYN

Lippincott ISBN 2007, Wilkins, 256 9780781768405 & ed., 4th pages, Williams

gynecology. and obstetrics frequently tested in A clinical review vignette–style diseases of pathogenesis, management, and Well associated Pros: by focus epidemiology, diseases. organized points: complications, illustrated. Well that high-yield easy read facts. An stresses as Not supplement. Cons: a comprehensive; used best Summary: vignettes. practice Wellorganized easy-to-read and

tables Obstetrics ISBN Wilkins, 6th 2007, pages, detailed and A 9780781770712 OB/GYN diagrams. outline with Gynecology B+NMS PFEIFER and of & Williams ed., Lippincott 496 few review boards. Pros: wards A and both comprehensive for explanations. The complete final exam good offers is relatively and Cons: dense and lengthy. is review The OB/GYN the boards not reﬂect questions Many do format. illustrations. Lacks A and discussions. with complete Summary: review ques-tions re-view. than for studying clerkship for Better boards and topics Williams B+High-Yield Obstetrics ISBN high-yield SAKALA A review Review/Test/500 in 208 ed., 2nd Wilkins, Lippincott & q format. $48.95 pages, 9780781796309 Gynecology 2005, of outline key scenarios chapter highlight points. Clinical of end at the each of Easy topics. high-yield good read, to discussion a with Pros: Cons: contains questions. depth no Lacks and practice but quick review. Summary: A superficial $26.95 Review B+B+

OB/GYN for Aid the Clerkship First

of and review diseases. ISBN pages, 304 McGraw-Hill, symptoms ed., 9780071448741 2nd 2006, high-yield A review and Pros: nice with algorithms, charts, diagrams, comprehensive A images, mnemonics. review. Lengthy Cons: lengthy too boards excellent review. OB/ GYN, but Summary: An review of for

Obstetrics Gynecology and Files: Case

ISBN 9780071605809 ed., 3rd 456 pages, 2009, McGraw-Hill,

questions OB/GYN A review answers format with case in following each of and vignette. Cases an reﬂect easy-to-follow and arranged topics high-yield in format. are Pros: are treatment. Cons: topics covered either given Some or brief not only Contains few images. diagrams and topic. Lengthy and time-consuming one for Explanations are terse. format, CK the vignette A 2 of be too Step good review may for Summary: review. detailed subject clinical but in

$32.95 Review Review $42.95

Wilkins, questions. & & Obstetrics TRAN 2004, ISBN 2 Q Williams Gynecology A ed., vignette-style & Lippincott Step 168 2nd One 9781405103909 hundred pages, B+Blueprints Blueprints series. nice Pros: A companion the to topics. high-yield on Focuses Explanations easy are follow. to Cons: used comprehensive; best supplement Not a re-view. for as Sparse images. Some boards-like. questions not and are esoteric Summary: well-organized supplement. easy-to-read and A series. to correlates Adds clini-cal Blueprints the Secrets-series B Test/200 9780323034159 q within $19.95 review organized question-and-answer Mosby, format, Secrets Gynecology BADER A presented ed., pages, 2004, book ISBN Obstetrics and topic OB/GYN. 3rd in by 448 topics. high-yield, relevant many coverage of Offers clinically good Pros: be detailed to Cons: Too rapid for useful review. Contains or few no illustrations and vignettes images. does Summary: not as but Good content, clinical topic review. for-mal serve a Better clerkship during CK than for use preparation. Step for 2 explanations 355 review PreTest ISBN Obstetrics question-and-answer detailed $31.95 B SCHNEIDER and for McGraw-Hill, 12th OB/GYN. ed., Review pages, with 9780071599795 Gynecology A 2009, Pros: be studying subtopic may by Organization areas. weak for useful Good emphasis. content Generally well illustrated. Some detailed. Cons: too difficult or ques-tions are 2 than are more simplistic Step shorter questions and Vignette-based those CK. on the to study, addressing of weakness. A decent for topic especially source questions areas Summary: of specific supplement q A & 2007, Wilkins, style. pages, and ed., Williams Test/500 BOURGEOIS Recall presented 3rd 608 Gynecology Lippincott Recall-series B−Obstetrics in $26.95 review book standard 9780781770699 ISBN question-and-answer the makes two-column for text self-quiz-zing. useful Pros: The format concepts Reviews many and high-yield facts. facts Questions individual integrate concepts. do but emphasize not Cons: Contains images. or vignettes no some spotty. topics of is Coverage comprehensive Use-ful selected for but for CK concepts, of Step 2 preparation. source a review Summary: not for clerkship for More appropriate than boards. Review/Test/350 q $36.95

Pediatrics ed., in 1st of common vignette–based ISBN A−Platinum clinical 9781560535331 2002, Hanley BROCHERT Vignettes: 104 pages, review & pediatrics. topics Belfus, A are similar to cases boards-type Pros: vignettes. Well-written Well illustrated. is and high-yield The diagnosis facts. more by pathophysiology, discussion and organized treat-ment, the amount of Cons: material. for Expensive as best used Not supplement. comprehensive; a Has updated been since not 2002. organized supplement studying. to and An Summary: easy-to-read Williams pediatrics. tested Pediatrics pages, Review A ISBN & 256 9780781768443 of frequently vignette ed., Clinical Vignettes: in 2007, Lippincott topics clinical 4th review $29.95 A−Underground Wilkins, KIM and pathogenesis, associated diseases. by organized focus Well points: Pros: epidemiology, manage-ment, complications, edition material “minicases” to the and information. present and illustrated, high-yield includes subject new more broaden Well Cons: text Not a supplement comprehensive; as review. used best to easy but to and for read, Summary: a Well organized review. intended as supplement $22.95 Review A−

q Test/500 Pediatrics PreTest $26.95

question-and-answer review pages, discussion. 2006, A detailed 11th McGraw-Hill, ISBN 464 9780071455527 with ed., by for Pros: organ pinpointing Organization useful weaknesses. system is thorough strong, Gives explanations. of fair questions. vignette-style Includes number a Well illustrated. detailed are topics. too Cons: Some low-yield emphasize questions or source for of review pediatrics. good and Summary: A questions with in format. not although illustrations, Solid content entirely good 2 CK Step

2 Pediatrics & questions. ISBN Step FOTI Williams Wilkins, Q Vignette-style B+Blueprints pages, & 2004, A 2nd 9781405103916 ed., Lippincott 176 to companion se-ries. nice Blueprints the A Pros: topics. high-yield Focuses on are follow. Explanations to easy for Cons: as best a comprehensive; Not used review. supplement Sparse images. and Summary: supplement. easy-to-read An organized clinical the to Blueprints correlates series. Adds One-page Test/100 prognosis. KAHAN Lippincott 384 Williams tests, of 9780781770453 Pediatrics ISBN 2nd & reviews and treat-ment, $17.95 diagnosis, ed., B+In differential diseases/topics A Wilkins, pages, Page q by 2008, epide-miology, discussed signs/symptoms, diagnostic etiology, 228 fast common review diseases. Pros: in-formation on concise high-yield of A and any diagrams. topic or is Cons: one without images page onto Each crowded low-yield topics. Includes but for Sum-mary: intensive for on 2 Step wards, Useful quick study CK time review. too the in answers. symptom 2006, Clinical cases $34.95 B+Blueprints followed 9781405104920 LONDHE ISBN & 2nd Williams by Lippincott related and questions Wilkins, Cases arranged Vignette-type Review pages, 426 ed., by Pediatrics companion the to Pros: An series. Blueprints excellent high-yield Focuses on cases. read of good a with to review illustrations nice management. Easy and Cons: a for Not used supplement best review. as comprehensive; organized An easy-to-read supplement. and Summary: clinical correlates series. Blueprints to the Adds ISBN pediatrics 2008, diagrams. & Lippincott 9780781782517 text $29.95 Pediatrics B+Blueprints A ed., tables in Wilkins, of review with q pages, 5th and Williams MARINO 384 Test/200 explanations. Includes a section ques-tion-and-answer with high-yield topics. focus Appropriate on Pros: illustrations. dense relatively A with text few Cons: detailed. Overly comprehensive Summary: review. more a for Good q Review/Test/100 $38.95

review 2006, case ISBN TOY pages, each McGraw-Hill, with fol-lowing and vignette. A 576 ed., 2nd Pediatrics 9780071463027 pediatrics Files: in of B+Case questions format answers high-yield are in ar-ranged format. Cases and an easy-to-follow Pros: reﬂect topics step diagnosis. and the the Emphasizes next likely most review. Cons: Not high-yield rapid suited for An vignette-style review excellent and on Summary: be for a too book. may review answers, but emphasis boards-type de-tailed with case boards presentation stand-alone important Excellent preparation. for clerkship ed., question-and-answer of 250 pediatrics 2004, Review review VIESSMAN Pediatrics A pages, detailed McGraw-Hill, with B+A&L’s Review ISBN 6th $29.95 explanations. 9780838503034 of on focus content. Pros: Questions boards-relevant questions. excellent The chapter in-cludes last vignette-based wellwritten Offers explanations. thorough, a on Includes test-taking nice strategies. primer are straightfor-ward questions the 2 CK exam. Step shorter Non-vignette-based more on and than Cons: those may too questions for Step 2 Some detailed preparation. CK be illustrated. Poorly review good majority An but of concise and reﬂect style. questions excellent, 2 Summary: appropriate discus-sions, the not CK Step with do content ISBN $41.95 pediatrics Pediatrics Test/1000+ Williams ed., 480 q Wilkins, & 2008, of DWORKIN 9780781770750 5th review pages, format. B−NMS Lippincott general A in outline Includes each of the end chapter. at questions of review detailed A pediat-rics. thorough, Pros: key points. Boldfacing highlights end studies provided book are Case of a on CD-ROM) (also and helpful. the the exam at comprehen-sive a discussion. good Includes Cons: dense, A text. lengthy of illustrations kind. good Lacks any of more than depth. large 2 its for but Summary: A review, thorough clerkships Step appropriate for be-cause CK review, part in q Review/Test/100+ $42.95

Recall $36.95 Pediatrics Review

pages, 508 ed., 2007, Wilkins, 3rd & ISBN Williams Lippincott 9780781771184

question-and-answer book typical of in review concise Recall series. A format presented a the makes easy. format two-column self-quizzing Pros: The on placed is and diagnosis management. Emphasis not are and topics thoroughly. Requires Cons: commitment, covered all time no Contains vignettes. or Useful a for not Summary: provide practice material, but systematic tests. substitute review does a suited Better to clerkship review.

Review Secrets Pediatric $39.95

Elsevier, ed., 4th 9781560536277 2005, pages, 688 ISBN

the question-and-answer text A series, typical organized of subspecialty. Secrets pediatric by of clinical discussion Includes of a a variety topics. thorough Pros: wide geared time significant investment. requires the wards toward content Cons: Detailed and is illustrations. or no images Contains review; clerkship. to suited Summary: better Too for detailed USMLE

with & brief pages, text Psychiatry Blueprints A review psychiatry 2nd ed., 304 in Lippincott A MURPHY ISBN criteria. of Wilkins, DSM-IV 2007, 9781405104968 Williams question-and-answer of brief at book. the Includes end section the a review tables. helpful with of clear, Pros: con-cise psychiatry A pharmacology. including good topics, Offers of coverage high-yield quick A read. Too Cons: some areas; general certain supplementation. requires in Summary: rapid A of high-yield topics. with review appropriate coverage A−Blueprints $29.95 symptom, Review/Test/74 ques-tions Williams ISBN cases Psychiatry Clinical Lippincott Vignette-type q pages, by in followed ed., & 9781405104968 2nd answers. Cases and HOBLYN related Wilkins, 304 arranged 2007, by to the se-ries. Pros: An Blueprints excellent companion Focuses high-yield cases. on Easy and read with nice good of management. review to a illustrations Not Cons: for review. a best used as comprehensive; supplement easy-to-read and organized An Summary: supplement. Blueprints series. the clinical correlates Adds to $29.95 Test/200 q

Vignettes: Clinical Review Psychiatry Underground $22.95

2007, Wilkins, 256 Williams pages, 9780781768467 ISBN ed., Lippincott 4th &

clinical topics psychiatry. vignette–based frequently review tested A of in points: management, organized and Pros: diseases. focus by pathogenesis, epidemiology, associated Well and “minicases” high-yield present information. includes Well illustrated, that as Not a supplement. used comprehensive; Cons: best vignettes. Summary: and organized Offers practice easy-to-read

Psychiatry q PreTest $26.95 Test/500

topics 2006, psychiatry. pages, McGraw-Hill, ed., ISBN question-and-answer 9780071455541 A 11th of in review 355 are organized. and written Questions well Pros: have level. Most content appropriate questions Offers explanations. good questions. vignette-type Includes few too Cons: too are detailed. questions Some the format 2 questions and good the for and may source psychiatry although Summary: A test. Step not reﬂect the review of exam, actual CK

pages, brief 2003, Wilkins, & psychiatry. 2nd Williams 9780781742689 ISBN of Lippincott ed., outline-format review 150 A with Pros: quick vignettes scattered throughout. A read, clinical concise tables. Offers Not in-depth review. Cons: for detailed sufficiently Summary: quick for excellent, psychiatry review additional of An source. use study as an same the Similar to Behavioral Sciences author. High-Yield by

Psychiatry Review A&L’s of

answers. pages, ISBN review of 7th McGraw-Hill, questions psychiatry and ed., 9780071402538 A 304 2003, general with for review. Includes vignette-style boards appropriate 114 questions Pros: Appropriate thorough emphasis; content explanations. management new treatment sections. and features The edition updated more shorter of Questions and are those than straightforward Cons: boards. the A review psychiatry, decent for boards of but Summary: source format. not does boards reﬂect

Case Files: Psychiatry

ISBN 408 pages, 9780071462822 2006, 2nd ed., McGraw-Hill,

in answers and vignette. questions format psychology A review of each case with following high-yield and in an reﬂect easy-to-follow Cases format. Pros: arranged topics are and treatment. initial best Emphasizes diagnosis, the the the likely step, most next rapid CK Cons: Step and Not review, review. too to detailed may be for high-yield suited 2 boards-type answers. An important that review and subject on emphasis vignette-style presentation case excellent Summary: places supplement the wards, for a boards. for the good and Great

$34.95 Review Test/900+ Review $29.95 $28.95 q

REVIEW review BROCHERT Belfus, in Vignettes: clinical & pages, ISBN 1st of Hanley RESOURCESB topics ed., A common 2002, Psychiatry vignette 102 Platinum psychiatry. 9781560535348 Pros: cases vignettes. Well-written are similar boards-type to illustrated. Well is facts. and high-yield Dis-cussion pathophysiology, and diagnosis by organized treatment, more as best a Cons: comprehensive; Not used sup-plement. supplement to Summary: organized An easy-to-read studying. and updating. Needs $29.95 questions. Williams Psychiatry Blueprints Lippincott 2nd & A ed., 2004, 2 ISBN B Review Vignette-style 96 Q Wilkins, Step & pages, 9781405103923 MCLOONE Pros: Blueprints companion the A se-ries. nice to on Focuses topics. high-yield to are follow. easy Explanations a comprehensive; supplement Cons: Not as for best used review. Sparse images. and Some not boards-like. are esoteric questions supplement. Sum-mary: and easy-to-read organized An Adds clinical Blueprints series. the to corre-lates ed., outline questions with Test/200 $17.95 exam. q of topics pages, Wilkins, the and each 2007, Williams Lippincott in a of ISBN final Psychiatry B comprehensive SCULLY NMS A at 9780781765145 format chapter 5th 300 end & general review concise A with text Pros: discussions. well-written disease an section. expanded pharma-cology Includes offers explanations, and edition appropriate questions. more and Questions new have the vignette-style complete test content the A for companion good clerkship. text not contain enough Cons: vignette-style questions. Does boards review. purposes Lengthy of for that time review commitment. Summary: detailed A requires clerkship choice for study, but single long good CK A be too re-view. may Step for 2 $42.95 q Review/Test/500

First $42.95 Psychiatry Review Clerkship for the Aid

9780071448727 McGraw-Hill, 2nd high-yield A pages, diseases. review 208 and symptoms of 2005, ISBN ed., A includes criteria and DSM-IV comprehensive with review scenarios. that Pros: mnemonics nice Includes high-yield tear-out cards. to May readers text who information format. prefer in appeal not Cons: high-yield suited good study. to CK to Summary: review clerkship psychiatry, but better of topics Step 2 than A in

presented Recall 9780781776981 Lippincott format typi-cal B−Psychiatry in book 210 the series. Wilkins, the & ISBN Williams question-and-answer of 3rd ed., pages, A 2009, review quick Recall FADEM format The self-quizzing. Pros: conducive two-column to is high-yield for and the concepts necessary Covers many USMLE. facts substitute practice vignettes, so does tests. not Lacks for Cons: Requires Summary: time commitment. topics Some over. glossed are resources. as Best a used supplement to other Part ed., pages, GOOD series. Simple” 2005, ISBN 9780940780682 Ridiculously Ridiculously Review MedMaster, “Made B−Psychiatry of $36.95 Made 98 4th Simple the nice read entertaining illustrations points. Pros: with A highlight fast to comprehensive, key and tables Some enough, are while verbose. too not areas detailed Cons: are others boards Not oriented. clerkship but the fast good, review, helpful boards. A for more for than Summary: presented review Hanley ISBN A question-and-discussion book 2000, of JACOBSON Belfus, Secrets $13.95 typical Review the ed., B−Psychiatric by in 2nd 9781560534181 & Secrets 536 series, pages, the topic. format organized explanations psychiatry. clear Offers Pros: important in concepts of good wards for reading. Makes Too lengthy and Cons: for review detailed purposes. Lacks vignettes. Summary: review. not significant fo-cused commitment; time for rapid, Requires review. to suited Best clerkship comprehensive 419 $39.95 Wilkins, outline ISBN Williams 2000, format. psychiatry 9780683307665 B−BRS & Review review A pages, in SHANER of Lippincott 2nd Psychiatry ed., Vignette-style follow questions each chapter. clinical thorough, Pros: A review of systematic psychiatry. definitions Clear, are concise provided. of Cons: single-topic information Great for deal review. date. out section is The pharmacology of investment; updating. Summary: Good a large but time needs material, requires Review/400 $37.95 q

tested Surgery KIM Vignettes: clinical Lippincott A Williams ISBN 256 pages, 4th 2007, 9780781768474 of surgical frequently vignette–based topics. A−Underground review ed., Wilkins, & Clinical focus epidemiology, pathogenesis, Pros: organized Well points: associated by diseases. and complications, management, illustrated that “minicases” and high-yield includes Well information. present comprehensive; review. Not supplement a best as Cons: to used and Well-organized easy-to-read practice vignettes. Summary: and of pages, 9780071463041 2006, ISBN Review 504 surgery questions vignette. $22.95 format each case answers 2nd TOY ed., Files: follow-ing with in A−Case McGraw-Hill, A review Surgery are ar-ranged format. topics Cases high-yield reﬂect Pros: an and easy-to-follow in and step likely Emphasizes the the next most diagnosis. too may detailed high-yield Cons: suited for Step review, Not rapid and preparation. 2 be to CK presentation Summary: review boards-type on excel-lent emphasis with im-portant answers. An and vignette-style case and study, clerkship Great good for for study. sup-plement boards a Review $29.95

medicine. common topics of & BROCHERT in A 1st trauma 102 Trauma pages, Belfus, and vignette–based 9781560535355 and surgery clinical ISBN Vignettes: ed., B+Platinum Hanley 2002, review Surgery Pros: Well-written