cells. dendritic 9-14 initial the Cell-adhesion naive antigen- molecules with cells. of 366 presenting interaction T mediate cells expansion the differentiation of and 367 naive clonal

T cells. co-stimulation receptor. high-affinity expression of T induces activated cells the and 368 IL-2 9-16 interleukin-2 of CD28-dependent pathways 9-17 in involved co-stimulatory are 368 Additional

T-cell activation. do 9-18 co-stimulation that differentiate act. cells into not require T effector Proliferating to cells 369 T different to CD8 cells. ways in T can 370 activated cells be become cytotoxic effector 9-19 several subsets differentiate effector 372 functionally 9-20 CD4 cells. cells different T into of of 372 induce Cytokines differentiation naive 9-21 CD4 the

effector pathways. down cells T distinct subsets through differentiation cytokines T-cell cross-regulate each can 9-22 they other’s 375 produce. the CD4 cells involved 377 immune 9-23 controlling T Regulatory adaptive responses. in CD4 are 379

Summary. 380

effector of properties General cells cytokines. T and their cells Effector are with interactions molecules. target T-cell 380 9-24 381

of release cells regulate and targets the to to T effector and signaling direct their molecules. produce. effector the by of determined are they of molecules cells T that 9-26 array The 381 effector functions locally distance. at 383 or 9-27 act can Cytokines a cells usually that TNF-family cell with proteins the are surface. T cytokines express associated as 383 9-28 several trimeric 386

Summary. 386

cytotoxicity. T-cell-mediated target of induce undergo 387 9-29 T pathways apoptosis. to cells cells Cytotoxic The release is 9-30 apoptosis c 387 mitochondria. the cytochrome intrinsic pathway of from of by mediated effector CD8 cells. granules 9-31 Cytotoxic 389 trigger proteins that contained of T cytotoxic in the are apoptosis 390 are killers Cytotoxic cells serial of 9-32 selective targets antigen. expressing T specific a

cytokines. act Cytotoxic by 9-33 releasing T cells also 392

Summary. 392

to Chapter 9. Summary

Questions. 393

References. 395

cells. B-cell helper T antigen and by activation

the antigens. TFH or B antigen of by involves B-cell 10-1 receptor cells microbial cells signals either Activation and from Linked cells robust B recognition of by cells responses. 10-2 400 promotes antigen antibody T and B-cell between 402 the boundaries secondary and areas in tissues. T-cell lymphoid promote TFH-cell 403 turn activate B which cells, in development. 406 differentiate plasma cells. 10-5 and B into Activated plasmablasts cells antibody-secreting of and 406 immune follicles to form second primary 10-6 B-cell a centers. proliferate germinal The phase hypermutation, with mutations improve and for that 408 are cells selected. antigen affinity B signaling. center TFH cells involves of Positive 10-8 cells selection 410 contact germinal with CD40 and in B 412 cells. somatic by hypermutation initiation to following AID. 413 contribute class AID switching same to 10-11 assembled 414 allow different with VH to initiates the exon associated be

immune of CH genes the course in response. an the direct responses. cells Cytokines made of choice by TFH 10-12 415 memory center the that 418 10-13 germinal cells. reaction survive cells B T-cell induce do not antigens 419 help responses. B-cell 10-14 require to Some

Summary. 421

The immunoglobulin and distributions classes. of functions classes and operate distinct different of 422 effector functions. in 10-15 have Antibodies places distinct

Polymeric across and barriers. receptor 10-16 them to IgM transports the epithelial Fc IgA of and regions binds immunoglobulin

carries Fc 10-17 IgG the the placenta body. receptor excretion neonatal IgG The and across from prevents due mucosal defects tissue pathway. induce protective lymphocytes one mucosal to at the immunity can 13-4 in purine 426 salvage Priming be in of 12-6 SCID other also may surfaces. 538 cells SCID. 502 Distinct control of dendritic populations in result 12-7 can responses. immune mucosal 538 503 immunodeficiency. severe can cause 539 immune responses. roles mucosal in Antigen-presenting severe 12-9 result in 505 cells the in development mucosa intestinal immunodeficiencies. routes. of antigen acquire a variety 539 by antibody IgA associated the with antibody immune mucosal class is that production an cause of 12-10 Secretory the system. in to inability 505 clear 506 and some bacteria viruses. extracellular some in be Immune contribute deficiencies defects to caused 13-9 12-11 T-independent can species. by in can 541 IgA processes production 509

function and activation or that T-cell antibody responses. abnormal lead B-cell to compensated IgA relatively for IgM. be 12-12 543 common secretory deficiency by humans is may but in and to cytokine contains host and 509 type unusual Normal genetic 3/TH17 pathways of propria intestinal pinpointed of by T infectious The lamina deficiencies 12-13 typeexperienced against populations different pathways are cells for central antigen 1/TH1 responses. defense agents 13-10 innate cells. lymphoid 546 of 13-11 in a 12-14 epithelium The intestinal is 510 defects immune pathway unique compartment the Inherited cytolytic system. of the proliferation to 511 viral responses and inflammatory

Summary. 514 infections. 548

response mucosal associated mucosal by is with of virus Epstein–Barr and regulation The fatal and immune the to infection infection with X-linked syndrome responses. lymphoproliferative 13-12 development 514 of lymphomas. pathogens response caused a and 12-15 development 550 by Immunodeficiency immunity. local inherited protective defects the inflammatory Enteric is of cause 13-13 of 515 dendritic in cells. the development damage. 551 proteins humoral regulatory tissue immune defective function cause and 552 been have defenses innate when breached. epithelium. protect of T-cell the the Effector 518 intestine 12-17 the function in responses bacterial 518 infections. must antigens. tolerance harmless 12-18 system of The molecular Mutations maintain to 13-16 in immune mucosal 553 inflammation the foreign regulators 556 519 The ‘autoinflammatory responses large in for of inflammatory that 12-19 uncontrolled contains intestine health. are that cause required can disease.’ bacteria result normal quantities therapy useful 520 genetic defects. can to be correct 13-18 Noninherited, to immunodeficiencies without while to 557 react are preventing the microbiota ability invaders. compromising inflammation secondary and causes major 521 infection of predisposing death. plays microbiota 12-21 in role 558 The intestinal major a

Summary. immune systemic 559 function. and shaping intestinal Full immune bacteria 522 responses to 12-22 commensal

of defenses. subversion immune Evasion and provoke 560 disease. intestinal different pathogens to detection have 524 avoid 13-19 evolved Extracellular bacterial pattern strategies by

Summary. antibody, receptors by and destruction recognition 525

12. Summary Chapter to antimicrobial 525 complement, and peptides. 560

Questions. pathogens bacterial 526 by the 13-20 immune phagocytes. seeking Intracellular shelter within evade system can 563

References. is 527 practiced parasites. protozoan Immune 13-21 evasion by also system. use antigenic step keep 13-22 viruses variation of of immune the a mechanisms 565 to ahead adaptive RNA different 566

Chapter 533 Failures 13-23 13 and Host to NK-cell Mechanisms use multiple mechanisms of DNA viruses Defense subvert CTL responses. 568

Immunodeficiency diseases. repeated immunity history 13-1 a suggests of A infections until replicate wanes. 533 of 571 diagnosis immunodeficiency. 534

Summary. by 13-2 caused gene diseases 573 defects. inherited immunodeficiency Primary are 534

syndrome. Acquired immune deficiency 573 HIV chronic a that retrovirus combined a immunodeficiencies. establishes 13-25 is that progresses slowly infection 535 to AIDS. 574

vaccination. with diseases Fighting infectious 729

Immunoblotting blotting). A-14 (Western

the and Use of or from material organisms. antibodies killed A-15 isolation in mass complexes by multiprotein of spectrometry. characterization 730 effective vaccines that caused 16-21 generate that the 764 by or Most prevent damage antibodies toxins

the lymphocytes A-16 peripheral density- stop pathogen of and Isolation neutralize blood by infection. gradient fractionation. 731 766

Isolation safe while from being than other lymphocytes inexpensive. A-17 protection of tissues and blood. 732 usually vaccines viral Live-attenuated 16-23 more are 766

A-18 cytometry Flow analysis. and FACS DNA 767 of by use technology. the recombinant magnetic 732 beads. 770

homogeneous of Isolation lines. T-cell A-20 770

Limiting-dilution culture. A-21 creating attenuated parasites (GAPs). genetically 771 734

ELISPOT assay. A-22 vaccination is of 773 16-25 route The important an

subsets of determinant success. T based Identification functional cells A-23 of of cytokine vaccination pertussis factor transcription 735 or expression. illustrates on the 16-26 production Bordetella safety of of importance perceived 773 a the vaccine. 736

T-cell vaccines Conjugate using 16-27 been specificity a tetramers. developed of peptide:MHC have Identification as receptor A-24 result between recognition B cells. linked 776 of and T 737

adjuvants and but their of Biosensor A-25 must antigen dissociation immunity, require receptors and association for for ligands. measuring rates of the assays they appropriate be to cell the and cells targeted 777

A-26 lymphocyte proliferation. Assays of be compartment 778 to effective. 738

Measurements of A-27 apoptosis. vaccines, Adjuvants for enhancing are 16-29 779 are important but few of the immunogenicity approved

cytotoxic Assays for cells. A-28 T in use for 780 humans. 739

Assays T CD4 for cells. A-29 782

protective immunity. Transfer A-30 of 782 vaccination. 740

of Adoptive lymphocytes. A-31 transfer 783

A-32 transfers. Hematopoietic stem-cell existing infections. in controlling 784 chronic useful 741

administration A-33 antibodies. of vivo In 785

Summary. 742

mice. A-34 Transgenic 786

Chapter to Summary 16. 742

A-35 by targeted disruption. Gene knockout 786

Questions. 743

Knockdown by A-36 of expression gene

References. 744

RNA interference (RNAi). 790

Toolbox Appendix 749 Immunologist's I The

A-1. Immunization. 749

responses. A-2 Antibody 752

A-3 Affinity chromatography. 753

Radioimmunoassay (ELISA), competitive inhibition assay immunosorbent assay. enzyme-linked (RIA), and A-4 753

A-5 Hemagglutination blood and typing. 755

tests Coombs of detection the A-6 rhesus and incompatibility. 756

antibodies. Monoclonal A-7 757

antibody Phage libraries V-region for production. display A-8 758

human individuals. Generation vaccinated monoclonal from antibodies A-9 of 759

fluorescent A-10 imaging using Microscopy and dyes. 760

microscopy. A-11 Immunoelectron 761

A-12 Immunohistochemistry. 762

Immunoprecipitation A-13 and co-immunoprecipitation. 762

the Immunology against study of the infection. is defense body’s exposed disease, microorganisms, We rarely. and to ill only of which cause yet become many are continually defend body How itself? does the the eliminate cure and does body infection does the how invader When occur, itself? we infectious overcome? do to develop many encountered and long-lasting immunity once diseases And why the at addressed study understand are questions molecular to immunology, body’s our and by the These we against levels. cellular which infection defenses

to is work century Edward in (Fig. immunology a attributed of late his Jenner 18th beginning the usually The for science as 1.1). ancient The notion confers Greece. disease a immunity— surviving it later—was that since known of greater against protection 1400s was or at Variolation—the in to of smallpox against skin and that since form the transfer and into East been superficial material least inhalation a pustules—had of the protection practiced from China Jenner. known as disease Middle wounds that fatal had the vaccinia, to cowpox, that against disease mild relatively protection with often against observed he disease 1796, seemed the of in smallpox. protected demonstrated the inoculation smallpox, and or confer Jenner recipient of cowpox to scientific exposure material infectious inoculated relied inoculation. His of months two after smallpox the on the individual proof deliberate his This contribution. was original test scientific

called procedure Jenner the vaccination. from with term strains weakened disease-causing order provide still the of to healthy in individuals used is or disease. attenuated protection to This agents inoculation of describe experiment centuries to bold it successful, was almost universal. become for took two Jenner’s smallpox vaccination Although to the announce that (Fig. in Organization Health enabled advance eradicated This been had World smallpox 1979 modern arguably medicine. of triumph greatest 1.2), the

microbiologists. was Jenner’s by many century of the strategy late in the of 19th extended discoveries great vaccination by Robert diseases proved that caused Koch are infectious microorganisms. specific vertebrate Louis In 1880s, the cells. the Pasteur origins of immune of Principles innate immunity.

adaptive immunity. Principles of effector of mechanisms immunity. the

Fig. 1.1 Edward Jenner. raphael John Portrait Smith. by of reproduced library. medical courtesy Harvey Whitney yale university, Hay Cushing/John

with Number cases or of countries more one

Fig. by of vaccination. eradication 1.2 smallpox The was smallpox a 3 organization no cases of Health eradicated, years of which (upper panel). been and World in 1979 smallpox were After stopped had to that able vaccination recorded, the in announce period few source stocks that the retained, virus might these a which fear A laboratory are from been reemerge. however, some and have last maow case of maalin in 1977. survived Ali smallpox in contracted the and panel) Somalia (lower of dr. courtesy Weisfeld. Photograph Jason

chickens, boy and devised its a by vaccine cholera in rabies bitten developed vaccine be trial dog. a first proved a success spectacular upon in that to against a rabid a

mechanism for practical protection the search science of the to development triumphs led vaccination’s immunology. of and to of These a against the In effects that activity’ diphtheria protection Emil animals tetanus the Behring specific serum in ‘antitoxic toxins the contained a people. to tetanus could immune of Shibasaburo that von short-lived and early or confer Kitasato diphtheria or discovered of 1890s, their specifically to to be we was activity activity. This neutralize and call bind due proteins now which the toxins to later determined the antibodies, a in acts of serum these discovery component complement, 1899 antibodies crucial was conjunction have bacteria. destroy by in Bordet’s to a might immunity role reinforced That pathogenic antibodies Jules in of with that

an against response by against a as production potential such adaptation as that of an known infection of antibodies with is because particular as pathogen, infection lifetime immunity, to pathogens, adaptive specific develops the pathogen. individual during A the it the developing already thus cells, that for Adaptive time against who diphtheria be Metchnikoff, is could was innate that phagocytic defenses great known many and serum which provide immunity, chiefly the infection Russian Elie distinguished von engulfed therapy digested which the by through nonspecific. are Behring immunologist from at work discovered was microorganisms of immunity cells— to which ready but act, immunity to develop called 'macrophages'—are is these requires and Whereas highly adaptive always specific. present Metchnikoff time

be a range could that antibodies It was stimulate antigens clear they because called could induced antibody substances, specific soon of generation. vast against treatment the serums. of diphtheria antiserum standardize development and to Ehrlich therapeutic methods a advanced as for Paul an developed immune system. any by term Today substance the recognized to refers adaptive the antigen drugs the of range much but glycoproteins, and in are (a organic and can common polysaccharides for proteins, structures, chemicals ivy. of as such chemical metals mix such such they of poison include the wider pathogens, leaves antigens as urushiol a Typically example, pentadecylcatechols) nickel, penicillin, as of on Ehrlich for immunity. Metchnikoff shared respective their and Nobel work the 1908 Prize

tissues adaptive circulate. the innate chapter system, tissues the principles the which in the This immunity, which develop, of and through cells introduces the of immune they they and they by specialized of eliminate the We functions infection. the different outline which types then cells of

origins immune vertebrate The cells. of

the agents, of the toxins, cells by protected make up and together is and system. their molecules from cause damage The a infectious they that effector immune body variety of cells responses adaptive immune white or activities innate depend upon and leukocytes. blood Both the marrow, and from of bone system cells immune mature. the many where arise of the develop them Most central certain system), the microglia development. But nervous sack populations of macrophage tissue-resident the yolk or fetal the (for originate from some, embryonic liver example, during particularly populations. maintained birth are life They before tissues seed and self-renewing independent, throughout as within or of the vessels reside called in circulate system a peripheral tissues, mature, bloodstream, circulate Once cells in immune specialized

immunity. Principles innate of

the system. lymphatic immune that emptied as drains system. The is cells extracellular transports and the blood lymph lymphatic back eventually fluid from and them into system tissues

the from cells the derive cells the immune oxygen, bone the clotting elements tissues, in that (HSCs) that cells white of blood including cellular system, transport red of blood blood marrow. the the of and blood, the All damaged stem hematopoietic trigger ultimately platelets are give pluripotent can different they types hematopoietic these as of often all rise cells. Because to blood stem cells, known the rise the cells and cells stem platelets, give the progenitors hematopoietic cells, which The two red of main blood to lymphoid blood myeloid are potential, the lineages. of cells, immediate categories more limited white and developmental of Fig. types of relationships and their are cells summarized lineage different in The blood 1.3.

immunity. of Principles innate

by molecules that outline principles cells invasion provide will the this the part of describe immunity the and In continuous we and of innate pathogens. defense against chapter participation initiate known microorganisms, need blood of lymphocytes ability the possess and mount the offensive. their target they Although powerful as recognize cells pathogenic white to to the system immune the most innate and destructive immune Indeed, adaptive immunity to same innate eliminate microorganisms. the invading many mechanisms use the of and response

host damage damage variety organisms host a pathogens cause while tissues of Commensal mechanisms. 1-1 by little

four multicellular We bacteria termed the collectively recognize (Fig. and unicellular disease-causing fungi, microorganisms, archaea, categories of or viruses, organisms pathogens: and parasites eukaryotic and broad 1.4). they in host damage These size vary in microorganisms tremendously how and tissues. five The hundred obligate which intracellular few to in are smallest from pathogens. a range size nanometers and are viruses, cells Viruses can their during by inducing directly kills lysis replication. bacteria intracellular Somewhat larger and are mycobacteria. These kill can producing or directly toxins. damage cells cells by infected Many single-celled cells. such kill cause members malaria, Plasmodium as directly of parasites, also that the genus intracellular bacteria releasing extracellular or shock and growing in toxins blood Pathogenic fungi can the and into induce tissues. by spaces sepsis the too to pathogens—parasitic in or into large The but damaging host migrate. worms that cells responses tissues induce injure cellular by helminths—are can infect cysts tissues forming worms, largest which the

Not microbes pathogens. are all tract, damage gastrointestinal mucosa, host. but microbial especially the oral tissues, and fungi no consist archaea, skin, the colonized communities—called to Many and cause by of are constantly bacteria, microbiome—that the conjunctiva, symbiotic since called with commensal These they relationship a host. the also microorganisms, have can are organisms commensal in ruminants. case digestion that of of cellulose stomachs the functions, Indeed, perform some the important in as the in bacteria aid in between whether lies commensal and organisms they damage. The induce difference pathogens protective are lumen confined epithelial bacteria within into barrier, injure layer damage intestinal a microbes intestinal no the whereas normally the of spread enormous Even cause microbiome tissues. mucus, can the cells, by penetrate underlying and in numbers this of and pathogenic intestinal

Fig. blood, the bone All in the the cellular system, of marrow. including immune elements 1.3 hematopoietic arise the cells from the stem of cells pluripotent produce cells. two pluripotent types cells these of to stem divide B the leukocytes—the the gives killer natural (IlCs) of lymphocytes. cells to and and lymphoid common cells (blue or lymphoid and background) progenitor blood t white rise (nK) A innate cells lymphoid lineage A that and common lineage of yellow the rise gives produce clotting. to rest comprises erythrocytes and progenitor the (pink (red leukocytes, which blood platelets megakaryocytes the myeloid blood cells), important myeloid backgrounds), the the in distinguished leukocytes sites marrow, by t having lymphocytes differentiation—the of bone other each and respectively. thymus receptors and their are and other from the B by from antigen into while into t t B effector cells, differentiate cells variety plasma functions. antibody-secreting cells differentiate antigen, cells of a After encounter with with cells, specificity. antigen cells lack nK B t and and unlike IlCs monocytes, and eosinophils, the are the and leukocytes basophils. the remaining dendritic neutrophils, cells, the the the gives polymorphonuclear these of distinctive of staining termed circulate nuclei. granulocytes, blood in smears, their because last or cells appearance and of because irregularly three blood leukocytes, these in shaped cytoplasmic are granules a whose the cells encountered enter the after have tissues; potential are a that cells background) they mature phagocytic pathogen. Immature they (yellow dendritic dendritic common of cells, myeloid arise the lymphoid progenitor. also progenitor from but majority common the some cells the may are from derived differentiate they enter phagocytic monocytes macrophages into tissues, dendritic where or cells. maturation also their cells enter and complete mast there. tissues

innate of immunity. Principles

bacteria Archaea, Fungi Extracellular Protozoa Viruses bacteria, Parasites Intracellular

cm) Log scale 10–4 10–7 (1 in 10–6 Fig. 10–2 of 10–3 meters 10–5 size in Pathogens vary size greatly and 1.4 lifestyle. as herpes various (first monocytogenes pathogens bacteria, Intracellular such include such and Listeria panel), panel). simplex (second viruses, as panel). many (fourth (third do as bacteria, fungi, such Aspergillus such as or aureus tissues, panel), panel), Staphylococcus archaea and some fumigates protozoa (third as move the organisms complex life (fifth panel), a the that such are cycle. Strongyloides multicellular body in as many stercoralis throughout can nematode parasites, large panel Second of courtesy dan Portnoy. James of Fifth lok. courtesy panel

the extracellular first in grow through directly spaces invade the barriers defense chemical are and Anatomic 1-2 against pathogens. can and

can three threat tolerance. and microbes: by avoidance, deal posed The with to the strategies host adopt resistance, behavior and exposure both mechanisms include barriers prevent and to anatomic microbes, Avoidance modifications. If is or is eliminating an resistance established, at infection reducing pathogens. aimed the pathogens. resist to cellular effector against or different of defend variety and great suited microbes, molecular categories To system has of collectively mechanisms, mediators, functions, numerous the called immune a description is Their of book. this aspect major resist damage by tolerance tissue’s induced responses to a microbes. enhance capacity involves that Finally, used extensively meaning term rather than been of ‘tolerance’ disease context This in in the has susceptibility plants immunity. the of animal a For increasing is growth undifferentiated the generate tolerance by new common that mechanism activating parts meristems, the in to damage. plant, example, response dormant cells of mounted This from prevent against the refers term the should tolerance, immune being own immunological tissues. which to from response that an distinguished mechanisms be host’s

(Fig. 1.5). the infection and are against initial chemical Anatomic defenses barriers represent and of that skin internal prevents mucosal exposure of strategy kind avoidance to microbes. tissues surfaces a The further additional barriers, mechanisms At resistance anatomic defenses. most host strengthen a prevent as to of antimicrobial entering the mucosal surfaces that act produce variety natural For from microbes antibiotics example, proteins body.

into system innate these play. are of or immediately If components come breached other immune barriers the evaded, can Bordet complement, with by antibodies earlier lyse which bacteria. the discovery We acts to of mentioned Jules and mechanisms Complement different together of 30 the important group and is one interstitial tissues. of are act that plasma effector proteins most serum in a around absence Complement the it only of adaptive and can specific in organisms antibody; innate conjunction but also acts with not thus antibodies, both in responses. a to target contributes foreign barriers, Chapter in the antimicrobial 2. proteins, anatomic detail We in and greater will examine complement

first anatomic barrier provided the body’s by is surfaces. the the epithelial including near as Second, act complement, an various these systems, epithelia. enzymatic and chemical barrier antimicrobial immediate coordinate various nearby cell-mediated innate breached, cells defense. lymphoid are a can rapid If epithelia pathogen If adaptive the the brought these bear. immune of system barriers, are slower-acting the overcomes to defenses

Macrophages, Sensor crystals cells Induction ATP, of neutrophils, lipopolysaccharides, of Bacterial tissues inducers Mediators Killing Target cytotoxicity of antiviral Production cells proteins proteins Cytokines, infected cells urate intracellular dendritic antimicrobial In˜ammatory

Fig. of proceeds series a steps. Cell-mediated 1.6 immunity in

the structures by microbes cellular of indicate that chemical or the damage them. are Inflammatory invading produced inducers presence or act a detect variety mediators the recognition cells produce that response various innate receptors, these defense inducers by response. that in in of and immune propagate directly expressing Sensor further intracellular many target tissues, other to that such and epithelial cells, response. or mediators act antimicrobial cytokines, include amplify on immune IlCs cells, induce such cytokines that produce other viral proteins immune various on growth; as as resist and they the

indicate system 1-3 is that immune The the inducers inflammatory pathogens of presence damage. by tissue or activated

and breaches defenses host’s will cellular anatomic pathogen encounter innate A the the that of immunity. chemical barriers cells Cellular immune detect initiated (Fig. 1.6). inducers when sensor are responses inflammatory an are expression relatively over that of receptors, cells innate constant many that by small recognition of include which number remain many detect a lifetime. types Sensor encoded cell genes mediators through individual’s inflammatory to not these bacterial Inflammatory extracellular or trigger viruses, such the molecular inducers such normally in as receptors molecules or space. bacteria as lipopolysaccharides, ATP, include found unique components which that is immune other mediators can directly produce cells on immune invading act to innate various to the response. either or that Triggering to act activate receptors cells these microbes, propagate destroy such degradative macrophages oxygen example, to and toxic produce them. ingest chemical kill intermediates, For reactive mediators, microbes enzymes as or can cells, many as or such tissues, Dendritic invading cells immune epithelial target that to microbes kill cytokine including other mediators, activate efficiently. may more resist produce cytokines or much in mediators receptors will We greater below these discuss in and briefly 3. detail Chapter and

1.7). on Innate organism (Fig. infectious an to responses occur exposure immune rapidly contrast, adaptive immune days In rather system than responses take hours develop. to by the system immune specificity of infections eliminating capable adaptive is more the exquisite of However, efficiently because

Fig. the 1.7 immune Phases response. of

immune cells, start T immune activation, destruction lymphocytes from formation Innate pathogen effector B centers. time phagocytosis, after with of cells the and lymphoid Typical Response of Phases response Infammation, of response peripheral of of of to response Duration complement organs germinal of Interaction Emigration response infection B and cells. effector memory of B cells cells) Formation (plasma and and and levels. T Production high of effector memory dendritic T-cell T antibody Adaptive B Elimination memory B of immune antigen-specifc effector Formation and proliferation of and Activation memory T mucosal by response antibody of cells pathogen cells serum Immunological cells antigen, cells Interaction co-stimulation, cells: antibody Maintenance antigen-specifc recognition or of cells between adhesion, and cells antigen-presenting of differentiation Hours Minutes A to Weeks days Days few Protection Can weeks Days Days against Weeks Days Weeks Weeks Days days be lifelong Days few A reinfection Hours

Principles immunity. innate of

its of antigen lymphocytes. recognition by limited that repertoire antigen a contrast immune lymphocytes repertoire cells, innate receptors of In express specialized specificity. expressed to possess highly by of receptors vast collectively a focus This and the pathogens that any or immune evaded pathogen effectively eliminate to have innate immunity. enables system virtually resources overwhelmed adaptive to to respond immune for interacts on, its system of and relies immune cells adaptive the innate the But functions. system many with, of the prepare of to introduce the several adaptive and will consider later immunity major The innate sections chapter. components immune in us system next the

most innate of lineage immune myeloid of system. the The cells 1-4 comprises the

for the mast basophils), of granulocytes blood white the is The (the cells neutrophils, (CMP) and dendritic called cells, collective macrophages, innate and progenitor immune of myeloid precursor system. term the eosinophils, common cells the cells three make types of granulocytes, the and phagocytes Macrophages, dendritic the up system. immune in not The here. will and which with also blood generates megakaryocytes be red cells, we concerned CMP the in shown Fig. lineage of cells myeloid are The 1.8.

are all almost in Macrophages tissues. resident but into form arise blood during which the where migrate the animal the are tissue-resident in development, some marrow from and bone they circulate macrophages of Many the tissues, differentiate. adult in continually embryonic that mature arise macrophages monocytes, cells immune relatively the perform subsequent response adaptive the throughout different and long-lived are Macrophages innate functions immune response. and several engulf is invading One to kill microorganisms. and This function innate first phagocytic provides defense immunity. in a immune adaptive and cells targeted pathogens response. also Macrophages by of an infected dispose in is monocytes it tissues, so this function. infections primarily are Both macrophages macrophages protective but most and and that phagocytic, occur the important perform is produce crucial and and to a response, other orchestrate them activate is immune cells an help to prerequisite that inflammation, and many we An shall they immune a macrophages additional responses: which, immune-system immune induce as recruit they mediators into response. inflammatory see, of role successful

of invading can phagocytosis Local bacteria the inflammation complement. by be activation also triggered the and of can the inducing microbes surfaces fragments complement system, a complement proteins of activate of cascade with reactions specific Bacterial the coat of proteolytic that the system.

Fig. in 1.8 cells immunity. innate adaptive and Myeloid these in the In will the form book, schematic represented rest on of the the be left. cells shown type of A cell photomicrograph each right. on shown the is a phagocytic that vesicles, are innate responses. primarily pathogens engulf them and in immune and neutrophils cells function in intracellular adaptive perform both macrophages and destroy they lymphocytes dendritic that immature immune a lymphocytes after pathogen present initiating t maturing, pathogens; cells and thus can when antigens in take up they they function as adaptive recognize, are are responses. they phagocytic t specialized and can to form activating cells present can them. lymphocytes can to and activate macrophages also t antigens prominent immune of granules an myeloid their during the cells response. secretory the adaptive primarily cells upon release that other via activation contents are antibody as in such thought antibody-coated be are to involved worms; immunity. to be parasites eosinophils also large are attacking thought involved in basophils anti-parasite local vessels. tissue substances to trigger act local cells inflammatory that mast cells on antigen are response a blood that releasing by and basophils responses. in mast eosinophils, are allergic also important cells, Steinman, rooney, and courtesy of n. r. Photographs d. Friend.

1.1 MOVIE

and macrophages specific coated this by by in on complement destroyed. and way recognized are phagocytosis, up neutrophils, taken Microbes receptors debris. in system, of it general immune scavenger the macrophages specialized clearing as cells In and addition act cells role the body, cell dead in their to

also shaped densely polymorphonuclear cytoplasm; granules The are named leukocytes staining of are granulocytes in oddly their because their the for nuclei. they called serve granulocytes—neutrophils, The their types basophils— by three of which of properties distinct eosinophils, are and functions. different distinguished granules, staining the few a relatively all short-lived, days. surviving for Granulocytes are only when marrow, immune They in increases they their the and bone production during migrate inflammation. responses, to infection of sites mature or degradative phagocytosis The them by a their microorganisms the efficiently responses: most in enzymes they in intracellular and cells phagocytic antimicrobial stored up granules. substances vesicles and numerous and other cytoplasmic of using take innate by important destroy in immune variety neutrophils are if which neutrophil way overwhelming is open bacterial function infection, untreated. the fatal to deficiencies in Hereditary in role further Their Chapter 3. is discussed

and activated. abundant are neutrophils, a toxic and have they are when granules than released less Eosinophils cells basophils of variety like but proteins, these neutrophils, which are containing enzymes too are are Eosinophils macrophages to basophils or parasites, be be in against to thought ingested and important defense large by which neutrophils. chiefly They in their inflammatory effects reactions, also are contribute allergic damaging to than protective. which rather can

marrow, mature in especially in bone development peripheral immature airway Mast precursors migrate mucosa. begin tissues, but cells intestines, skin, as that and the proteases, Their internal such various granules from as which parasitic protecting worms. surfaces including role the histamine pathogens, and play a many contain in inflammatory mediators, their mast cells eosinophils, role and 10 cover and inflammation basophils, and 14. in We Chapters allergic further in

1970s in Steinman, discovered the Ralph cells 2011 Prize. the by Dendritic for he half Nobel received were which and lineages phagocytic functions cells cells distinct These the class the whose of form clarified. are immune still several being third system related include of Most have of cells. dendritic like elaborate the processes, membranous nerve cells dendrites enter through from dendritic migrate marrow to tissues. Immature the bloodstream bone cells the up amounts contents by the fluid They extracellular a by particulate of continually known process take matter phagocytosis macropinocytosis. large and its ingest and also as main is system pathogens the role not take in up, of but immune clearance that the microorganisms. they They their the degrade major cells encounter with produce cells immune activate are sensor triggers them other to Instead, whose pathogens a dendritic of mediators class cells. that a and immune the when class because Dendritic of we discuss in their in we activity lymphocytes—of activation of particular role were will return this lymphocytes—T cells discovered to Section 1-15. T-cell system, adaptive activating critical the play a of mediators also cells responses immune cells of the dendritic But role they innate system. and controlling in produce

recognition an initial that Sensor provide self 1-5 nonself. cells pattern discrimination between express receptors and

in before is, response not proteins immune the evoke Long immunization—that recognition as an innate not antigens purified experimental of it discovered, they such did were an recognized that was were mechanisms often

innate immunity. Principles of

immunogenic. immunologist’s by A-1–A-4). secret’ proteins required bacterial Janeway responses called Charles (see the little constituents, against as Sections the the induction famously extracts, such killed immune inclusion of Appendix microbial purified or Rather, I, strong of bacteria ‘dirty ‘to helped it help’). is for (adjuvare because termed intensify Latin additional adjuvant, to was antigen This the response immunizing an the material cells in activate adjuvants know cells now to help receptors sensor to at of an absence needed, innate infection. in activate that We types of on T are least the part, various

are adaptive of the Macrophages, initiate function. that immune can other of and and although in mediators, responses even classes infection this cells, cells cells important immune by detect serve dendritic cells producing sensor inflammatory system, neutrophils, these means Section 1-3, number a the or damage as pathogens of mentioned in cells detecting As invariant recognition innate them. induced of express a receptors limited by molecular called they many own of as that microorganisms cells. molecular Also simple body’s the known patterns are not patterns pathogen-associated structure regular molecules receptors pattern host recognize of (PAMPs) of but part recognition (PRRs), and common and the as oligosaccharides, of structures CpG lipopolysaccharides bacterial many wall, mannose-rich to peptidoglycans, pathogens. DNA unmethylated as well include cell Such recognition because they change elements conserved excellent evolution, have them for targets during do not microbial of making been these (Fig. All 1.9). derived as from bacteria transmembrane proteins, such vesicular that PRRs bacteria detect are Toll-like pathways PAMPs Some (TLRs) into receptors or the phagocytosis. taken by extracellular Jules Beutler. homologous first immunity of The in to Toll in and in Drosophila later Hoffman, discovered extended was mice Janeway the receptor role and by TLRs by melanogaster Bruce the in innate their Beutler work shared activation and for immunity. Nobel the of the Prize 1-4) half of Hoffman Section remaining (see 2011 cytoplasmic proteins, sense that intracellular (NLRs) invasion. such bacterial receptors as NOD-like Other the are PRRs receptors viral virally RNA derived the and other and mRNA cytoplasmic locations and differences host species, of host the between in and microbial structures Yet based on detect DNA. infection cells detect the induced Some damage expressed sensor pathogens cellular rather by themselves. pathogens, receptors by than only recognition innate knowledge area an active of of 15 of is within emerged Much discovery. years still past and the has our Chapter We and of in vaccines innate a describe are how 3, component further in these as recognition used systems 16. adjuvants Chapter

and cells response such chemokines producing mediators as an inflammatory Sensor cytokines. by 1-6 induce

in encounter. such these macrophages such the of can functions induce neutrophils of effector cells, degradation PRRs directly Activation bacteria and sensor as phagocytosis on as and cells they sensor mediators. the of inflammatory cells to response amplify serve by production the But immune important signals similar called to of to manner in immune proteins act cytokines mediators categories other Two important the cells. are inflammatory chemokines, convey hormones to and which secreted a

any receptors. term cells by secreted is that immune appropriate of for cells nearby behavior protein bearing the affects a ‘Cytokine’ many cell different cell are types. There more produced different types; cytokines; by by specific a others, 60 are than few some only only influence of the expression receptor. cytokines cells, others specific cytokine’s through types while of a influence few, each many pattern Some target the induces that an amplifying of in illustrated a in is typically as cell, to target effector cell mechanism a cytokine next the The related section. response

of able each to recognize which microbes. receptors, of macrophages variety a specific is of components express bind the yeast, and Some, bacteria, and glucan the carbohydrates of receptors and cell-wall scavenger fungi. receptor, like mannose and family on (tlrs) toll-like recognition pattern receptors cells, present an the immune of are cells. important macrophages, dendritic receptors other certain gram-positive bacteria, from tlr-1 both lipopolysaccharides tlrs lipopeptides for acids lipoteichoic recognize microbial gram-positive tlr-2 a such pathogens of while binds example, tlr-4 and bacteria. as binds heterodimer from different from gram-negative and components;

Fig. inflammatory response. triggers 1.10 Infection an blood (center microorganisms vessels, in pass of into proteins the and the encountering bacteria panel) or types that (left allowing other to triggered panel). cytokines tissues increase to tissues of release are permeability macrophages fluid produce infection. the the of macrophages site chemokines, direct neutrophils to also of which migration then vessel the also crawl neutrophils first immune the changed, are the shown to endothelial and through blood wall is the that from cells vessel stickiness of (right it; the entering of the system tissue panel). blood wall circulating adhere cells of and able a monocytes to so are infection accumulation collectively of site causes cells and inflammation. swelling, the known redness, and the pain as fluid at the heat, of macrophages and neutrophils inflammatory the principal cells. are an response, in lymphocytes immune activated inflammation. can to also later contribute

tissue, releasing redness, and fuids Vasodilation mediators monocyte cause increased vascular Infammatory into infammatory cause and heat, migrate that protein permeability pain cells neutrophil swelling

description cytokine as presenting arises during cytokines together each of of introduce it cellular and our once, all all we functional Instead the responses. at functions the their Appendix and general We cells, target and their cytokines, list III. producer in

(Fig. neutrophils receptors, chemoattractants, tissue the Chemokines act monocytes, 1.10). cells a infected of secreted that bloodstream and are out chemokine into specialized attracting bearing subgroup such of as as and proteins regions specialized can organize Beyond lymphoid responses take also into the help where in place. cells this tissues various role, chemokines discrete chemokines, related different of two the major into are all on fall but structurally are classes. 50 There order which chemokines, Appendix IV general their lists the their functions. cells, and target immune discuss our chemokines need descriptions cellular particular processes. arises during as We of the will

as cytokines the into from helps macrophages the recruit by act pathogen. to infected chemokines known to blood that inflammation, a and activated destroy process, cells released tissues, The is carries flow adaptive antigens which or immune the lymph, bearing response the to tissue Inflammation increases nearby lymphoid cells from initiated. of where tissues, their microbes the infected site recruits the to of infection. generated, been Once inflammation adaptive components also has these immunity effector

is swelling. rubor, clinically meaning described heat, words by Latin and tumor, and Inflammation calor, pain, dolor, redness, the local other these effect mediators or of of Each inflammatory cytokines reflects vessels. an the features blood on flow Heat, increased result leakage of from blood fluid of into inflammation, blood permeability dilation proteins blood and vessels and and to and swelling the during leading the increased local tissues. redness, have produce themselves Cytokines in that cells blood the response the also on effects endothelium and to vessels; infection. cytokines endothelial lines important fragments complement migrate to the endothelial site cause circulating they adhesive the chemokines. by infection, cells stick between endothelial to leukocytes These which the attracted to into them properties cells the and of and of alter are pain. actions The the account cells into their migration the tissue local for and of

latter response being inflammatory inflamed, the The cell large in the are macrophages and initial types phase infected of tissue main into in an numbers. recruited the seen neutrophils, Macrophages inflammatory and known as also are cells. neutrophils thus of and immune increased sustaining innate is by short response. The the time thus differentiate neutrophils macrophages, into rapidly reinforcing entry of influx later monocytes, which followed the a the into inflammation eosinophils contribute inflamed the to migrate the tissues and continues, of microorganisms. invading if also Later, destruction

of immunity. Principles adaptive

killer lymphoid adaptive with that share system. of immune lymphocytes and cells Innate similarities cells 1-7 are lineages the natural effector

lack rise marrow common in antigen-specific to innate system lymphoid adaptive lymphocytes that bone several receptors. both The antigen-specific immune gives lineages progenitor and to of the the (CLP) B recognized the lymphocytes and (NK) immune in the killer T (Fig. Although the were system 1960s, of the natural cells adaptive 1.11) innate immune the discovered of system 1970s. until were the not that infected and of are were with lymphocyte-like herpesviruses. cytoplasm and because with granular tumor ability NK their distinctive to kill cells large cells a recognize identified cells certain cells but CLP Initially, recognize T a cells distinct between distinction from cells now are was that in lymphocytes these that the the bone and unclear, of NK marrow. arise the we lineage cells by antigen-specific stress cellular infections innate to immune but receptors various adaptive receptors respond very They of members can system lack specific cells, of families the viruses. to express that and the of viral has immune an infections, NK the developed. cells role important innate early response play before in the adaptive to response

recently, identified. lineages of been additional cells related cells to NK More have these cells lymphoid called are Collectively, innate (ILCs). cells peripheral as CLP, inflammatory as in Arising of mediators ILCs sources the from such the of the responses. where tissues, function they intestine, reside 3. in are The cells ILC functions NK Chapter cells discussed and of

Summary.

resistance, and of tolerance pathogens. avoidance, represent to ways Strategies deal different with organisms line and into they a avoidance, as barriers host and be may primitive commensal defense various entry of chemical antimicrobial form of first and pathogens both the tissues. and against complement such are barriers Anatomic of proteins considered these response largely the immune resistance. If vertebrate are becomes barriers breached, on focused which structures inducers, microbes chemical the (PAMPs) Inflammatory infection. expressed to inform on damage, unique be system of either tissue chemical signals cells the receptors or immune by to act may of sensor innate macrophages or cells are immune cells. such cells as typically dendritic Sensor respond the ILCs. cells either produce cells, inflammatory cytokines innate that act mediators, NK Sensor effector immune with other chemokines as such on and cells can typically directly and activity or immune-response to into such infection tissues cell of of are cells eliminate to killing pathogens. effector then types direct that provide antiviral activities, aimed as by recruited all These or specific activity, reduce target have or cytokines production by target intracellular types cells of tissues inflammatory suited extracellular specially induce bacteria, parasites. are or can for mediators that Responses several pathogens, eliminating viruses, in

Principles adaptive of immunity.

cells large, infections, granular, intracellular lymphoid-like important able cells. against are with being innate these functions to in other immunity, especially kill unlike they antigen-specific lymphocytes, receptors. lack B. courtesy Smith. of Photograph

adaptive the the antigen-specific components to come lymphocytes. immunity, of now We only Unless antigen-specific the the lymphocyte to term refer otherwise, to lymphocytes. we shall indicated use pathogens person’s a of lifetime and important responses a memory. vast against during array various confer antigens allow encountered of Lymphocytes immunological feature from the the Lymphocytes antigen receptors highly this make through variable possible

Fig. inactive mostly are 1.12 small Lymphocytes cells. and eosin a panel dye, by have stained of by hematoxylin a has nuclei). left and blood no been cells nucleus purple lymphocyte (which the in shows surrounded small which micrograph red light the and of transcriptional little the purple note cytoplasm. the activity darker absence condensed lymphocyte indicating of patches chromatin of relative nucleus, the right micrograph of a lymphocyte. shows transmission panel small the electron a note the evidence chromatin, of functional condensed and cytoplasm, endoplasmic the the rough reticulum. Again, absence the inactivity: scanty of Photographs n. rooney. courtesy of

which recognize by on antigens. bind they surface, and their receptor, in are matures lymphocytes receptors prototype a expresses of variant their that a antigen-binding highly unique antigen of diverse sites. lymphocyte that huge bearing population repertoire a the so Each of foreign or that antigen. will there one a given can in at circulating the some Among the always be any body so time billion lymphocytes recognize

is, individual will unique against generating to agent, the so person a immediate protective it an of any response of and capable that subsequent having that is make immune to against the stronger it. have immunity infectious will adaptive exposure that A it; exposed system been immunological once is memory, feature an greatest naturally generating Finding today. it is immunity immunologists pathogens do challenges long-lasting facing that one of of ways the provoke not to

lymphocytes antigens 1-8 induces with of antigen effector The and activity. to receptors memory acquire interaction

immune are cells) vertebrate of major (B types lymphocytes cells). two system, and the the lymphocytes There T (T B in lymphocytes and quite system, 1960s. These the immune in express antigen roles the receptors was distinct of in as have different types discovered unimpressive body the circulating condensed, appear lymphocytes rather cells small chromatin as Most and nuclear with cytoplasmic in few a organelles inactive-appearing (Fig. 1.12). functional receptor cell an manifest surface. with that antigen a they until little Lymphocytes antigen specific encounter activity their on interacts and have met those are that into antigen, known lymphocytes. by have lymphocytes further activated, fully as have Lymphocytes not been functional naive become known antigen their activated as that are effector differentiated lymphocytes; yet

cells the and distinguished antigen T are express. they B that the structure cells of receptor by that same class antigen genes formed is receptor, The by proteins immunoglobulins (BCR), B-cell also receptor of a or antibodies, as (Ig) encode known B-cell (Fig. the 1.13). the B as is antigen immunoglobulin or (mIg) also immunoglobulin of Thus, membrane lymphocytes receptor (sIg). surface known in (TCR), and is quite structure the receptor is recognition The distinct related antigen but or T-cell to T-cell immunoglobulins properties. receptor, its

and B-cell (BCR), antigen or binds cell into plasma proliferate the B-cell a cells. differentiate receptor, will to B antigen After receptor of plasma form they B These effector lymphocytes, antibodies B-cell the are secrete the that and cell’s same the as antigen have receptor. specificity the the antibodies B becomes produced a cell’s antigen activates of target the B given cell that progeny. that Thus by

Principles of adaptive immunity.

Fig. antigen structure 1.13 receptors. of Schematic antigen-binding effector upper is molecule. an by activated molecule, secreted B as an panel: cells which antibody molecule acts receptor antigen as of this shown). the (not B-cell membrane-bound version A composed identical light two antibody identical heavy (green) is An and (yellow). of two chains chains constant part has part blue) a chain a each red). and (shaded variable (shaded with chain parts site. is a variable arm chains each the together antigen-binding variable and the coming region the formed to of light that the by two a antibody contains molecule create chain, a of heavy of constant parts and number the takes limited the heavy formed stem is the from of a forms. chains the is antigen. the constant this bound elimination involved region in of panel: lower antigen t-cell a receptor. also composed chain and β (yellow) a part. an variable this a of has (green), which each constant chain and two of a chains, is α variable parts region, of As the the site. create variable which two forms antibody molecule, chains antigen-binding the a the with secreted receptor the in produced not a t-cell is form.

receptor antigen that of it types first one of bind, T into different When an differentiates cell lymphocytes. encounters and effector can T functional its several proliferates a of T manifest can subsequently effector detect broad three activity. cells antigen, they classes When intracellular antigen. T other infected viruses that the or cells other Cytotoxic kill with bearing pathogens are cells the as production B-cell and other signals, often pathogens. cells specific such in form of that cells, of provide killing Helper antibody activate cytokines of functions the macrophage engulfed T of T suppress help Regulatory damage immune responses. possible limit to and cells of the of activity lymphocytes the other We of helper, 9, cells 15. and Chapters in discuss the cytotoxic, detailed 12, functions and regulatory T 11,

by activated to lymphocytes that the disease exposure can cells the vaccination. responsible immunity cells long-lasting the memory are differentiate will that cells, into for T Some follow or B antigen of and antigen. to on a will exposure cells specific second cells readily effector Memory their differentiate into Immunological in Chapter is 11. memory described

are receptors distinct of that Antibodies constant regions composed T-cell 1-9 and and provide functions. variable

DNA and Antibodies forms study of receptors by recombinant before of on long the cells. antigen technology allowed the techniques membrane-bound B biochemical traditional T studied the were These distinct are found that composed two antibody of early molecules studies regions. only the One region, (see or 1.13). called Fc one a forms fragment also region, which is region, takes four Fig. five crystallizable or of biochemically constant distinguishable antibodies by of number variety can different contrast, variable equally acid sequences composed a The recognize vast that an of region, antigens. be amino allow of to vast for region Edelman Porter, It 1972 Rodney who shared its the allowed was uniformity Fc that their Gerald relative by crystallography of work and on the variable of Prize early Nobel structure antibodies. analysis the region by X-ray the to the

chains. of antibody is identical and identical The two chains two composed heavy molecule light light regions. and variable each constant and Heavy chains have the chain heavy light of specificity a antibody. antigen-binding and form The to determines variable regions site combine of chain that the antigen-binding an a the and chains antigen-binding to molecule. antibody of Thus, contribute both specificity the heavy light two has so and has two Also, each regions, identical sites. antigen-binding antibody variable identical function The antibody, interact determines effector that is, bound. various to of once it cells of the the how will constant dispose with antibody the antigen region immune is

Fig. antigens receptors epitopes bind. within Antigens to while recognized response, are 1.14 the by sites are immune antigen molecules which the

as in proteins, macromolecules be complex shown as can yellow. such Antigens the antigen they and of are or portion to that known on sites as the most antigenic the bound epitope, receptor determinant, which larger or antigens antibody antigen is receptor. that for is the bind, than actual the here same one in can contain thus the more color bind). antibodies different red (shown in large (indicated may and and antigens epitopes than such epitope blue) as bind the they proteins as Antibodies the surface of recognize generally antigen. epitopes the on

Fig. T-cell bind fragment a complex a molecule. and self 1.15 of antigen an receptors receptors can that are antibodies, (first most buried recognize unlike epitopes antigens within panel). t-cell first degraded panel). an by delivered the molecule must molecule, epitope (second proteases these a called panel) (third peptide mHC be to and antigens self are this complex (tCrs; and It receptors panel). molecule, is mHC t-cell antigens recognized a of peptide fourth as that form, by in

and (see many shows to B-cell T-cell receptor receptor similarities the 1.13). The antibody Fig. β of TCR membrane. T-cell the and It span roughly chains, size the αand are equal in is that chains, which two composed creates region a variable a the αand Like antibody, the and binding has regions region, each β-chain and for of a site variable antigen. constant single combination TCR chain 5 functional constant of detail are and are antibody 4, in described properties in discussed antibodies of T-cell structures receptors Chapters both and Chapter regions in and The 10.

and different antigens receptors fundamentally 1-10 T-cell recognize Antibodies mechanisms. by

can encountered antigen an and principle, be chemical any usual pathogens. as antigens In adaptive proteins, infection polysaccharides glycoproteins, are in the the system, of almost recognized immune by but the an structure an the and molecular (Fig. as antigen’s structure, or is epitope a of small antigenic the individual determinant known recognized part antibody antigen or recognizes An portion receptor 1.14). antigen epitopes can glycoproteins recognized many have by and different receptors. be that different Typically, proteins

spaces. or recognize antigen in receptors native B-cell serum of extracellular Antibodies the the the directly and epitopes of different simultaneously It for is recognition to possible different an or clearing neutralizing increases antibodies its antigen. by such efficiency simultaneous the antigen the epitopes; recognize

usually recognize can chemical very do antibodies. antigens differently type any T-cell and from nearly so protein antibodies receptors recognize Whereas structure, of protein, MHC a peptide recognizes derived The peptide if is the molecules receptor only degraded glycoproteins called (Fig. cell-surface a to partially but from bound T-cell specialized epitope 1.15). of called genes large of of the cell-surface a (MHC). family histocompatibility complex major this are members encoded cluster in The glycoproteins such virus, arising recognized from can from derived from pathogens, cells be pathogens. as antigens by proteins a T or The extracellular intracellular difference is the from antibody signal receptor; and the A it no its antigen, bound that actions secreted that receptor T-cell there T-cell the of T the on form to has to cell functions further the immunological the of T solely subsequent the depend themselves. molecule effects cells is subsequent epitopes out 9. and T 6 Chapter MHC describe in cells proteins We antigens functions how in on carry Chapter their are how from further placed will

epitope a buried and are into to peptide The molecule, receptors antigen by receptor epitopes recognized The binds of ÿrst fragments MHC peptide T-cell binds complex be MHC a molecule an to molecule T-cell TCRMHCmoleculeMHCmoleculeepitopepeptideThe often self down must broken epitope peptide The

of Principles immunity. adaptive

of gene are assembled genes gene somatic segments. rearrangements receptor Antigen-receptor 1-11 by incomplete

TLR system a 100 as of of immune inflammatory means limited different stimuli the detects of such innate number proteins. fewer NOD relatively numbering and sensors, than by The proteins, types of and immunity encoded infinite specificities, of finite provide are adaptive by genes. a seemingly of yet receptors range a Antigen-specific number 1976 this Tonegawa, in was Susumu for 1987 basis was The specificity awarded range by for the which of Nobel he discovered Prize. extraordinary Immunoglobulin chains. sets variable of segments, are the one part polypeptide region a encoding gene of each regions immunoglobulin of of as inherited the variable these DNA DNA complete a the by development encoding of a joined variable are form of region. marrow, B-cell stretch in process segments to recombination gene During irreversibly bone a similar the gene receptor takes antigen-receptor A T-cell process rearrangement in during the of T of cells place development for thymus. genes

thousands different in generate few hundred different can to of ways Just receptor a segments chains. different gene combine staggering a encode allows combinatorial diversity amount receptors. small This genetic truly a material of to diversity of During additional random as known the at nucleotides the junctional addition or diversity. gene junctions process, diversity creates of of the segments recombination this subtraction the chains, receptor gene is by sets fact two has antigen that further distinct by segments. each each different encoded of variable Diversity amplified gene complete rearrangement will gene from We the in segments receptors describe Chapter assembles 5. process that antigen

of to mediate by adaptive cells give that Lymphocytes immunity. clones 1-12 antigen rise activated effector antigen-specific

features critical are two adaptive of immunity immunity. lymphocyte distinguish that development from innate There developing that the one a specificity. manner receptor that segments receptors First, process each described ensures carried lymphocyte in out above that assembles only gene antigen expresses from incomplete is cells shared others specificity that innate lymphocytes the many immune each different receptors the features its the express in of antigen recognition mature system ‘clonal,’ pattern receptor. of pathogens, many recognize by lymphocyte differs and Whereas so the is of expression from antigen-receptor the because specificity. inherit changes its same progeny rearrangement receptor the DNA, process irreversibly Second, gene lymphocyte’s the all an lymphocyte of specificity with proliferation inherited receptors. clone progeny, by cell’s the identical forms Because individual a antigen is of a cells this

individual of least lymphocytes receptor There comprising human one at of the an repertoire at 108 any specificities the different individual. lymphocyte are in time, antigen into lymphocytes lymphocytes will be activated process and to similar are receptor a binds encounter those cells. which that to undergoing selection: natural effector to their differentiate an proliferate only continually These antigen. postulated first as in antibody on receptor that of body preexistence Macfarlane antibody-producing the served surface displaying by the a in was 1950s the for different This proposed cells, potential the mechanism of its membrane-bound version Burnet, the a each selective many who specificity process cell divide clonotypic now secrete of expansion; known first identical clonal as a clonal is surface activation can produce a the to binding that antigen, of (Fig. with and to receptor triggered that to this expansion progeny, 1.16). antibodies On cells many and identical clone activated the identical Burnet clonal selection theory the this called

speciÿcity a different large A to with rise of single number gives each progenitor a cell lymphocytes,

Fig. Clonal 1.16 selection. progenitor each each a a of number large lymphoid lymphocytes, distinct rise receptor. antigen gives to bearing receptors with antigens before are to self tolerance they lymphocytes fully that mature, bind such become self ubiquitous ensuring eliminated antigens. activated starts foreign is divide. and on (red with When antigen cell that to receptor a lymphocyte, the a mature interacts dot) naive clone same identical whose antigen. the all rise to progeny, of bind receptors of It gives a progeny differentiate into thus effector and the proliferate is cells. Antigen specificity as maintained although cells, been mediate effector memory. to some response by antigen are these the retained ceases, immune immunological eliminated has once lymphocytes

a unique bears of type speciÿcity receptor lymphocyte Each a with single

with that lymphocyte high to of molecule binding Interaction leads a capable between receptor molecule lymphocyte a and activation foreign afÿnity

will cells receptors speciÿcity activated identical differentiated that effector lymphocyte of was lymphocyte those the The parental from an derived derived of cell which from bear to

self absent of for the therefore development speciÿc mature at receptors stage in Lymphocytes and are deleted lymphocytes an ubiquitous cell lymphoid molecules are bearing repertoire early from

Fig. clonal principles basic The four of 1.17 selection.

are four of production; basic in listed Fig. antibody its postulates 1.17. principle is selection of most the lymphocytes important immunity. in single adaptive Clonal

are normally self-reactive functionally eliminated or receptors inactivated. during 1-13 Lymphocytes are with development

Burnet was themselves. receptors of lymphocytes indeed the nothing known the his function or formulated of When antigen theory, which lymphocytes removal immune James of the the all lymphocytes early in the from discovered Gowans when rats known were resulted small restored replaced. In were small the that 1960s, responses, loss of adaptive be the units field lymphocytes biology immunology. the to This the of realization new led must of the clonal of and became their cellular focus selection, that

problem. conceptual it one selection with raised Clonal explained significant of adaptive elegantly but immunity, receptors diverse lymphocytes antigens. there a individual, is some antigen possibility self so generated react that the receptors during different receptors randomly an an of lifetime being might With many own against individual’s prevented from lymphocytes attacking the and native on How tissues the body of recognizing them? antigens are or blood a unresponsive, tissues. shared different another’s circulation, were common Ray placenta, Owen and that one thus to had twin with the in calves 1940s shown tolerant, late a placental immunologically genetically that then Medawar to tolerant 1953 exposure foreign mice tissues to development Peter in become immunologically to tissues. caused embryonic these showed during deletion. a that they are can before lymphocytes process known as are self-reactive proposed that Burnet clonal developing mature, potentially removed the work 1960 Prize for on their tolerance. Burnet and shared Medawar Nobel 1980s. demonstrated to late occur was the process experimentally This in little cell of suicide a lymphocytes apoptosis—derived form receive eliminated programmed Some are their from leaves meaning cell development that too trees— the from called much death. or or either falling during receptor through a by too Greek of signal antigen word of tolerance called anergy, state, an well rely then suppression mechanisms as the identified on Other that induction of have inactive immunological self-reactive of of types active mechanisms as lymphocytes. of been since the that lymphocyte tolerance describe shape repertoire. mechanisms will and Chapter receptor 8 development lymphocyte and will sometimes can discuss fail. 14 Chapters tolerance immune how mechanisms 15

of Principles adaptive immunity.

in thymus mature lymphoid tissues the body. bone throughout then or Lymphocytes 1-14 the and congregate in marrow the

tissues numbers or and organized lymphoid in lymph blood lymphoid in in a nonlymphoid in and the Lymphocytes organs, framework cells. lymphocytes which aggregates of the circulate of are are found also large are or broadly where organs, central lymphocytes and are maintained secondary organs, or be responses adaptive peripheral immune primary and organs mature into initiated. lymphoid lymphocytes where naive the are can lymphoid Lymphoid generated, the divided upper and central the chest. organs the organ thymus, an are marrow in The the bone lymphoid and nasal other and lymphoid tract, the comprise lymphoid organs mucosa. the the the the tract, respiratory The lymph nodes, gut, peripheral urogenital and spleen, the of mucosal tissues lymphoid tissues the locations The schematically are in shown main Fig. of chapter. peripheral lymphoid organs individual the detail in we in later describe the 1.18; more carry lymph blood. it system by deposit it from lymphatic which the tissues, nodes, through nodes and the are extracellular interconnected vessels, drain fluid back into of Lymph a

progenitors lymphocytes in originate B rise The to and that give T the marrow. bone their B complete development within the marrow. cells bone young of marrow. for lymphocytes for mnemonic a Fabricius, the chicks bursa in in Although ‘B’ useful organ it is the B in a mature, originally lymphocytes which lymphoid bone stood their development lymphocytes complete migrate immature and there. name, which of their precursors get the T thymus, they The from to through of have peripheral mature the completed enter types lymphocytes and as they maturation, Once both continuously lymphocytes tissues. lymphoid bloodstream circulate naive the

Fig. tissues in of 1.18 The the lymphoid body. distribution stem the cells arise bone central marrow the cells lymphoid in differentiate (yellow)—B from t and and lymphocytes marrow bone thymus. organs the in in in cells the to migrate peripheral in from bloodstream carried are (blue). they tissues lymphoid the and organs these nodes, gut-associated associated and mucosa, patches, tonsils, the such include lymphoid lymph Peyer’s these appendix. with tissues and spleen, as their encounter recirculate antigen. of specific blood peripheral organs by lymphocyte organs the and lymphoid the these until antigen, they and are activation sites between the lymphocytes vein. duct, nodes, the extracellular lymph subclavian which fluid tissues, left thoracic drain into from the peripheral empties into through and the lymphatics the into fluid, up lymphocytes antigen nodes back lymph, carries blood. the as taken as and nodes, the by as the dendritic recirculating cells lymph well from this lymph to macrophages known lymphoid linings as associated shown). with mucosa is the tissue such also (not bronchial other

Fig. responses. adaptive cells immune Dendritic initiate 1.19 antigens by residing take endocytosis. dendritic cells pathogens and Immature tissue a macropinocytosis their by and in up receptor-mediated molecules necessary and mature the lymph both that to as migrate dendritic co-stimulatory by lymphatics recognition express of they recognizes nonphagocytic they a are regional to of t the to that presence nodes, cells naive fully antigen. antigen the arrive activate pathogens stimulated where cell through the lymphocyte stimulate thus proliferation cells differentiation. dendritic and the

MOVIE 1.1

Fig. key a and cells 1.20 immune Dendritic innate system. link between form system adaptive the the immune dendritic activated infection. invariant recognize pathogens like cells early and cell-surface an cells stimuli pathogen the of immunity, are molecules for innate by these receptors via in other form to that in to the and by tissues t phagocytic; cells. a specialized wide surface are are display can at ingest their range antigens pathogens cell a dendritic cells they of dendritic be in recognized

antigen by lymphoid and tissues. immune Adaptive are cells initiated 1-15 antigen-presenting in responses secondary

that to for immune receptors lymphocytes responses provided specific reactivity, signals have appropriate initiated support when antigens or inflammatory T B activation. there are are Adaptive which their encounter and at occurs cells, secondary organs. activation this migrated picked to up cells that For lymphoid via antigens sites with have T encounters of infection dendritic the dendritic engulf the at intracellularly. the in of and site tissues PRRs cells’ dendritic it of infection pathogen the PAMPs stimulates by cells Activation to the degrade material, receptor-independent including also bacteria, virus take extracellular They by particles up and macropinocytosis. dendritic antigen activates MHC receptors of antigens on display display processes to the the These that lead molecules cells, the the of peptide of lymphocytes. a proteins its final, PRRs called T and molecules, the proliferate dendritic form differentiate the of Activation triggers functional of co-stimulatory support which to fully lymphocyte the also to cells cell-surface into express ability (Fig. 1.19). response the reasons a immune (APCs), and are as the link form innate dendritic also crucial (Fig. they called antigen-presenting For response immune and cells cells adaptive such, between these 1.20). act as the cells the that In certain also and situations, B are adaptive specialized antigen-presenting cells, are cells can initiating but response. immune cells macrophages dendritic in but cells antibody cells optimal the B also for from T activated Free cells, antigens most helper B antigen receptors can require ‘help’ of stimulate responses. virtually adaptive therefore is an essential activation lymphocytes first all T of responses. naive stage immune in The Chapter cells antigens cells. for presentation dendritic to 6 T how discuss processed are to to returns co-stimulation 9 and discuss activation. lymphocyte and Chapters 7 10 describes Chapter T cells how B help activating in cells.

of adaptive Principles immunity.

knee. lymphoid the recirculate illustrated node—a as lymph peripheral a lymph constantly naive lymphocytes tissue, node situated here through popliteal behind an activated. draining will the may specific In in where the antigens this of node, foot, encounter lymphocytes and be become their case lymph infection the activated Both the lymphatic to bloodstream are via lymphocytes and system. the returned nonactivated

organs. encounter peripheral antigen in the respond to and Lymphocytes lymphoid 1-16

organs—the tissues in and the and Fig. each peripheral spleen, lymphoid Antigen eventually (see nodes, lymph other lymphocytes lymphoid mucosal encounter 1.18). cells. lymphocytes Mature antigens recirculating carried tissues, from are primarily to these pathogen infection, continually of dendritic through which by are naive sites to trap specialized organs The antigen-bearing initiation facilitate lymphoid are responses. immune cells peripheral adaptive and the of to dendritic organization lymphocytes. stromal help nonleukocyte structural the lymphoid basic to life which a survival provide lymphocytes signals the in aggregations the composed of of sustain are and of of the tissue cells, both framework tissues of Peripheral lymphocytes, cells. also resident dendritic Besides lymphoid peripheral macrophages organs contain and

from antigen antigen-bearing occurs as site a (Fig. the infection the cells of lymph free afferent such the into vessels in skin, and an lymphatic the draining tissue nodes infection through travel When dendritic antigen-specific lymphoid lymphocytes. 1.21)—peripheral activate they tissues where a which activated via the The cells of lymph proliferation then and period nodes efferent lymphocytes undergo as the leave most differentiation, after effector vessel. lymphatic bloodstream eventually This the Fig. (see them returns to which then carries where they the to act. tissues will 1.18), them adaptive recognized, not does which process an the immune antigen time that until that after that days is from the encountered This about Fig. not response takes been effective means whole a about become an has antigen 1.7). 4–6 to (see infection week before returned they recognize tissues lymphatic which lymphoid continue their they and do antigen die. through leave that to the antigen or to also vessel lymphocytes blood, through efferent from recirculate the until are not Naive recognize

vessels tissues at from lymph Fig. extensive (see points that is lymphoid the of lymphatic the The fluid of system highly the the collects nodes and extracellular it of located organized system, to blood convergence which returns are organs the 1.18). This the and filtration called is produced blood lymph. from continuously by is fluid extracellular exerted by pressure production, vessels, away Lymph peripheral the flows under or the lymphatics. is lymphatic and carried its by from tissues continuous important of reverse another along. movements prevent in One-way the in a vessels flow, are one to valves of lymphatic in lymph the the part the and driving body relation

from cells antigen-bearing drain fluid (Fig. infected carry the afferent lymph nodes lymphatic tissues and pathogens the noted above, and from tissues vessels to As 1.22). the chemokines. into to simply attracted lymph Free lymph the the by diffuse antigens migrate cells while through dendritic the fluid actively node, node, extracellular squeezing appearance same by locations. called through walls to rounded endothelial The from lymph relative more the the for lymphocytes cells specialized and of thicker, chemokines named (HEV), attract in their vessels other also flatter blood, nodes these high blood enter endothelial venules with the outer more nodes, node, T which lymph cells localized cortex lymph up lymphocytes are in follicles, the B the of In make

Fig. lymphocytes Circulating 1.21 organs. antigen lymphoid encounter peripheral in

lymph heart reach lymph of sites blood infected Naive the lymph enter Lymphocytes peripheral from from duct blood and lymphatics lymphocytes return node nodes to Antigens via nodes thoracic lymph tissue via infection

Fig. node. of 1.22 a Organization lymph inner diagram node medulla. lymph a a consists an and in outermost left As shown longitudinal at node the cortex an in of lymph section, of of cells outer B lymphoid and follicles organized adjacent, the mainly composed cells an made paracortical, is of into of t cortex of or cells. areas dendritic cortex up and way, contain is germinal of as areas the centers. intense secondary When immune some under follicles— follicles—known called lymphoid proliferation central response of an B-cell dramatic, senescent. become centers reactions are as these out germinal eventually but very die phagocytic extracellular the lymphatics. to phagocytic spaces node afferent of antigens carries macrophages from in draining lymph lymph tissues cells from and body the via the the the dendritic cellular from directly of the these node. the sinuses parts the into migrate the via in efferent leaves lymphatics lymph the medulla. cells of macrophages cords. the and medullary plasma of known as antibody-secreting strings the consists medulla through bloodstream lymphocytes the lymphatic. venules efferent node specialized from postcapillary shown) with the (not the lymph enter naive leave through and the containing lymph micrograph a (right) light node, a transverse follicles the centers. prominent with germinal through section shows ×7. magnification of rooney. courtesy Photograph n.

or cortex to referred distributed surrounding zones (see diffusely also the in areas, as Fig. paracortical deep T-cell the 1.22). by become dendritic and Lymphocytes same into attracted paracortical blood they the migrating enter because chemokines, antigen-presenting from the there. lymph cells also areas macrophages first, are the localized nodes and dendritic these can become antigen lymph through node and cells the on trapped macrophages. Free diffusing in T-cell specific naive thus cells become T creates their the antigen juxtaposition of can and antigen-presenting T This environment ideal in cells, bind activated. which and an zone naive cells antigen,

which a cooperation but effector cell. also activation T noted cells, of earlier, T cells the only the to usually B binds As helper type not receptor, of activated of antigen, requires B-cell by regulated cells is node activation. and within T of B The dynamically cells state the of location their lymph activated, T zone, to When become move cells. and follicle to cells function helper where their first provide border B B the T-cell the they T and cells can of cells both plasma and cells Some where follicles B into include the of B-cell differentiation cells. intense centers, proliferation are undergoing activated germinal 10. described detail These in Chapter are mechanisms in

the behind In humans, is just a situated fist-sized Fig. the organ (see stomach spleen 1.18). collects lymphatic no antigen has direct it system; instead, from with responses the connection to involved is It in and blood-borne pathogens. blood the immune via enter blood Lymphocytes the vessels. spleen leave and cells. red also collects senescent blood and of disposes The spleen organization Fig. shown is in schematically Its 1.23. spleen red is site red the is cell of pulp, of blood which disposal. of bulk The composed the spleen, the forming running through arterioles the surround isolated lymphocytes The

adaptive immunity. of Principles

Fig. the lymphoid Organization 1.23 of of tissues the spleen. of lymphocytes. shows red red pulp arteriole. which destruction, each areas), left of In schematic from (pink and a blood both cell trabecular is interspersed a the pulp, into white site blood consists carrying flows spleen lymphocytes antigen of a the central of artery that area top at white From smaller lymphoid with arteriole blood this the fan pulp. vessels out, a marginal each section of white zone terminating areas surrounds in arterioles. An the in a shows which a the (PFZ), arrangement specialized (yellow and of of spleen small discrete (top pulp blue) right) of human called perifollicular zone enlargement eventually around human central spleen the zone. of transverse the is pass white section, most then white in two pulp and spaces through Cells antigen the zone. perifollicular open shown in pulp the into with blood-filled the in light portions micrograph section. longitudinal mature human section of left a at cells. section of two spleen transverse the show below pulp a this white transverse diagram bottom (bottom center) enlargements of shows for B schematics immunostained white longitudinal of PAlS and Both right) (bottom and section pulp. follicle are zone. the surrounded by Surrounding perifollicular made in sheath (arrowhead the goes central bottom), the arteriole is emerges arteriole follicular at (PAlS), follicle, t the lymphoid the periarteriolar the of PAlS up traverses cells. the zone and zone, through into come dendritic together and antigen-loaded opens the here. cells lymphocytes perifollicular marginal follicles (upper mainly arrowheads). of B consist the cells; follicles, gC, a pulp; by follicular Co, mZ, germinal in zone; surrounded germinal secondary center arteriole. arrowheads, is red central marginal a corona; B-cell rP, B-cell center; corona. milicevic. surrounded by m. the courtesy zone are follicles of a so-called marginal Photograph n.

areas pulp. white of T arteriole of around lymphoid sheath contains the lymphocytes is periarteriolar mainly The called an sheath (PALS) and cells. these intervals B follicles occur contain at mainly it, along cells. and Lymphoid it has is marginal area cells surrounds B of has population known the rich a noncirculating cells. and few in zone T marginal macrophages, called zone as resident, follicle; cells, the An B to cells polysaccharides. low bacterial to antibodies rapidly produce have poised that B These capsular affinity are of degree 8, provide discussed immune antibodies, fully Chapter before is which response in some activated. protection These the adaptive are macrophages from are zone. filtered marginal and by immature complexes within microbes, and the cells antigen:antibody antigens, blood the dendritic soluble Blood-borne immature the tissues migration of areas of the zones antigen present areas dendritic to spleen from marginal peripheral lymph dendritic to up able cells. the they are becoming T-cell and antigens the T after the T-cell cells cells to in here carry Like to taking they nodes, activated; the migrate in

M epithelium dome an specialized ruf˜es lymphatics efferent M a follicle-associated center have cells layer containing M which epithelium GC b cells cells, characteristic subepithelial membrane patches epithelial villusgerminal covered T called c cell dome by are Peyer’s follicle cell TDA

Fig. Organization mucosa. in gut 1.24 a Peyer’s of the patch the patch diagram follicles numerous the As Peyer’s B-cell with germinal contains left centers. shows, on a t-cell called follicles t between areas by therefore and areas. are the are cells dependent occupied the dendritic subepithelial and the B and between known surface rich and the the is layer dome, the follicles cells, cells. in cells, t is epithelium as Peyer’s a and up made so-called afferent enters specialized lymphatics, the epithelium the microfold (m) have across antigen no directly cells. patches from of gut organs, divisions basic Although this from other very lymphoid maintained. the are tissue looks different nodes, patches lymphocytes lymph shown), via leave from Peyer’s lymphatic. the blood across high the venules the of enter and As in efferent walls endothelial the (not panel a in mouse. patch of the a a section shows a gut micrograph in the light wall through Peyer’s lying epithelial be the the patch seen beneath can Peyer’s tissues. dependent center; germinal gC, t-cell tdA, area. scanning follicle-associated the the the and a, lack boxed b, micrograph cells. layer on epithelium m of in microvilli normal Panel epithelial present shows cells, electron the panel mucus which a the m appears as a each epithelial cell surface. area sunken on of c, an b, the panel Panel a area higher-magnification cell. view ruffled the characteristic m of in surface shows boxed particles. are and cells many m other entry portal for of the pathogens ×100; panel ×5000; c, magnification a, and stain, hematoxylin panel eosin Panel ×23,000. b,

environmental encounters. 1-17 microbial orchestrate immune that Mucosal specialized structures have to surfaces responses

exposed food, enter natural these through from other antigens of and the pathogens air, to vast Most the potential and of load surfaces, mucosal a microbial body body. are flora the also the system mucosa-associated the immune system extensive Mucosal of or (MALT). known tissues generally an lymphoid are lymphoid mucosal by tissues protected surfaces as set a system rest they body, organs. mucosal specialized estimated of the many other of from contain the the cells Collectively, to immune recirculation form peripheral as as rules all those is obeying different somewhat lymphoid lymphocytes of in the and antigen (GALT) of include tonsils, from The epithelial gut-associated in they surfaces structures Peyer’s intestine and the the called and small adenoids, specialized collect appendix, gastrointestinal the patches, lymphoid tissues tract. the by (Fig. tissues, these cells called Peyer’s or In the important patches, antigen collected highly epithelial of cells are and specialized which organized M microfold the is most 1.24). lymphocytes. T dome surrounded lymphocytes a The lymphocytes B of of central large consisting form numbers follicle by of a smaller T lymphocytes. cells resident Peyer’s patch the antigen the to within Dendritic present Lymphocytes through the efferent and from Peyer’s enter patches blood lymphatics. leave through the are patches carry their from into lymphocytes system tissues disseminated into to they mucosal actions. back and effector generated travel where out in Effector Peyer’s bloodstream, lymphatic the

tissue present but (NALT) respiratory tract other mucosa: present respiratory tract. tissue bronchus-associated nasal-associated of (BALT) more in aggregates the diffuse and Similar in and lymphoid are lymphoid the are lymphocytes tract which covering by can Peyer’s in inhaled lymphoid antigens these respiratory cells, and become patches, M also the through of overlaid the trapped mucosal mucous are that pass. the Like microbes tissues Chapter in system The immune is discussed 12. mucosal

basic same different lymphoid lymph appearance, and mucosa-associated architecture. nodes, in Although share tissues spleen, very the the all to and order infection from the antigen inducing small on thus operate antigen-presenting They responses. of trapping same principle, cells immune lymphocytes, present to sites migratory all antigens adaptive in The lymphoid and tissues signals recirculate. that they sustaining specific so that not provide also to immediately, to encounter survive do peripheral continue lymphocytes their antigen

involved not static lymphoid initiating markedly, quite responses, structures in peripheral vary they the adaptive immune tissues are Because are but

of adaptive Principles immunity.

is depending on whether infection or not present. infection. diffuse during the disappear, way more may in changes whereas of defined infection tissues tissues the architecture appear lymphoid response a to and organized an mucosal in The then lymph of For follicles lymphocytes the example, centers form proliferate expand to the Fig. B germinal nodes as B-cell (see lymph entire a glands. as known 1.22), enlarges, node swollen familiarly and phenomenon the

tissues. body found lymphocytes in be found and can rather in being Finally, particular throughout sites lymphoid distributed than organized the cells populations lymphoid of specialized innate gut, as of propria lining of not the and but the the include Such reproductive in epidermis. the sites lamina epithelia, as well the and, gut, liver humans, in the base mice the of epithelial have in described role and an tissues further are 12. from lymphocyte in important and these populations These to Chapters 8 seem infection, protecting

1-18 generating the cells antigen and peripheral effector activated proliferate memory. by Lymphocytes lymphoid organs, in immunological

a given of The receptor lymphocytes some usually for receptor there lymphocyte great will be antigen. means repertoire bearing that any foreign diversity Recent a mount pathogen. be number hundred few mouse, a certainly experiments to against response perhaps to a suggest per this enough not first lymphocytes fight with To infection, antigen-specific an proliferate. sufficient to receptor is to appropriate a an effector specificity activated lymphocyte generate when into been differentiate days. has do effector identical 5 finally large Only process cells of a that 4 requires cells, these clone to a produced has system. adaptive response a by means initial several the immune to This occurred days the innate that after been and infection the detected occurs pathogen immune

mRNAs specific nucleus antigen new the its activated new synthesized. and the and an lymphocyte antigen-presenting on cytoplasm are proteins cell, stops migrating, a naive and of On recognizing volume increases, a and as Within cell few a known different the hours, is lymphoblast. completely looks to daughter duplicate of produce able 3–5 themselves lymphoblasts a every two around lymphocyte of to cells identical so Dividing specificity. for clone that days, times are four single 24 can hours 1000 a naive differentiate then into cells. effector These the In case the of secrete differentiated B which plasma cells cells, effector antibody. cells, the are the other cells, cells, cytotoxic Section 1-8). immune of destroy cells, the effector cells helper In the T either cells, infected system are activate to able (see of cells T case are T which which or

naive lymphocytes. not lymphocytes like Effector recirculate do detect to others the sites and effector blood; in infection tissues activate cells them stay from cells. the of Some migrate B into lymphoid T up spleen residence the system. the migrate antibodies peripheral nodes lymphoid organs, remain plasma generated cells amounts but the and secreting marrow into in in most Some bone there, will plasma lymph blood and to take large of cells the antibody-secreting Effector immune in generally generated system stay cells tissues. the mucosal mucosal the within in die. clonal generated an response expansion immune lymphocytes Most eventually by will a T significant cells and after activated of eliminated. B However, antigen-specific has been persist cells antigen number cells as basis These memory the of known are immunological and memory. form cells can They naive be response thereby a protective pathogen on more lymphocytes, second reactivated ensures more which a immunity. lasting and a quickly and encounter much with rapid usually effective than provides

Fig. 1.25 The response. of course a antibody typical an primary response. a with first antigen the produces encounter little zero antibody specific Antigen in time introduced at A serum. encounters the (dark to response. A typical then appears; After gradually declines, a primary plateau antigen a a lag phase concentration blue), of against (light rises its blue) antibody and for antibody preset. (yellow), there tested little B the antigen, serum another is against is When a A When memory. occurs, mixture is secondary antibody antigens a response rapid and illustrating challenged to A animal intense immunological later with of very B, the and initial is injections the this main after reason for giving vaccination. an booster B. the antigen response resembles note first the as primary that B A, is the to encounter this with response to

a characteristics antigen. the immunization of response by observed to with are secondary same an immunization comparing first response immunological to or the readily antibody The individual’s with booster primary memory a or As in shown Fig. response a markedly the than a primary the after achieves level phase 1.25, antibody secondary in response. lag shorter and occurs higher the affinity process for the or specialized within maturation, place can a of the 1-16). binding, antigen in germinal to centers follicles higher takes antibodies B-cell During due secondary Section also acquire (see strength which affinity, responses, called affinity affinity process are required helper of undergo but do cells Importantly, T-cell for the maturation. maturation, receptors not T changes for show as because responsiveness and the activation, a cell memory cells, the Compared T receptor. in lower T of naive a but threshold in not cells changes of result of with the describe the of maturation and We Chapters affinity mechanisms 10. in 5

of is The cells cellular expansion entirely attraction differentiation for memory specific immunological and basis the memory therefore of clonal the antigen-specific. eliciting a and have the is that clonal antigen, that It adaptive vaccination memory by successful reinfection have immunological and repelled an pathogens immune response. that successfully been is with enables prevents immunological we 11, In is to biological immunity. of perhaps Chapter memory, will which consequence important return adaptive the most

Summary.

structures detect system receptors individual to While adaptive specific recognition or receptors on common antigen immune immune invariant the pathogens. a microbial on to cause, that structures pattern to damage the recognize repertoire innate relies of system they relies are the immunity greater and sensitivity specificity. provides with adaptive feature This immunological of antigen-reactive of protection enhances pathogen. expansion property confers lymphocytes which same by The clonal the the against reinfection memory, also

immunity types lymphocytes. of major two relies Adaptive on the antibodies. circulating marrow are source bone of cells in B and mature the presented T and MHC peptides immunity. by of from in cells mechanisms the recognize the mature effector pathogens thymus

cells. infected or on antigen-presenting molecules cells that bearing foreign antigen. involves response of An of the selection adaptive amplification lymphocytes the and receptors clones recognize adaptive key This of response. framework the an the provides for selection understanding all theoretical features clonal immune

specificity. cell-surface Each lymphocyte a carries single antigen of receptors the recombination variable receptors. protein distinct immunoglobulins, These and two generated the chains random gene pairing chains: heavy variable receptors segments are of chains T-cell receptor in of of and by the or light repertoire recognize lymphocytes antigen. can any antigen-receptor virtually of large The eliminate the and co-stimulatory receptors—migrate new to cells initiated and infection fails cells—typically that an lymphoid a immune dendritic draining activated when to immunity innate bear Adaptive antigen-presenting tissues. is response from antigens pathogens

lymphoid in Immune several initiated peripheral are responses tissues. a serves infections. spleen The filter as blood-borne for GALT) helper organized cells B into nodes and by tissues and antigen-presenting where various cells efficiently T draining are (MALT tissues the cells. lymphoid Lymph mucosal and and specific zones be gut-associated can activated T or clonal T can it peripheral agent. and that progeny its When lymphoid lymphocyte a corresponding eliminate the proliferates, in infectious differentiate effector encounters recirculating B into antigen its and these tissues, lymphocytes encountered again. it to A to subset rapidly these respond is differentiates if into same pathogen the ready lymphocytes of memory proliferating cells, development, central differentiation and the of processes of three of form main of parts recognition, The book. material this these the details

of effector The mechanisms immunity.

they to immune infecting pathogens, agent. appropriate destroy to and adaptive must mechanism activated For each effector suited cells innate an employ noted pathogens The in Fig. of types different responses both and their require destruction. and recognition their for 1.26 lifestyles have different different is effector pathogen against defenses modules for suited organized it different different then, lifestyles. into surprising, Perhaps not are these types that innate this module of is collection elimination to both effector humoral of and of act adaptive, an category achieve a pathogen. particular sense, a mechanisms, cell-mediated together and In that antigens plasma become environment. cells extracellular phagocytic into against For involve extracellular secrete pathogens both can B the and and which defense cells example, extracellular recognize that antibody cells, involves intracellular inside T peptides cells detect cell. against infected pathogens the generated can Defense that pathogens kill effector with intracellular viruses. Some such T directly infected cells cells as major activated cytokines. of patterns helper cells, differentiate three subsets cells T Moreover, of which different produce T into These promoting provide intracellular lifestyles: bacteria they and major extracellular below, against pathogens three against fungi, destroy in infection, defenses immunity can subsets, specialize directed having defend three discussed barrier parasites. generally at or antibody. cells by extracellular B cells make against T helping promote also pathogens defense

Most proteins are response of macrophages the those as and and adaptive of dispose as complement. an as such the such to involve other neutrophils, mechanisms of effector innate by and used pathogens immunity same cells immune vertebrate it by Indeed, that innate response likely the addition specific the of evolved defense in recognition to immune adaptive mechanisms seems existing invertebrates. already properties of lymphoid cytokine-producing supported findings cells—the different T similar those subsets differentiation patterns ILCs—show by cells. into This recent to is of innate the that

system. on depend cells this innate of recruiting outlining actions molecules and almost antibodies, of which section the the begin immune effector by entirely We

modules pathogens. effector types of different protect immune from responses can select Innate to several 1-19 against

lymphocytes, several mentioned the ILCs—that Section similarities immune contains to particularly cells—NK types innate we T have cells of in cells. system As 1-7, and exhibit can cells, the some the cytokines effector the antigen-specific T of cells produce. cytotoxic NK produce cells receptors cells but and lack T that of T capacity of from marrow cells antigen-specific same ILCs bone also they and cells, develop lack as receptors. progenitor in the NK the that in comprise produce Very activated. discoveries actually when will several that they indicate closely differ cytokines the recent lineages related that ILCs specific mentioned striking there and subsets above. of cytokines between as subsets, a similarity by helper produced is the T-cell Remarkably, patterns ILC of innate NK innate are the their are helper that appears the homolog homologs subsets cytotoxic ILCs cells. of counterparts, of cells and It T-cell T

cytokines a are As Section mentioned different (see number 1-6, III). Appendix there in large of functions with way promotes. the each A cytokine by to that is of organize module convenient cytokines effects effector the tend cytokines pathogens. intracellular to Some immunity promote to target activating to One to and intracellular phagocytes tissues more kill cytokine both acts resist such is by pathogens. by pathogens interferon-γ, efficiently inducing which intracellular type called is This 1 immunity. of called making ILC but the and not adaptive innate is lymphocytes, all subsets ILC1. some IFN-γ produced is and IFN-γ by subset of which and favoring pathogens, 2 coordinate extracellular produce modules Other type parasitic and subsets called type respectively. ILC against 3, effector cytokines defense frequently functions of throughout effector be will modular nature The book. this encountered immune modules specialized One directed the system be activated (Fig. subsets the different either innate effector lymphocytes of cells seems immune against categories amplifying from that or adaptive innate that or can activate of adaptive principle that for to pathogens sensor different are particular are 1.27).

effector immunity. of the mechanisms

Fig. adaptive and a Innate cells lymphocyte functions. of 1.27 variety share different innate by are modules served effector the mechanisms. adaptive immune both and a similar there generally For with cell of four type lymphocytes, corresponding of each innate of types functional is the t characteristics. major exert at category that each broadly t innate distinct directed set and of pathogen. cell an effector of lymphocyte a activity is

their products. protect pathogens and against extracellular toxic 1-20 Antibodies

are plasma—the found in fluid component Antibodies in blood—and fluids. of extracellular by once humors, as immunity. as mediated antibodies known is were known body humoral immunity Because fluids

or Y-shaped sites constant, and region. Fc, one antigen-binding molecules are Antibodies with identical two mentioned as 1-9, the an classes there antibody region Section of isotypes. forms are antibody, constant in As the known or of five properties—how constant mechanisms engage dispose functional once it antigen of effector is recognized. it with The that antibody’s region an will the determines out by carries class function set effector mechanisms. of a engaging particular its distinct Each 10. and the 5 describe and We in Chapters actions classes antibody their

destroy products protect (Fig. The most their thereby cells way them antibodies or and infect in they is their access or to by that binding which against to first can might blocking direct and pathogens 1.28, left panels). replicating, is for form and bacterial important vaccines. entering viruses, against immunity of and most become neutralization the and against by which and elicited as is is known from protection toxin This cells prevented

by bacteria, not is their however, to sufficient binding stop For antibodies replication. In a destroy the ingest bacterium. is a such this cell macrophage to enable or as case, the the function and of antibody a to phagocytic neutrophil an the immune bacteria not recognized phagocytes. pattern evade they have is because by recognition innate of receptors system the Many outer coat that antibodies, region constant the called receptors, of that be phagocytosis bacterium bind Fc in antigens can phagocytes Fig. and facilitate recognized (see receptors, coat by have the and However, the center 1.28, panels). particles The pathogens of opsonization. way coating is foreign as and known this in

of is The activation. antibodies complement third function we that discovery complement activities the a serum as ‘complements’ of Section antibodies. In of 1-2 Bordet’s mentioned briefly factor of deposition even covalent surface. the leads be activated without microbial proteins antibodies, certain by the to of surfaces can the bacterial help onto complement Complement which that with cells and much host bacterial the preventing to from its antibodies toxin, left surface, provides more an first region antibody platform panels than the causing is bacterial binding and it a show thus when pathology. to a neutralizing efficient But constant in complement activation interacting binds complex receptors can the toxin cell, the toxin:antibody whereas cannot. unbound react with on host also particles neutralize binding and Antibodies them. cells virus bacterial and complete by inactivating scavenged antigen:antibody macrophages. the degraded complex eventually and is by opsonization. antigen is this it; (macrophages and it an and foreign as called phagocytes by then Antibodies coating render ingest recognizable which destroy neutrophils), and of cell. the bacterial panels a opsonization show center phagocytosis the to first antigens cell through regions. bacterial on (red) binds Antibody the variable binds (yellow) Fc and antibody’s by phagocytes, facilitating to then other region the phagocytosis. expressed receptors macrophages Fc of the the antibodies right coating activation system show cell. bacterial by panels a complement the of the the which complement Bound deposits (blue) that surface form in the protein complement system, platform on activates a proteins bacterium. antibodies first cases bacterium lyses a to the in pore lead that formation directly. this of some can generally, bacterium ingest bacterium. on proteins the complement to the stimulates the phagocytes destroy be on this recognized by receptors complement and can more phagocytes; and phagocytes. their toxic thus, target for products pathogens antibodies disposal by

activation microbial alone. complement substantially a antibodies against Thus, be increased. produced, can activation are pathogen once

deposited can the the components this surface directly infections that in and some lyse bacterial of on a few complement membranes is (see Fig. are important bacterial Certain bacteria, right 1.28, panels). recognize. engulf destroy bacteria enable phagocytes to of complement, to and major the however, otherwise that would phagocytes The function is not bacterial facilitate complement proteins bind thus that proteins; and express bacterial these receptors receptors complement to onto phagocytes bind the surface certain Most phagocytosis. complement called deposited the receptors, capacity. the bactericidal proteins also complement Certain phagocytes’ enhance other for eventually are that The and (see is ingestion, Fig. and all to delivered from molecules free pathogens the end antibody degradation, phagocytes by bound body result removal panels). 1.28, bottom upon antibodies not and antigen-specific; the particles recruit depend antibody The phagocytes complement mark the that system as they themselves to are molecules foreign.

immunity. effector the of mechanisms

immunity most antigens. cell-mediated 1-21 responses and orchestrate to cells regulate B-cell T

cannot inside replicate which detected and they viruses, by bacteria Some space. antibodies, where the access be blood parasites, and cells, extracellular only all and is responses which of the the immunity. The immune lymphocytes, the intracellular for destruction T cell-mediated adaptive responsible function of invaders are of organisms, participate effector T wide of so lymphocytes exert But variety a a including extracellular variety wide and to must in responses of pathogens, activities.

in develop several of types, the which T there thymus. are lymphocytes, by certain the They characterized are and the they of T-cell of by markers. receptors express type expression called a CD8 two cells protein T express either CD4. another classes cell-surface main or The of called interactions are but the These to the not random for T important are because markers, they and help cells. cell’s between just a cell function, T determine other from T 1-10 peptides that from cell’s detect a molecules displayed foreign cells MHC derived are that surface. on antigens by Recall Section in the by and antigen. signaling in T-cell recognizing molecules function receptor and by that involved being recognition of its regions CD8 CD4 MHC engaged antigen different is the of with difference CD8 cells, co-receptors a and provide between functional CD4 and Thus, as and are they CD8 T CD4 known

I of MHC MHC Importantly, main and types called MHC class II. there molecules, are two class (Fig. on that an different outer peptide have the structures, surface can elongated slightly a both have groove but These bind 1.29). to of synthesis cell, and T the surface inside during peptide:MHC the becomes this the in then MHC complex peptide and groove the to is and assembly trapped (Fig. cell displayed cells the The transported molecule 1.30). cells. II I MHC Because MHC CD4 a class the recognizes of the region T co-receptors of CD8 while recognizes protein distinguish functionally a two class region protein, by are MHC cells Therefore, cells peptides MHC that CD8 bound to recognize peptides CD4 recognize II. presented molecules, selectively while T I class T class

most The direct cytotoxicity. cells of T action is effector are infected Cytotoxic cells T act T against viruses. cells cells that with derived are from the the cell’s the T the cytotoxic by receptors surface, are displayed antigen cells. virus on Antigens of cell they where infected recognized multiplying inside T before the the killing new control infection viral complete is These viruses are cells cell then by released infected and (Fig. replication can directly 1.31). antigen so recognize presented class Cytotoxic T I CD8, cells by and carry molecules. MHC most MHC molecules viral I defend important infections. class serve body, cells against Because to they an expressed of as mechanism on the are

Fig. on cell surface the display antigens. fragments molecules of 1.29 MHC peptide peptide outer bound. extracellular a which form cleft are whose a fragment domains in membrane molecules mHC proteins is proteins derived self and and degraded these the protein antigens. include fragments both foreign inside are cell from by surface. reaches the the before molecule mHC peptides synthesized are it the cell bound newly distinct structures and and of mHC mHC class II; I related molecules, kinds there functions. but have are they mHC two class two class the nonself mHC chains class simplicity, both here and I not shown self II mHC peptide. bound Although are and for of or molecules protein trimers

Virus cell class transported reticulumcytosol bound Peptide I infects of proteins in Bound by nucleus by class viral in MHC fragments endoplasmic to synthesized peptides proteins surface I ER cytosol Viral cytosol the MHC cell

Fig. 1.30 I class antigen present MHC in cytosol. molecules proteins from derived the the with viral proteins viruses, infected cells cytosol. In are in synthesized then viral reticulum of by bound Peptide the I (er), surface. which where transported class proteins fragments molecules, the mHC to deliver are cell they the peptides into endoplasmic are

Fig. host by of defense 1.31 Mechanism infection viruses. against intracellular which directly. kill t the specialized by by cells, cells cells are infected t infected viruses called Cells recognized cytotoxic enzymes their aspartic which killing the target caspases, at acid. mechanism and activation in active of proteins contain site the cleave as involves cysteine known the host caspases cytosolic dnA in that and a cell. turn nuclease infected activate the in cleaves viral ovary micrograph Chinese virus. of cell infected electron with is CHo cell showing transmission plasma Panel a hamster the a (the line) membrane a cultured influenza seen from virus surface. the cell particles be can many budding appear as in coupled solid black micrograph. a and is monoclonal have to been a these for specific labeled with which gold is the that the antibody Some of protein particles, viral dots virus-infected of a surrounded micrograph a is by (V) Panel t electron lymphocytes. b cell transmission cytotoxic corner micrograph, (t) the cytoplasmic the contact membranes point the t the clustering in between its and infected of with note of nucleus left the of of cell the cell virus-infected and close the the of t in cell. apposition the cell and upper the the organelles of a and Bui m. courtesy Panel

A. b of Helenius; courtesy panel n. rooney.

by recognized class I which peptides viral cytotoxic MHC T cells, bearing cell molecules infected then (Fig. the are kill CD8-bearing 1.32).

CD4 (Fig. are proteins, system: predominant antigen-presenting recognize cells cells macrophages, by dendritic and cells cells, immune T the by the expressed class which presented II MHC of antigen B 1.33). by extracellular antigens from Thus cells CD4 up taken tend to environment. T the phagocytosis recognize in T cells earlier mentioned T the chapter. the helper cells CD4 are similar of TH2, T effector helper subsets into and type a TH1 so in patterns they protective different subsets, TH17, pathogens. earlier modules the to that cytokines produce called of mentioned effector They activate variety (for against develop and ILCs different on, 1), These sites act peripheral infection at subsets primarily tissues. of or in injury CD4 production the the T antibody helper a of the with In subset response. during to interacts tissues, (TFH) B regulate called T cell, cells immune cells, lymphoid follicular subsets T Chapter later, The described various are in 9. helper

control to in certain the For take of up membrane-enclosed example, cells vesicles T inside that TH1 residence bacteria helps macrophages. CD4 subset killing ILC1 bacteria. which destroy the increase macrophages these cells, power They produce their activates same as intracellular cytokine IFN-γ, and to and are bacteria function are and Mycobacterium are Important caused by controlled by respectively. which tuberculosis leprae, tuberculosis this infections leprosy, M. the that of because and enzymes occupy vesicles lysosomes, contain degradative antimicrobial intracellularly the which from prevent survive they with Mycobacteria a variety substances they fusing (Fig. 1.34). antigens recognized immunity. that mycobacteriaderived secrete infected induce of mechanisms antigen-specific in which the particular activated turn TH1 macrophage cytokines that the However, macrophage cells, on be by can to effector presents surface, its the

Fig. antigen T molecules. II CD4 1.33 cells class by recognize MHC presented

macrophage, specific leading destruction macrophages, antigen intracellular infected on of their panel). to cells (top bacteria of the tH1 recognition on the the activate B they into antigen (tFH) cells (not cells follicular to cells When plasma t these activate differentiate antibody-producing on shown). proliferate cells panel), and helper (bottom recognize

vesicle fusion. on the block overcome or are against specialized and promoting subsets responses that TH17 respectively. cytokines for extracellular and produce parasites bacteria TH2 fungi, a 12. will in times play be them in subsets, 9, their and 11 role book, returning cells, to CD4 adaptive and including T pervasive 8, specialized in immunity, and many Chapters we this

Inherited system increased defects 1-22 susceptibility acquired the in to infection. in immune result and

take free granted our ability the our infection for of to bodies immune prevent We and its systems recurrence. of to tend people, the In however, fail. some immune parts system of overwhelming heroic In death infancy the severe most immunodeficiency immunity adaptive from unless measures completely and occurs these are diseases, taken. infection absent, of in is with Other recurrent failures infections less of types particular on pathogens, to the catastrophic depending deficiency. lead particular of learned caused the system these are defects. the immunodeficiencies, which inherited functions of has human genetic many components the Much of of through immune been by different the about study a of most until have 13, can requires considered they understanding features diseases immunodeficiencies the detailed Chapter postponed where discussion mechanisms, we of of of together. knowledge normal be Because these immune

human ago, the acquired syndrome, AIDS, than appeared, by 30 immunodeficiency viruses is the and infectious an agent, HIV-2. or caused HIV-1 which immune of More years immunodeficiency a form devastating deficiency and CD4, to pathogens and other intracellular bearing This by T leading dendritic infections macrophages destroys cells, caused disease cells, bacteria

Fig. mycobacteria. infection Mechanism by intracellular of against host 1.34 defense the but in reside resist are from by destroyed agents. intracellular mycobacteria by being they with engulfed vesicles fusing lysosomes bactericidal which macrophages containing preventing from are the killed. bacteria protected thus being vesicles. persist replicate In macrophages, these and mycobacteria in resting can the tH1 fuse is with activated cell, When by the phagocyte recognized and bacteria and a however, the killed. phagocytic be vesicles lysosomes, cells, avoid tissue and controlled save damage is macrophage to by both activation tH1 to energy. mycobacteria. row) light the show (bottom macrophages infected and activated (right) micrographs (left) resting with stained reveal red the been mycobacteria. with cells an dye acid-fast have to the red-staining eliminated rods as resting the in these activated are but prominent from have macrophages. macrophages been courtesy Photographs g. of Kaplan.

Fig. be the responses antigen. on the of can or harmful, Immune 1.35 depending beneficial nature red responses in white, in Beneficial boxes. are shaded harmful shown responses absence beneficial, is harmful. is its response the Where

controlled by cells. such normally this prevalent in inherited with fully These discussed major immunodeficiency death of infections from the which together 13 increasingly disease, cause immunodeficiencies. is Chapter are the

responses and autoimmune transplanted 1-23 immune of important for is control the organs. the rejection adaptive disease, allergies, of Understanding

from to infectious main human immune system protect The is of our the function agents. host medically often are inappropriate response many immune in antigen, disease. However, infectious a against absence diseases an important directed normal with the associated of in Chapter is by a an antigen at in the noninfectious a which in responses in substance; which rejection, transplanted antigen is autoimmune antigens is self in disease, antigen; innocuous occur in directed in the the allergy, 15). to foreign and response foreign which Immune cell borne graft (discussed their by originally 1930s transplantation major rejection is controlled tumors, in was role in a they in as the locus of by highly in mouse antigens ‘tissue unrelated molecules a the as rejection tissue known each the mice, property are versions these Snell, who MHC of they developing strains set their is, human gene differ transplanted MHC acceptance different by most provoking Goren and at express, people only type.’ histocompatibility that of polymorphic—and molecules, population—that or in the H-2 work The MHC fact, are, later the present in of these Peter locus, graft the differing The as in commonly many examined the loci. recognized George burned attempts made skin during to from were first Second victims. donors molecules repair bomb World pilots The discovered MHC and War, badly the were to use when grafts human is immune on a the but immune patients grafts, nature which occurs not whether in being or as we The a on recognized or failure, itself the harmful to successful the and rather beneficial rejected (Fig. antigen the the and response of response the ‘foreign.’ which host, call by their depends were response the What systems circumstances considered response the 1.35). Baruj Jean on Benacerraf 1980 Dausset. was together awarded Nobel with MHC, the work his for Prize Snell and

world. asthma, developed which in of the include cause Allergic are increasingly disability an diseases, common now cause as of recognized many is diseases. important the also Autoimmunity young. the diabetes the against cells directed of in autoimmune is leading response An β cause pancreatic serious response protective patient. cause immune to diseases, the powerful adaptive mechanisms the allergies autoimmune and damage of the In

antigens, other to to responses to grafts or tissues, body harmless all organ highly Immune like specific. immune are, responses, the which present, is all mechanisms At immunity. way of responses the immunosuppressive drugs, treat with to usual inhibit these effector

alike. undesirable desirable and immune responses, the it the the for response, those or suppress protective cured grafted unwanted clones were be disease lymphocyte possible impeding only If protected organ immune responses. to could without responsible treatment. clinical present, is antigen-specific of the At outside immunoregulation reach 16, immune responses. many control other Chapter immune new unwanted as been have to selective in autoimmune and shall But see developed suppression recently we more drugs offer that for who and production. Köhler the monoclonal the these, their discovery Among César 1984 antibodies therapies Georges shared by highly specific of made using Nobel Milstein, were Prize possible of antibodies and regulation the understanding the of how a discuss the Chapters and are autoimmune them. graft functional rejection, immune allergies, that to we lymphocytes Chapter cytokines 14–16, emerge We the understanding shall monoclonal better and and in of immunosuppressive 15 control of of mechanisms in disease, present from see subsets state drugs beginning shall

infectious 1-24 most Vaccination controlling means effective the diseases. of is

vaccination, by has an stimulation achieved immune experiment. The since many the of immunization, two pioneering centuries in Jenner’s response or deliberate successes of mortality eradication (Fig. used to programs (illness) the have morbidity led several to associated be diseases virtual that with immunization and significant Mass 1.36). 1.0 400 Reported 600 0 vaccine cases cases 20 30 0 safe population 1980 1960 1970 1940 measles is 1965 40 100 1990 50 per 500 population per 1930 1910 1985 USA vaccine considered per 1990 1980 1900 SSPE 1940 100,000 cases so inactivated 0 1920 Reported cases 100 100,000 100,000 60 Reported population 1970 300 40 vaccine 1960 1990 1975 SSPE 30 1950 DiphtheriaPolioMeasles 20 Immunization 1960 Reported vaccine 1970 200 1950 10 10 10 1980 0.1 in oral

Fig. 1.36 campaigns. vaccination Successful States, consequences been and have and these in united eliminated virtually as shown three measles in graphs. diphtheria, polio, their the disease consequence stands for brain is a of in SSPe patients. measles that late sclerosing few infection subacute a panencephalitis, a SSPe was later. prevented, years 15–20 disappeared measles When eradicated be prevent maintained not of population high the diseases these in very percentage because immunization to their have However, been a reappearance. must worldwide,

important so that states seven United childhood common against require immunized most up be in States children and to diseases. to the for these diseases are lack vaccines. Impressive we many effective accomplishments still are, as which there countries, be problems widespread these where diseases is high. mortality effectively economic their can from use and vaccines as developed such where still And developing in used for technical diseases even measles prevent countries, can in

tools Chapter are advances ones, molecular and we vaccines of applied and to The in discuss and improve immunology develop old biology these new 16. being modern important The diseases prospect these controlling exciting. tremendously is of critical step of a The guarantee development. population health control and economic toward good is hardship alleviated. and suffering person, great pennies At can be cost of per a

because efforts adaptive subvert have resisted the Many pathogens them, they serious mechanisms response. evade vaccines often develop of or can protective to against an immune some the Chapter 13. in evasive strategies successful We used examine by of pathogens that diseases AIDS, leading The including the leading and cause interactions malaria as with threat on them diarrheal cells of better as the the system. their of world’s the children) pathogens killers depends well of many diseases, immune of (the recent of conquest understanding from more the a and

Summary.

into responses various pathogen can organized effector several be to The types the target of lifestyles. infection that modules effector cells which immune lymphoid that cells, also response innate infection activate that cells and generate various mediators and amplify detect T (ILCs) Innate the modules. sensor activate Innate activate subsets lymphoid produce include distinct cytokines and cells modules. that different effector class T proteins, presented classes CD4; fall the co-receptors MHC of that expression I MHC class and recognize major on or two are cells CD8 respectively. the these by cells based antigen into II T the subsets cells, of counterparts, like of effector These ILC T their distinct actions promote modules. also activity exert and as T CD8 viruses. can cells cytotoxic intracellular to target infections NK cells such effector and other bacteria, and Other ones can secrete that of target T fungi, cells extracellular helper subsets parasites. that lymphoid and innate bacteria mediators intracellular functions, activate them to cells T antibodies. produce signals regulate also help cells and provide that stimulate B elimination and mediate and pathogens. extracellular antibodies the soluble clearance Specific of toxins specific by of toxins with also antigens with receptors They on phagocytes. are that interact or the Fc types only not expressed microbes, of the region many but the proteins presence receptors for surfaces, particularly that on in also are of antibody. the deposited microbial complement express Phagocytes

can that infections components the by important caused immune target by of immunity defects or Failures of system. genetic be of autoimmune tissues, can organs. the in diseases or host Misdirected as to immune failure transplanted allergy, lead damage or responses approaches While important decades. have the diseases, new modern in antibodies, the two is progressively over more that tools, clinic have still of greatest become the immunology such monoclonal to vaccination added tool as past fight

1. to Summary Chapter

infection. immune against system defends host the The but and a serves first pathogens of Innate the immunity as lacks line to ability recognize certain defense

Questions.

reinfection. specific immunity provide that protective prevents to the the selection bearing on of a based immunity to lymphocytes enable that antigen. antigen-specific diverse receptors clonal any system recognize foreign highly repertoire Adaptive immune from is adaptive differentiate effector eliminate that into response, In lymphocytes lymphocytes clones the antigen-specific the of and pathogen. immune proliferate immune approximate timings. the Figure1.7 and response phases their summarizes the of Host body within and mechanisms different and systems at requires and effector its the wide habitats destroy variety and surfaces. of to internal external variety wide of defense pathogens recognition a their seek the in various out in generates process, response a clonal pathogen, upon reinfection. immune memory also more can differentiated numbers eliminate this and it effective allows only response adaptive a increased and the lymphocytes of Not rapid the but, through selection, unwanted immunology. research the them of immune to prevention in The responses, disease, them infectious to or is suppress of when the medical major stimulate of whether goal in regulation

Questions.

Choice: an be following can of of considered Multiple illustration vaccination? examples the Which 1.1

that individual Inoculating order A. against with smallpox to protect an in cowpox individual

B. the of serum individual toxin diphtheria to in of effect exposed the against protect immune an diphtheria to animals Administering

A C. activation complement of the that pathogen and results destruction in infection bacterial

following memory? appropriate an 1.2 ill but to of does individual becomes definition is not it of for with develop memory Multiple immunological immunologic the D. An chickenpox, again the Choice: development that Which due

which own of tissues development by against A. host’s mechanism the response organism an the an immune prevents the

prevents B. organism by which an the to mechanism exposure microbes

infection the reinfection after antibodies of can C. original that has eliminated and been the persistence pathogen-specific lymphocytes so prevented be

the bacteria. D. receptors or intracellular process or pathogen recognize nod-like toll-like receptors False: recognize while extracellular (nlrs) True a of bacteria, eliminating 1.3 reducing (tlrs)

Matching: lymphoid the in Classify myeloid following 1.4 origin: or as

A. eosinophils

B. B cells

C. neutrophils

nK cells D.

E. cells mast

F. macrophages

immunologist’s a 1.5 G. red secret’ strong against immune response involves the ‘dirty interest. Multiple cells blood antigen of desired protein order to the the little in Choice: of microbial stimulate addition constituents achieve response? a products can in following is a not the microbial order receptor or immune that receptor family of potent Which recognize to

A. receptors toll-like (tlrs)

(tCr) t-cell B. antigen receptor

receptors C. (nlrs) nod-like

can body. D. type Hematopoietic cell True receptors the Pattern or into develop False: any stem (Prrs) in cells recognition 1.6

following 1.7 Matching: to the each terms match it that best: of the numbered phrase describes

A. Allergy __ 1. a on an present to foreign response antigen transplanted Immunological cell

2. Immunological B. to that response foreign tolerance __ antigen Immunological is innocuous substance an an

3. Autoimmune C. that disease to __ immune Immunological an antigens process self response prevents

rejection graft __ 4. D. a tolerance? of Which the is a not Immunological antigen of Multiple maintaining to response mechanism processes Choice: 1.8 self immunologic following

deletion A. Clonal

B. Anergy

Clonal C. expansion

self-reactive the of organ: lymphocytes central/ of following peripheral/secondary as D. 1.9 or Classify lymphoid primary Matching: Suppression a each

A. marrow Bone

B. node lymph

C. Spleen

D. thymus

match structure, with they organ the numbered following 1.10 subcompartments are Appendix present in: the or Matching: E. region,

A. __ lymph node

Spleen __ B.

the intestine 1. mucosa C. small of __

2.

3.

following events 1.11 Which do not occur of Choice: during Multiple inflammation? the

A. secretion Cytokine

Chemokine secretion B.

immune C. innate cells recruitment of

t immune kill to cells, other infected while cells Fill-in-the-Blanks: Constriction D. cells are blood the of cells activate ________ t 1.12 vessels ___________ system. of able

B-cell progressively an or receptors t-cell process and the acquire for response. antigen 1.13 affinity Both in affinity maturation True higher of immune to during undergo False: an order

receptors cell-surface specificity. or carries 1.14 with lymphocyte antigen multiple False: each True

immune cell important 1.15 response the adaptive forms response? between immune Which an link Choice: the and innate Multiple type

cell A. dendritic

neutrophil B.

cell B C.

Which (IlC) a the an Innate lymphoid a is Choice: which Multiple 1.16 protect not pathogen? by following antibody options of cell against D. mechanism can

neutralization A.

Co-stimulation t of B. cells

C. opsonization

mHC D. Complement activation/deposition class True or not possess I False: cells do molecules. 1.17 tH2

references. General

F.M. Burnet, Acquired Theory : of The Immunity. Selection Clonal Press, University 1959. Cambridge London:

Gowans, J.L. The : knowledge. lymphocyte—a in gap disgraceful medical Immunol. 17:288–291. Today 1996,

K.: Reactions, of Specificity Serological 3rd ed. Landsteiner, The Harvard Press, 1964. University Boston:

1st Immunity É.: Diseases, in the Metchnikoff, Infectious ed. Press, York: Macmillan New 1905.

ed. of Immunology, A.M.: Silverstein, History 1st 1989. Press, Academic London:

B., the P.: K., and ed. Molecular 6th Biology D., Morgan, Lewis, Johnson, Raff, Roberts, Alberts, Cell, M., of J., A., Walter, York: Science, 2015. Garland New

J.M., and Stryer, J.L. Berg, Tymoczko, L., 5th ed. Biochemistry, : New W.H. York: Freeman, 2002.

Geha, and Notarangelo, L.D. R.S., Companion, A in Case ed. Studies Clinical : Immunology: 7th Garland York: Science, 2016. New

D.R. Harper, : Control. Viruses: Applications, Biology, Science, 2012. Garland New York:

(eds): Immunology and A., Kaufmann, R. Infectious Ahmed, Diseases. S.E., of Sher, Washington, ASM 2001. Press, DC:

Lodish, Scott, Biology, H., Cell H., Ploegh, 6th A., M., and Matsudaira, Molecular A., C.A., ed. Berk, P.: Bretscher, M.P., Kaiser, Krieger, York: New W.H. Freeman, 2008.

P., M., Holton, Lydyard, Infectious and P., N., Porakishvili, Studies Ward, K.: J., Disease. Irving, W., Cole, Venkatesan, in Case 2009. Science, New York: Garland

of Mims’ Disease, 5th Mims, Infectious C., A., ed. Nash, J.: Pathogenesis Stephen, and 2001. Academic Press, London:

K.J. Ryan, (ed): ed. Medical 3rd Microbiology, Appleton-Lange, East Norwalk, 1994. CT:

textbooks in Advanced immunology, compendia, etc.

5th P.J., of and Immunology, Clinical F.S., Walport, Rosen, Lachmann, Peters, D.K., Aspects ed. M.J. (eds): Blackwell Publications, 1993. Scientific Oxford:

Saunders, M.E. and Mak, T.W., Basic Clinical Principles. Response: and Immune : The Burlington: 2006. Elsevier/Academic Press,

J.J.L. Simard, T.W., Mak, and of : Handbook Genes. Immune Response Press, New Plenum York: 1998.

W.E. Paul, (ed): Immunology, Fundamental 7th ed. York: Lippincott Wilkins, 2012. Williams New &

P.J. and Delves, Roitt, I.M., ed. (eds): Immunology, Encyclopedia of 2nd (4 vols.). 1998. and Academic London San Press, Diego:

First Immunity: The of Lines Innate Defense

by innate and lymphocytes. in not be microbial can do antigen-specific hours defense immunity, rely or which mechanisms of invaders most introduced destroyed minutes expansion As on 1, detected body’s within Chapter the of and immune to limited receptors and uses a secreted The host cell-associated of detect infection proteins distinguish innate system between number pathogens to and tissues. lymphocytes they because generated the parents, not need by are Section innate do These to assemble an by are encoded called from receptors be directly 1-11. in inborn; to of antigen inherited described gene they genes are used and receptors rearrangements individual’s that is in susceptibility innate increase Chapter in to when is system. it infection adaptive immunodeficiencies an which result the illustrated The several immune presence 13, of even discussed importance intact impaired, by immunity of

in As we saw Fig. pathogen starts a anatomic breaches of the when one an barriers. infection host’s 1.5, mechanisms (Fig. immediately innate immune acting Some start 2.1). weaken classes or can defenses These its that include blood, immediate in that several effect. extracellular molecules pathogen and either fluid, are kill of present secretions preformed epithelial the soluble and enzymes targets system bacterial cell macrophages. directly; peptides bacterial the of as cell membranes known lysis for complement to innate and begin as a of such the by defensins Antimicrobial digest for such lysozyme walls; pathogens as such plasma antimicrobial immune system proteins phagocytosis system cells both lyse and as the pattern that innate recognition become receptors (PAMPs) molecules cells by called 1-5) activated microbes. fail, are pathogen-associated these molecular of (see that Section (PRRs) If typical patterns detect immune The to cells effector infection. mechanisms innate activated can various the eliminate engage themselves, the long-term By nor generate immunological of soluble protective memory. cellular innate immunity neither components the lines these of induce infectious will an the first organism immune engaged adaptive to mechanisms response of defense if third be a breaches two response—the pathogen. to phase Only an expansion memory immunity. the the of leads long-lasting that antigen-specific pathogen the formation to and of cells that This specifically specific to provide target lymphocytes

Fig. infection occurs phases. in an response three The initial to 2.1 response, and early phase, the adaptive the innate These innate the are immune response. induced by two receptors that immunity gene rearrangements. a whereas are on produced antigen-specific of phases segment uses adaptive the result rely recognition immune as receptors germline-encoded of first system, pathogens The of the innate variable cells cells the effector for the invading cells Adaptive site late, infection. specific T occurs pathogen of into clear the and they that B differentiate expansion immunity and rare first because the must clonal undergo infection to before migrate or are phase. each infectious effector identical agent that remove similar in mechanisms the The

and Anatomic initial chemical defenses. barriers

The complement innate and immunity. system

response Recognition effector Removal immune to Recognition PAMPs. hours) agent by lymphoid differentiation cells to Adaptive naive and and of antigen >96 Clonal B of infectious T expansion of (late: Transport cells organs induced specifc of Pathogen Removal an and infectious infection nonspecifc FAIL innate infammation response FAIL by of Recognition cells 4–96 broadly Prevention by cells agent of effectors of barrier (early: Early Removal hours) agent effector effector Containment Activation and anatomic of Infection infectious preformed Recruitment FAIL

This phase first the response. the chapter of immune considers innate provided that against anatomic proteins. barriers We the various the the by and immediate infection examine soluble innate first defenses secreted host protect describe infection against The phagocytes line external residing anatomic epithelia surfaces beneath body that of the are surfaces. and the with of internal barriers and along consist defenses fixed epithelial the the all act directly and microorganisms. phagocytes invading engulfing digesting by These kinds peptides. chemical are defenses, Epithelia by antimicrobial many enzymes protected of also and including phagocytic microorganisms and with promote Next describe removal by to system, their the we directly some complement which kills others interacts cells. word sometimes The body system to is referred immunity, for together ‘humor’ fluids. proteins humoral soluble the other circulating defensive innate from complement with old as inflammation, will discuss 3. these phagocytes a and cells in recruit which defenses early molecules, we Chapter fail, help site new effector If at called the circulating of process the infection

Anatomic initial and barriers defenses. chemical

and different body sites in humans disease a produce at and animals enter the symptoms mechanisms. cause Microorganisms by of that disease variety cause that produce or pathogenic pathology, or tissues as pathogens. disease Microorganisms referred simply are and to to damage, microorganisms, innate an overcoming have defenses barrier, microorganisms other that effectively eliminates microorganisms. most immunity pathogens microorganisms ways may than the occasionally more body’s cross innate are As anatomic that of evolved and both required to from established, typically pathogens eliminate body. immune is adaptive responses Once innate infection are the for by the function gear to action. cases, up performs reducing the a system immune during the adaptive system innate valuable numbers needed time pathogen in immune for Even these briefly describe immediate types first invasive infection. we from and cases, that, of their prevent an most the the In the examine then microorganisms establishing part defenses different chapter innate this of pathogens strategies, in and

are that by caused agents diseases diverse 2-1 their replicate in living hosts. Infectious

bacteria, and protozoa, helminths cause The into groups: (worms). five viruses, disease fall fungi, agents that grouped the are whereas subject parasites, and of viruses, subject discipline bacteria, and the of parasitology, worms the are and together microbiology. as of Protozoa are fungi usually Fig. classes parasites, microorganisms the and cause. examples different and the diseases of 2.2 lists they some of replication, it pathogenesis—the of its response host. characteristic mechanism The its disease—and elicits of are by transmission, mode features the causes of pathogen it of the which each mechanism its from means that different a have cycles range distinct immune innate and mean and be for The of pathogen pathogen deployed habitats to destruction. mechanisms life adaptive

all Fig. agents schematically as in can grow compartments, Infectious in shown body 2.3. 1 compartments intracellular. two and Chapter defined—extracellular in be saw that We major can in with adaptive innate responses found these and two pathogens Both have of different dealing ways immune

Anatomic defenses. chemical barriers initial and

Plasmodium aegypti) Clostridium tetani Athlete’s anthracis bites burgdorferi Physical foot (Aedes bites Mosquito tularensis Bacillus Borrelia Trichophyton bites Flavivirus spp. Mosquito (Anopheles) Deer tick Francisella contact bacterium bacterium Fungus Lyme anthracis Hepatitis bacterium infections Neisseria bacterium Candidiasis, Hepatitis Pathogen surfaces B Fungus thrush Fungus Candida poisoning immunodefciency Mononucleosis infected virus Meningococcal enteritidis, animals Gram-negative (HIV) Acquired Gram-negative meningitidis abrasions infected Rotavirus (spirochete) infection Food Retrovirus Tularemia Bacterium skin Protozoan wounds fever disease transmission/ anthrax Infuenza for routes of tract Disease Virus Herpesvirus Cutaneous virus Chickenpox other transmission Varicella-zoster Tetanus Gram-positive External Sexual water Neisseria Measles Handling tract virus Routes bacterium microbiota Human Haemophilus of of Sexual Malaria Orthomyxovirus External syndrome albicans or Wounds meningitis Pneumonia, Resident microbiota food Yellow meningitis bacterium pathogen and A and Hepatitis Picornavirus Opportunistic Rotavirus Gram-positive Salmonella Gram-negative virus epithelia virus lung Inhalation Epstein–Barr tract respiratory bacterium Pneumocystis surface Gram-positive Puncture Mucosal bites Gram-negative Bacillus Resident Mouth Infuenza and Streptococcus Insect Mode of (AIDS) jirovecii Diarrhea Gonorrhea transmission Gastrointestinal pyogenes Paramyxovirus immunodefciency Hepadnavirus Gram-positive Herpesvirus B blood Tonsillitis abrasions pathogens Jaundice Reproductive Contaminated bacteriumS. Minor bacterium Measles anthrax entry Type gonorrhoeae infuenzae Route Pneumonia Gram-negative Syphilis ingestion Bacterium saliva Treponema pallidum Inhalation infective droplets) or typhi trichiura Salmonella cholerae Helminth Typhoid Vibrio Trichuris typhimurium Spores (spirochete) Trichuriasis bacterium (e.g., fever material bacterium of Cholera Gram-negative Gram-negative

Fig. disease. A cause of variety can 2.2 microorganisms and are main of five protozoa, fungi, viruses, organisms Pathogenic types: bacteria, worms. listed. are Some well-known pathogens

and to molecules pathogens are the antibodies Virtually which immune circulating the of response. of have innate cells to vulnerable adaptive all an the phase and in extracellular they immunity All by system. by the these phagocytes clear immune the microorganism the uptake its promoting and mainly destruction of the to cell cells NK cells phases immunity of the is instead, cytotoxic attacked T of such not by of viruses pathogens or by adaptive mechanisms; accessible Intracellular immunity. innate are the infected these as pathogens induce to living kill can a as Activation NK-cell are that macrophages inside of T-cell vesicles. macrophage or result activity the of macrophage

compartments. bacterial epithelia either spaces, in or Many the body the extracellular of within tissues on and line cavities. that replicate pathogens live surface of susceptible Staphylococcus bacteria polysaccharide a to species, by engulfment. some protected by pathogens, resists are are usually Streptococcus the important arm innate killing an Extracellular immune and as such but phagocytes, that system, capsule This the be extent phagocytosis. renders of more another can some immunity—complement—which help the component to of by overcome to innate bacteria susceptible the antibodies more a rendered complement. response, adaptive to combination immune of susceptible are phagocytosis and bacteria In by

in tissues or compartment—and what causal Infectious intracellular differ damage extracellular pathogen their within symptoms (Fig. replicates the the body—the outcome diseases the it on does where depending the and to 2.4). damaging live cells frequently the they by that infect. cause or Pathogens disease intracellularly killing must to as such cells replicate. viruses, host Obligate pathogens, invade intracellular pathogens, can intracellularly such mycobacteria, either replicate intracellular outside or the cell. as Facultative defend of strategies innate against Two pathogens. immunity intracellular before cells. is pathogens destroy to One infect they as destroy innate before cells includes and become antimicrobial such that engulf To soluble phagocytic peptides, as immunity as well they end, pathogens defenses intracellular. can this some infected the Alternatively, can innate and pathogens. system immune cells recognize kill by check is cells the natural instrumental (NK system are cells viral which of killer the keeping of This certain in infections before become role cells), in T functional. cytotoxic immune adaptive the inside as the that viruses replicate replicate and mycobacteria. Chlamydia, can bacteria those intracellular subdivided as cell, in into (for that Intracellular be and certain further pathogens freely vesicles, Listeria), those and such such example, Rickettsia, killed live a that macrophage may of Fig. after more result susceptible to of vesicles or macrophage the T-cell become as inside NK-cell being Pathogens (see actions activation 2.3).

dangerous are protein secreted the releasing exotoxins toxins toxins; extracellular these disease Many Fig. called of 2.4). (see most bacterial by pathogens cause toxins, system innate immune such defense against little The has

and chemical defenses. barriers Anatomic initial

virus syndrome, typhi scarlet Boils, Salmonella simplex tetani Meningitis, panencephalitis Varicella-zoster subacute sepsis Wound Herpes Streptococcus 8 pathogens aureus diphtheriae Clostridium Bacillarydysentery damage virus herpes virus Measles, pyogenes toxic Measles virus Haemophilus Typhoid Cholera Hepatitis Tonsillitis, Gram-negative tissue Infuenza infuenzae coli Tetanus Pseudomonas infection (HHV8) Escherichia Hepatitis production pneumonia Poliomyelitis food Endotoxin fever Yersinia Corynebacterium Cold Diphtheria virus mechanisms cholerae poisoning fever by Chickenpox, sarcoma shock pestis sclerosing aeruginosa shingles Variola Vibrio sores virus Kaposi's cytopathic Polio Staphylococcus of Plague B Human Direct Infuenza effect Smallpox Direct Shigella Exotoxin

Fig. ways. 2.4 variety a Pathogens of in different tissues damage can each mechanisms names are infectious diseases representative agents, of the and associated common damage, of The with the shown. of the receptors. by by are host at and released example, cells, to act binding Exotoxins surface for microorganisms trigger are to of microbial which that intrinsic or symptoms. phagocytes Endotoxins, local produce structure, cytokines systemic release components the cells pathogens cytopathic, Many infect. damaging they are directly to can that infected adaptive the that neutrophils or pathogen and kill immune T cross-react generate macrophages, with response antigen:antibody an complexes tissues, cells antibodies activate host cells. Finally, can that to host’s All the have of some potential damage these tissues. control most in that mediators damage. inflammatory small-molecule tissue cause proteins addition, infection and In neutrophils, cells release early abundant both the and many infection,

their (see system neutralize adaptive action required immune produced are highly the specific antibodies Fig. by and to 1.28). a systemic grows; depends where whereas by lung for pneumonia, example, on infectious particular The potentially illness, the causes damage agent Streptococcus pneumoniae sepsis. fatal caused causes blood in also it in the it a pneumococcal to trigger structure effects are cytokines contrast, called endotoxins. that local with nonsecreted systemic release In bacterial and phagocytes constituents of endotoxin such Gram-negative (LPS) of the An as is the cell outer of membrane lipopolysaccharide bacteria, major importance medical of Salmonella. fever, symptoms due hemorrhage, septic of the clinical rash, of pain, bacteria—including LPS. shock—are such to infection largely Many by

pathogenic innate prevent responses response ill. to eliminate An and them microorganisms and required is to continue immune overcome adaptive immune grow, reinfection. can to us subsequent Most making are never body system, and Certain pathogens immune in the the eliminated for years. entirely persist by most But pathogens not universally are lethal. alter achieved cannot evolved compromise the thousands upsetting of their have population Those highly that in system. human pathogenicity have their are with years immune human hosts; they they without lived the to the for exploit human to long-term pathogen someone by killing survival before of the better immune than else. Rapidly is wiped infect time for it being out host microbe has the had response every a no infects the with have microbes, adapted live and us. we In many with short, they to remind from coronavirus acute severe syndrome), that infections strains episode that influenza from in Nevertheless, pathogenic deadly caused pneumonia of of by to a (severe humans the 2002–2003 about avian transfer bats, respiratory highly humans. new in animal us is concern the recent and SARS reservoirs a and can 2014–2015. the for Such virus transmission responsible Ebola epidemic in appears Africa in West must These at known the zoonotic pathogens new be infections—and we health. all to and times the threats emergence of for as on are alert new as AIDS (discussed we 13) Chapter warning virus a in causes that serves human immunodeficiency The constantly that vulnerable. remain

Epithelial first provide the barrier of infection. against 2-2 surfaces body the

physical impose which a external that the the world milieu by epithelia, defended and between internal contains body surfaces pathogens. are Our barrier skin Epithelia structures— of urogenital, and body’s respiratory, the the and gastrointestinal tracts. tubular linings comprise the the microbes locations typically innate specialized (Fig. functions particular these possess strategies against they and in are Epithelia unique defense the for their encounter 2.5 and Fig. 2.6).

Epithelial the external against are together form which effectively cells held tight seal by environment. a junctions, mucins. many mucus, internal they known epithelia which as secrete because called The contains fluid viscous are mucosal called glycoproteins epithelia a a Mucus protective functions. number of has the the epithelium, mucosal the on Microorganisms outward cilia from in to of (Fig. of mucus epithelium by adhering expelled be respiratory prevented can driven be and mucus microorganisms tract, beating in in flow the coated may the 2.7). disease CFTR, becomes chloride of due to defects inherited channel importance and by in dehydrated a mucus a abnormally mucus illustrated epithelium. in clearing gene, cystic people encoding flow with in fibrosis, the The which is the the infection thick in by (see caused epithelial it bacteria surface develop not but cross Such colonize do lung Fig. the infections individuals that frequently 2.7). mechanism peristalsis the for important food moving body. is an both infectious gut, through the keeping agents In and of of accompanied the the bacteria Failure peristalsis pathogenic by lumen the within is of overgrowth typically gut.

Fig. from barriers pathogens colonizing and tissues. epithelia Many prevent crossing 2.5 provide chemical, to infection. mechanical, barriers microbiological Surface and epithelia

Eyes/nose/oral pH (lysozyme) joined RegIII tears cilia Epithelial or Cathelicidin junctions or Gut and mucus (pepsin) of tight °-defensins ˜-defensins microbiota air °-defensins Cathelicidin Longitudinal Nasal Low cilia (cryptdins) Cathelicidin Skin of bodies Pulmonary fuid Tears (lecticidins) Lamellar surfactant Enzymes Microbiological Mechanical of Lungs Histatins in Normal by fuid Enzymes cavity by Chemical fow cells Movement saliva ˜-defensins Fatty fow acids Longitudinal air

Anatomic and defenses. chemical barriers initial

Fig. that locations. specialized barriers in defenses chemical Epithelia different provide 2.6 innate form physical and panel: the cells. of layer layers stem Top has in the differentiation from different stages epidermis of multiple basal of arising keratinocytes are organelles called and corneum) secreted a space lipid stratum containing activity. lamellar (yellow) intercellular in Differentiated antimicrobial the β-defensins spinosum layer form cathelicidins, secretory and incorporated into keratinocytes produce (the stratum bodies the to waterproof into which lung, Center are airways panel: in lined ciliated epithelium. the the by outward, ejecting continuous moves mucus (green) stream by secreted cells trapping a goblet cilia the of pathogens. of and Beating potential pneumocytes lung also produce defensins. the secrete Type shown) antimicrobial and (not II alveoli in Bottom lectin in the RegIII. produce panel: (cryptdins) cells in crypts— antimicrobial of kinds several antimicrobial epithelial and Paneth proteins: the the deep α-defensins cells—specialized intestine,

or with help population large keep bacteria are epithelial known normally of associated bacteria, microbiota, as healthy at that also nonpathogenic pathogens commensal bay. a surfaces Most the as of the which peptides microbiota vaginal also by produce antimicrobial strains produced lactic such make some (bacteriocins). lactobacilli, substances, can antimicrobial acid also The stimulating barrier to epithelial also functions induce cells the epithelia microorganisms strengthen responses Commensal to help the by produce that of

cystic Cilia is Mucus Lung of patient by epithelium layer of a Epithelium Ciliated respiratory fbrosis covered with mucus

Fig. microbes. environmental mucus of clearance epithelium overlying layer respiratory 2.7 the Ciliated propels for

Top the is layer the of respiratory in The airways covered lung of panel: mucus. a epithelium ciliated by airways prevent cilia propel The outward colonization bacteria. help mucus the by and the of of fibrosis. Bottom a patient panel: lung from Section a with cystic cilia resulting ability impairs mucus layer dehydrated to of propel and the to leading the of frequent The colonization bacterial inflammation airway. it, Ritter. J. of Courtesy

peptides. antimicrobial replace cause them are (see killed pathogens disease microorganisms commensal treatment, Fig. When and by frequently antibiotic 12.20). is is if compromised. in themselves some disease or kept microbes commensal their growth Under if immune cause system check circumstances not can the normally of in further normal can inherited the we in will immunodeficiencies. organisms disease the we nonpathogenic an the immunity, commensal play In 15, Chapter microorganisms see role and how how in cause discuss particularly will these context 12, intestine; setting in of important Chapter

infection. establish focus agents defenses overcome a must Infectious of 2-3 host to innate

been constantly other present to by bodies infectious in that agents environment, are individuals. exposed including have Our shed microorganisms our with or microorganisms epithelial surfaces. internal occur Contact external through these may to an must In order or first crossing to binding an a establish microorganism the by epithelium body infection, invade (Fig. 2.8). is loss wounds, With is of the the and cause body’s of common the a damage that of due burns, epithelial integrity to mortality infection epithelia, morbidity. internal major or by of air but being colonizing epithelial surface. to using specifically pathogens the body establish without fluid by attachment flow rapidly epithelial across damaged The and surfaces, to the epithelial or damage, avoid surfaces, repairs infection adhering dislodged even the may

further a when overwhelming transmission there infection, replicates and to host allow occurs Disease within defenses site evading then its in innate or to bodies. succeeds our local of a establish microorganism the and entry microorganisms tract into microorganisms, epithelium for of lining a provides same tract water. food route the The does ingested for lining respiratory and the tissues the gastrointestinal airborne of in respectively. Salmonella food water, causes which causes are Vibrio and cholerae, spread intestinal cholera, typhi, which The through fever, typhoid fecally and contaminated pathogens individuals gut, opportunities through the penetrate and allow the tract infection contact reproductive to and bites direct wounds skin, the for and offers skin, microorganisms between the Fig. (see Insect 2.2).

fortunately exposure, of disease In spite is infectious quite this infrequent. microorganisms mechanisms immune surface that succeed underlying Most infection are that crossing tissues, efficiently innate preventing epithelial the from becoming in function the of an removed by in established. are repelled pass because this cause in and to is how infections no It way, many difficult symptoms undetected. know they

pathogenic having from mass system. immune that the evade the adaptations of distinguished general, the microorganisms environment special are by in microorganisms In disease cases, significant infection In local the the such fungal cause initial not does foot, athlete’s some and pathology. remains as (Clostridium body’s case) other lymphatics as and secretes invades the such tetani tissues, or spreads disrupts neurotoxin, cases, the workings. tetanus, this bloodstream, a infection destroys serious the In it causes illness and as in and the the powerful bacterium through

countered effector by into out system (see tissues, recruits a the vessels molecules the of downstream blood cannot of the response of immune initially clotting inducing while in the inflammatory spread blood an further pathogen more that Fig. cells microbe so circulation is spread and the often through and innate that The small 2.8). act over days. of cellular immunity several innate The responses tissues pathogen to delivered local also antigens are this response During if time, immune from lymphoid adaptive the the begin derived may

initial defenses. and chemical barriers Anatomic

Fig. the An infection can and 2.8 be divided from to established. it response becoming contain of series into not, stages. If infection helps a to the it infectious skin. These lymph here illustrated in inside agent, and wound an a are and through infectious delivers also the for in microorganism entering carried the dendritic The cells, local to infectious lymph nodes. This to adaptive and epithelial the of then cells the infection. adhere agent the response eventual clearance first cross and immune the must initiates epithelium. A dendritic prevent immune may local 1-15). Section (see by response cells the infection response and response eliminate or to pathogens an host adaptive of either reinfection target infections, immune an immunological cells variants may memory. protect T innate generate antibodies against and strains immune can using While particular some effector by the

and antimicrobial of Epithelial phagocytes several proteins. cells produce kinds 2-4

variety growth. microbial also epithelia that or physical inhibit that mere microbicidal chemical are are they to more Our surface of infection; than wide barriers substances a produce create For gastrointestinal substantial in to enzymes, pH bile and tract the digestive salts, acid upper the a example, and chemical present (see stomach infection lysolipids of barrier Fig. the the fatty acids, 2.5). features group enzymes proteins specific chemical to comprises bacterial antimicrobial of walls. important attack One that cell lysozyme antibacterial phospholipase are secreted A2, phagocytes. which secretory tears saliva enzymes by and Such include and in and bond is bacterial that the a of the chemical specific cell wall. Lysozyme breaks peptidoglycan a glycosidase in component an bridges cross-linking N-acetylglucosamine of (GlcNAc) strengthened by Peptidoglycan acid and alternating (MurNAc), is N-acetylmuramic polymer peptide (Fig. 2.9). sugars more covering outer the an cell bacteria, against the in LPS have Lysozyme β-(1,4) layer. effective exposed, selectively linkage these the which bacteria, is between and Gram-negative against peptidoglycan wall cleaves acting than is in layer two Gram-positive which peptidoglycan of Fig. of the crypts is small many the into by proteins in cells gut the Lysozyme produced epithelial cells, the intestine (see specialized base secrete also Paneth that antimicrobial in 2.6). also to membrane, killing cell hydrolyze wall produce and access A2, enter Paneth phospholipase the cells phospholipids a the enzyme that secretory can basic bacteria. the highly bacterial in cell

The antimicrobial agents the and group peptides. epithelial cells of by is antimicrobial second phagocytes secreted represent ancient forms against one most defense These of infection. of the tissues. secrete surface, into mucosal the the secrete fluids peptides whereas these Epithelial them phagocytes in bathing cells and are classes cathelicidins, defensins, antimicrobial of Three in histatins. important peptides mammals

including of peptides by organisms, insects, eukaryotic mammals, antimicrobial plants evolutionarily ancient, and class (Fig. made many Defensins an are conserved 2.10). peptides around amino bonds hydrophobic amphipathic are short acids stabilizing of separated three have common charged positively that a cationic structure—a 30–40 from region. region disulfide They usually a well to disrupt fungi, within and membranes the envelopes membrane act as some the viruses. as of minutes Defensins of cell bacteria Fig. 2.10). mechanism leaky (see the the and membrane that is formation to The region insertion pore of involve hydrophobic membrane into bilayer makes the thought a the of make multicellular Most different many defensins organisms

Fig. bacteria. and walls the Gram-positive cell 2.9 of Lysozyme digests Gram-negative (GlcNAc) cell turquoise of is (red peptide polymer N-acetylglucosamine bridges acid β-(1,4)-linked (MurNAc) that into bacterial walls three-dimensional are of panels: N-acetylmuramic a cross-linked residues of a network. (purple bars) Upper (large dense hexagons) by circles) peptidoglycan the and alternating left the the embedded forms the molecules Gram-positive lipoteichoic which that cell bacteria (upper panel), peptidoglycan layer outer other acid layer teichoic acids itself. are and In membrane in as the to such link bacterial peptidoglycan of proteins In (upper membrane a that (LPS). panel), is and wall lipid by outer covered bacteria contains thin an peptidoglycan Gram-negative inner right lipopolysaccharide core lipid to lipid, hexagons). a of Lipopolysaccharide which attached is turquoise (turquoise polysaccharide composed is (small A circles), a creating and (lower panels) cell the to between agents. peptidoglycan linkages cleaves a and defect GlcNAc β-(1,4) the exposing membrane Lysozyme MurNAc, underlying in antimicrobial other layer of relatively Lysozyme bacteria effective the accessibility peptidoglycan. Gram-positive because against greater is of more the

Anatomic barriers and defenses. chemical initial

Fig. the microbes. cell Defensins are that of disrupt amphipathic 2.10 peptides membranes panel. β1-defensin of top is shown The the structure in human amphipathic antiparallel of in three It helix residues of composed (green), short of (yellow) separate regions. charged generating hydrophobic an and residing with strands α sheet β resting a against segment is peptide bilayer the the cell (center charged shared and feature with become of from inserted membrane defensins lipid surface interact panel). the and This is insects and plants by the to in defensins allows general membrane integrity of a the and membrane of unclear, in to are in formation defensins leads panel). pores a loss arrangement of the the the still Although the details transition (bottom

—the produces Arabidopsis Drosophila thaliana 13 least plant fruitfly at melanogaster 15. the and of encoded 8. Human are by on cells 21 genes which many as a Paneth make chromosome many different of as defensins, cluster

fungal of some and family distinct activities, on amino the and acid Gram-negative β-, basis has Gram-positive of subfamilies defensins—α-, are against bacteria, being and sequence, some members pathogens. others each with for while bacteria specific against Three θ-defensins—are active distinguished the antimicrobial processing propeptides by All the proteolytic inactive (Fig. from defensins, generated including peptides, are 2.11). granules. a is by processing neutrophils about anionic that 90 so-called the acids defensin generating propiece, remove cellular humans, amino developing an primary α-defensins to cationic stored mature proteases an by In in initial produce of of propeptide antimicrobial to other a as as number lysosomes, specialized The of contain membrane-enclosed rather vesicles, similar defensins. agents that well of are primary granules neutrophils the engulfed granules with has how a are phagocytic pathogen, vesicles to microbe. (phagosomes) 3 in Chapter kill fuse within will explain these after primary the helping induced to neutrophils cell We produce gut the are The before the α-defensins, or constitutively into processed of cryptdins, called by proteases in mice, in which secreted humans, such being trypsin gut the lumen. matrilysin as metalloprotease cells Paneth are α-defensins β-defensins and of generally the produced response presence long lack The of products. in propiece the microbial specifically to urogenital tracts, tongue. some by (and epithelia made gut, outside the α-defensins) β-Defensins the are and primarily respiratory skin, in and the lamellar and (see the by β-Defensins pneumocytes lungs in made in type keratinocytes by bodies packaged into epidermis II Fig. are space secretory into layer lung. in surfactant release to form in that the epidermis watertight their the extracellular lipid-rich 2.6), the the organelles lipid contents a and sheet pulmonary gene primates, by a single but in been has θ-defensin the arose human the mutation. inactivated The θ-defensins

the antimicrobial disulfide cathelicidin lack bonds stabilize peptides to the family the The defensins. belonging that one cathelicidin and mammals, mice including cattle but have other some and sheep, gene, have Humans several. are intestine. response made by keratinocytes by the skin and in to infection in constitutively and epithelial lungs macrophages, Cathelicidins made neutrophils the are and cells and in and are secretion pro-peptides as They domains inactive processed two linked Fig. of are (see before composed made 2.11). type the propeptides cytoplasmic neutrophils, another of cathelicidin in specialized secondary In granules. inactive stored granule called are primary secondary is Cathelicidin fuse been that stored with where are is has elastase it in phagosomes, neutrophil induced activated granules primary cleavage by only to proteolytic and cleaved granules. by when neutrophil cleavage exocytosis. in phagosome by domains, two are the from released or the Cleavage separates the products and remain either the that range a microorganisms. to a toxic cationic The is wide amphipathic and disrupts is carboxyterminal peptide membranes of peptide enzyme is of antigen role and defense processing similar protein a peptide involved degradation), L to an unclear. The its amino-terminal in cathelin, cathepsin in immune inhibitor is but protein called lysosomal structure in (a and processed the lamellar in stored keratinocytes, In cathelicidins, are bodies. like β-defensins,

β-defensins; shorter pro-region in synthesized, membrane-inserting amphipathic When is contain represses the β-defensins a shown); αand pro-region (blue), which the first (not are properties a of domain. the they peptide and the green–yellow); an (AMPH, amphipathic domain signal from defensins cleavage phagosomes, amphipathic form. or proteases, by releases After undergo domain cell, released active into they the the are which in a synthesized peptide, and domain, a proteolytic Newly cleavage. contain a activated amphipathic domain; cathelin short are signal by an too, pro-region, they, cathelicidins lectin also (CRD). domain RegIII carbohydrate-recognition domain C-type a a (CTLD), as known contains further regulates of peptide, proteolytic RegIII its After the antimicrobial cleavage of also signal release activity.

are antimicrobial and cavity sublingual, called histatins of the the produced oral constitutively A peptides by glands. in class submandibular parotid, These Cryptococcus and histidine-rich, cationic pathogenic against albicans. active short, neoformans as such peptides fungi Candida are the but oral effect healing rapid were found to wound mechanism this in of is unclear. the that is histatins typical cavity, promote the recently More

is type or Another carbohydrate-binding by proteins of made epithelia proteins, bactericidal lectins. a which the domain for lectins of binding require carbohydrate-recognition provides their binding variable carbohydrate activity (CRD), structures. for interface calcium C-type Paneth direct binds RegIIIγ RegIII lectins by humans ‘lecticidins.’ activity. in of is mice, several by bacterial proteins to expressed C-type the gut, and secreted walls it intestinal and produced mice, where family in include into cells bactericidal a epithelium comprising In peptidoglycans bactericidal of the family cell and exerts bactericidal fragment the (see inactive of is within peptides, amino-terminal activate potential is the lumen which removes short a bactericidal Like Fig. RegIIIγ trypsin, protease the in other cleaved but RegIIIγ to produced intestinal form by 2.11). called directly forming membrane hepatocarcinomaintestine-pancreas/pancreatitis-associated the a RegIIIα (also pore HIP/PAP bacterial Human in hexameric kills by protein) for (Fig. bacteria 2.12). RegIII proteins is (see Gram-positive exposed the surface family on which bacteria, outer in preferentially kill the peptidoglycan Fig. 2.9). bacteria. the of Gram-negative the further pore-forming inhibits bacteria LPS of for RegIII ability In Gram-positive selectivity fact, enforcing proteins RegIIIα, the of

Summary.

and mammalian phases, the to proceeds finally defenses, organisms adaptive in three The immediate invading beginning then immune innate immunity. with innate response defenses, induced an of phase any that first and are those ready The mechanisms invader of resist to at host present time. consists defense they more pathogen also physical surfaces strategies. Epithelial other entry, provide against have but a barrier specialized a protective have surfaces barrier Mucosal of mucus. particular interactions, protect microbial both Through and epithelia highly cell-surface invasion. differentiated colonization against and of secretion Defense actions prevention of adherence, include by of pathogen epithelia the and peptides, the of antimicrobial flow mechanisms bactericidal enzymes the cilia. caused RegIII made proproteins as inactive bactericidal of peptides that the require family and are lectins Antimicrobial the

Fig. by 2.12 formation human Pore RegIIIα. as a shown ribbon diagrams, RegIIIα microscopic individual map (PDB the of of by purple was the pore generated human the filament. structure cryo-electron 1UV0), into model pro-RegIIIα RegIIIα docking Top: and turquoise the ID: Gram-negative activity its against pore-forming bacteria. but RegIIIα, explaining blocks bactericidal the activity not of Gram-positive selective LPS of pores lipid microscopic the electron images Bottom: presence assembled bilayers. in of RegIIIα structure Top of courtesy

Hooper. L.

system complement immunity. and The innate

activation, in killing whereupon forming their membranes. by microbial pores to a proteolytic capable of step cell microbes they complete become the the and microbe. in on of actions glycan/carbohydrate to this unique peptides binding enzymes The antimicrobial described structures involve section often immunity. recognition defenses the both time, molecules the and at representing soluble simplest pattern Thus, are molecular these of innate form effector same receptors

complement innate immunity. The system and

component and a breaches innate known initial complement major host’s epithelial defenses, barriers as encounters the next immunity it system, the a or antimicrobial pathogen of complement. When in blood a collection Complement body soluble fluids. present other is of and proteins immune activity heat-labile was activity as whose could 1890s the bactericidal a plasma It ‘complement’ in normal the Jules discovered by of in sera. Bordet substance antibodies readily it and/or is coating complement of phagocytic Part and refers process the with taken proteins which to cells. opsonization, more so that destroyed be up a by can pathogen response, Although was protection in of the early as complement of of the an discovered through of now immune first it we that part pathways ancient effector as arm evolved and originally activation. system the antibody that understand infection, innate antibodies, it more in provides still complement absence

by different complement of system proteins, more liver. plasma The produced than the are mainly 30 which is composed In of form. absence in inactive these an proteins circulate infection, the the proteins all infection. several its bound responses directly complement pathogens, either help inflammatory the phagocytosis, or which to pathogen, fight becomes system killing that facilitating of have of or interact inducing Particular form different In and complement antibody by outcome of each to the the pathways to presence of activation, final other complement ‘activated.’ pathogens of with activation. There three of are complement pathways of activation As as the classical was complement of antibody-triggered the known pathway complement activation. became discovered first, this pathway and pathogen and is the activated by alone; carbohydrates the pathogen the can next called which activated lectin be be was proteins is recently discovered of recognize to pathway, pathway, that discovered bind which the most to on presence surfaces. lectin-type alternative The the by

means 2-4 Section proteins. proteolysis antimicrobial We a learned activating in can that of as used be In the of proteases proteins activation successively being system, complement is complement many and inherent, another. activate proteolysis one the cleave by that with only become active system or cleavage, of synthesized proteases as inactive by complement proteolytic the after zymogens, usually enzymatically which are The another complement pro-enzymes, protein. are receptors presence of detect The pathways the to that as complement pattern pathogens. proteins by triggered act recognition This in complement protease zymogen active proteolysis which many zymogens zymogen, next cleaves a the cascade the an proceeds. pathway, the of sequentially, activated signal activates are each as in triggering an initial activates detection and cascade molecules amplifying of the that becoming and eliminate three attack—that help phagocytosis, This results effector distinct in pathogen. pathways—inflammation, membrane activation the of number that each small even rapid is a step. a produces response of way, the greatly of pathogens this amplified at In detection overall for Fig. This is shown in complement scheme 2.13.

Fig. in proceeds microbes. phases of the The complement system elimination distinct 2.13 in a formation distinguish of proteolytic from can family that that ends activate a amplification convertase, box) the box) microbial cascade (green of surfaces the (yellow enzymatic proteases. of critical in self activity C3 Proteins the This complement that and microbe of (pink). produce lyse phagocytosis microbial effector (purple), the three is gateway inflammation enhance of to membranes (blue), arms activity figures this serves. use each activity protein We which to in complement scheme chapter throughout the color illustrate this will

MOVIE 2.1

names. will confusing, their Nomenclature proteins explaining we can for so start complement seem by letter by to are belong pathway, designated number. the they a C classical first the proteins by followed discovered The and native designation, number C1 inactive The a example, zymogens—have complement for and the C2. simple proteins—such as than sequence discovery of of rather they Unfortunately, the the reactions. were named their in order in C4, C1, is C2, pathway, C5, of classical that The example, C7, the these for reaction and C9 all proteases). not C6, C8, are (note C3, sequence reactions as cleavage a adding suffix. letter a of by designated are Products lowercase fragment, remaining produces example, C3 fragment small For the larger protein called cleavage and a of C3a C3b. the one with suffix for fragment the by convention, designated factors larger exception. other b, By is we system here. preserve larger literature, been the and the so For its in this maintained it C2, was named has fragment discoverers, by C2a cleavage together C1r, proteins is these the naming products and are C1s: not are distinct C1. comprise exception C1 C1q, but of of Another that were a the large factor Bb fragment pathway cleavage small and the are also is D. discovered alternative designated and of thus, example, letters, are factor and Ba. lowercase later the of B of B for capital by products designated by the different and b: Their proteins fragment called The addition components example, for this designated line, sometimes are not Activated use however, C2a; convention. by horizontal we a will complement in components system listed the complement the of All are Fig. 2.14.

immunity, innate also in complement immunity. influences acting adaptive Besides T of complement more Opsonization detail enhances that cells discuss phagocytic complement Chapter by antigen-presenting presentation uptake to facilitates the of we pathogens pathogen in their receptors; this express in cells, by which 6. antigens antigens, receptors later complement complement-coated to cells Chapter proteins 10. express that their B we as in for responses describe enhance adaptive antigen-presenting complement can direction of the 11. fragments influencing response, the immune cells, to in and extent In describe addition, influence of Chapter production thereby several cytokine act subsequent we by as the

The microbial features recognizes C3b. complement 2-5 with system of

Fig. highly the complement of mechanisms gives a preview outcomes simplified initiation and 2.15 activation. of pathways are activation different complement The initiated ways. of three in lectin bind to soluble The initiated by (MBL) surfaces. and proteins—mannose-binding carbohydrate-binding microbial pathway carbohydrate on lectin the is ficolins—that structures particular the activation these trigger serine cleavage Specific then of proteins associate (MASPs), MBL-associated proteases, the with called recognition that of proteases complement pathway. proteins and C1s), microbial complement surface when comprises a which proteases is initiated a bound C1, The already component to and to recognizes binds or directly antibodies classical either (C1q) pathway associated protein (C1r the a recognition pathogen. with to bind surfaces. microbial C3, directly which can the spontaneous the be component then of complement by hydrolysis activation and Finally, initiated alternative pathway can

central the in complement at These three important step pathways most converge and activation. When the pathways pathogen C3 of activity convertase with of enzymatic a is generated. any the interacts a surface, are protease (C3). protein There types 3 of the multisubunit complement that convertase, a C3 pathway cleaves activity on complement each activated, with various depending is component but covalently to C3 small convertase system; amounts surface, it the main large molecule the to C3 where C3b, effector binds the C3a, to peptide is pathogen of a generate The of that complement bound cleaves and

The innate system complement and immunity.

Phagocyte tissue of generate C6 and and disrupts receptors C9 with infammation the cell factor complement the leaving of and and C4 complex a C3b MAC C3 recruit C1s cell phagocytic factor C3b promote C3a for C3b lysis C3 C5a C3a formation cascade All Phagocytes bound receptors leads of MASP-2 releasing D C7 C4 the the site infection cells a to C3a Completion membrane C2 pathways MBL/fcolin, C3, pathogen convertase, C3 C8 (MAC), destroy surface microbial properdin C3b infected which engulf C1r, B causes C1q, cleaves which to to complement C2 C3a membrane-attack C5b and

Fig. molecules detect is pattern system of destroy microorganisms. and 2.15 receptors that a Complement effector recognition and soluble pathways used the mechanisms components The proteolytic are of cascades three a pathogen-recognition the row, leading top in to C3 along shown convertase. formation the complement with the in of complement-activation component activity the becomes to C3 soluble which the component cleaves C3b, complement small into surface larger This and (middle row). enzyme covalently bound protein the C3a pathogen in function later and biochemical by in figures. in 2.14 Fig, listed described are detail components The are left) or The (MBL) pathway the mannose-binding cell of lectin residues of by triggered (top walls capsules. is lectin in microbial and ficolins binding to carbohydrate complement activation (top antibody pathway bound classical either is the to to the center) pathogen. binding or of pathogen The surface by triggered to C1 undergoes P C3 fluid the augmented In alternative spontaneous soluble the hydrolysis by in action the (properdin). factors B, (top phase, which right), generating pathway of C3(H2O), D, and is formation to activities complement, effector converge to bottom thus of bound all All the the of lead shown of in row. which a C3b are pathways the pathogen and on to enabling microbe the opsonin, pathogen a as that (bottom complement-coated receptors ingest easily to C3b express acts center). for phagocytes an C3b more bound activity, (detail here), C5 convertases C3b C5 and convertase which C3 cleaves not C5b. to another C5a a bind also to produce can shown to a to complement of the in that components the (bottom of events can right). terminal pathogens damage which complex the membrane-attack (MAC) late triggers of membrane into pathway C5b complement—C6 C9—assemble certain the to that and C5a as cause recruit left). immune-system cells infection the inflammation and act C3a site chemoattractants of (bottom

and inflammation. receptors specific helps induce of activities Cleavage critical the or directly activation complement the indirectly Fig. (see and leads to complement effector step is in of the C3 system all 2.15). opsonin, destroy the take and acts the receptors to phagocytes surface as enabling C3b-coated complement and microbial C3b binds that to covalently up an microbe. carry for fragments in C3f C3dg. degraded that chapter, different the and serum describe Later a the bind complement of protease called will C3b receptors in into are how we inactive function that smaller C3b this by involved complement and is classical pathways another convertases C5 bind lectin enzyme, form produced and multisubunit C3 the and the to convertase. by can C3b the also highly cleaves C5, C5a This peptide the inflammatory C5b. liberating and generating in a additional the interact in proteins leads a activation, pore Fig. the of lysis C5b which the complex initiates that complement to cell (see pathogen cell complement events C5b on membraneattack membrane surface, to with (MAC) creating ‘late’ form right). 2.15, bottom

microbial bond The of responses. innate microbes of is be to a which surfaces, recognition its into form the C3b feature ability to effector covalent with key allows translated react the thioester highly C3 is Covalent cleaved. that bond cannot formation and due is hidden a bond C3 until reactive to is inside folded protein and cleaves amino the When 2.16). a or surface bond nearby in C3 hydroxyl releases to convertase the microbial group C3b C3a react fragment, the C3 large changes (Fig. conformational thioester allow on occur with that way the one thioester inactivating the no which in rapidly is If is alternative healthy individuals. C3b, is made, inhibited bond is hydrolyzed, pathway some C5 differ we between below, listed will various the components C3 and complement of different that see the are convertases the individual are pathways; in Fig. of As components 2.17.

of bound Glu a TED protected of C3 by bond 23 in 14 C3aTED ˜° C3 and on reactive in a inactivated pathogen Cleavage C3b react C3b surface surface GlnCys from ˜°Before C3 surface the releases with C3b chemical thioester Gly hydrolysis allows convertase, reacting bond the The C3a, TED 5 to group within is change conformation thioester to thioester bond (C4b2a)pathogen cleavage thioester group by the convertase 6 of C3b TED C3b pathogen

Fig. chain C3 C3b microbial convertase covalent convertase C3a in 2.16 of conformational bond C3b reactive cleaving a to in into C3b. thioester causes activates it and surfaces α the bonding is change shown for C3a of by here) and from C3 exposing terminus the highly amino C4b2a a and release exposes bond. Top that thioester panel: the surface. processing a bonding can the blood plasma surfaces, an amino chain together This molecules native microbial the on covalently (formed by hydroxyl from on proteolytic to held in now chain C3 with α consists β or and react polypeptide) of C3 C3b groups bond. Bottom schematic a panels: right view disulfide by (TED) thioester domain of reaction. the The of α thioester-containing the is If potentially made contains not a spot). bond with a thioester a reactive microbial highly (red chain bond is C3b the rapidly left (that water), convertase lectin inactive. rendering by (the surface, cleavage panels: thioester cleaved by C3 hydrolyzed Bottom is, pathway

The system and innate immunity. complement

Pathways destructive be inflammatory must tightly a and series regulated. leading to dangerous amplification potent effects—and have potentially steps—are such which built-in and of complement initiated. key rapidly One to safeguard is are their important unless was which activation that they bind on inactivated surface components activated the the pathogen regulatory pathway complement of act surfaces the which from healthy protecting in activation There shall host them prevent the several at as thereby the to points we proteins are on see the damage, chapter. also in accidental cells, later of programmed dying of death. can, injury, be cells apoptosis, Complement ischemic however, cells, as sites such undergoing by and or cell those activated at by dispose cells cell In thus autoimmune cases, being 15). dead of response these and complement phagocytes triggering released the dying an in coating risk of neatly, and helps contents Chapter the limiting (discussed the

of the account components, we pathways. for detailed ready complement more three the a main of are introduced Having some introduced of Fig. help the components out will rest each the complement throughout chapter, of we types in the use color the indicate the functions by in tables the To code carried of Fig. 2.13 and for yellow membrane amplification, and recognition for and inflammation, activation, for blue for 2.14: pink attack. for phagocytosis, green purple

cascade. complement the that activate lectin recognize The 2-6 microbial uses surfaces pathway to receptors soluble

their on generally molecular repeating as known typically Microorganisms patterns patterns bear surface molecular structures, pathogen-associated of (PAMPs). Gram-negative of composed repetitive walls matrix of and lipids The (see are a and bacteria, array carbohydrates, proteins, Gram-positive of in for cell a example, Fig. 2.9). present lipoteichoic cell system. lipopolysaccharide of animal outer of the are walls membrane Gram-positive the by innate the bacteria of Gram-negative are and The bacteria the cells immune acids in on bacterial not important of and recognition residues vertebrate in the Similarly, proteins (Fig. commonly acid) (N-acetylneuraminic cells the that residues rather yeast acid than terminate sialic glycans terminate mannose of the glycans surface of 2.18). features lectin pathway surfaces detect uses microbial of to and to The these pathogens. respond

Fig. sugars. of are chains The different with and yeast side on patterns terminated carbohydrate glycoproteins 2.18 vertebrate fungi same in Glc3Man9-GlcNAc2 animals addition (left of the an oligosaccharide, to initiated and panel), residue. the is glycosylation N-linked precursor by asparagine (middle is many panel). this glycans processed In yeasts high-mannose to the glycoproteins residues the N-linked contrast, panel). and of and initial vertebrates, (right In have glycan in trimmed is acid sialic terminal vertebrates processed,

on lectin recognition receptors any recognize pathway carbohydrates in of extracellular four and pattern blood triggered The by and circulate surfaces. that can be microbial fluids different discovered shown first to receptor is (MBL), was which lectin in The be such mannose-binding Fig. liver. which in synthesized 2.19, and the is MBL up that domain contains lectin collagen-like protein Section amino-terminal is 2-4). a an an built carboxy-terminal and domain oligomeric C-type a monomer from (see this called are of type collectins. Proteins assemble formation helix collagen-like into domains. MBL of the by their trimers monomers a through triple then oligomers by cysteine-rich Trimers assemble disulfide into bonding between domains. the collagen trimers being forms The trimers, with the major tetramers. human and is the blood two to composed MBL six in of present of MBL sialic glycans. affinity vertebrate and but does MBL low N-acetylglucosamine terminate microbial fucose, residues, common has residues, domain acid carbohydrate-recognition which which mannose, A of are single (GlcNAc) on for not bind a glycans, and on wide microbial avidity, for host has a MBL Thus, Gram-negative strength, and mycobacteria, interacting multimeric viruses total parasites, binding carbohydrate or bacteria, of while Gram-positive some cells. not repetitive with and structures high variety yeasts, including surfaces, presence present plasma of is during increased acute-phase low infection, production in but at the concentrations the individuals, is in most of its the response. MBL 3. phase of This is innate induced part is response in the of the immune Chapter discussed and

used by pathway other ficolins. three are known pathogen-recognition The lectin as molecules the related shape and attached rather to have domain, lectin in overall they to a a domain, Although function MBL, fibrinogen-like than

collagen-like is heads two (MBL) in panels) the clusters carbohydrate-binding an from Mannose-binding monomers. of oligomeric from to the protein six stalk central lectin tails (left a MBL which formed of arise composed carbohydrate-recognition domain (red), an neck a region (yellow). and MBL monomer An a collagen α-helical region is of (blue), Three form to (bottom two MBL trimers MBL mature left monomers form six between and assemble associate a trimer, panel). and a molecule to molecule An MBL-associated with proteases serine MBL (MASPs). associates or spatial particular a that of fucose MBL binds display to mannose residues. arrangement surfaces bacterial their ficolins binding overall with and MBL and activate The MASP-1 surfaces. molecules after C4 are resemble to present C2 in structure, panels) (right can carbohydrate on microbial MASP-2, and associated MBL. ficolins rather domain, is than of carbohydrate-binding in a the domain fibrinogenlike present lectin The domain

Fig. and recognize proteases form on surfaces. complexes carbohydrates Mannose-binding ficolins serine with 2.19 particular and lectin microbial

˜-helical domains coiled are helices MBL coiled but to a clusters helices have MBL coils form structure carbohydrate-recognition collagen carbohydrate-recognition of ˜-helical carbohydrate-binding trimeric in Ficolins domain different ÿbronectin similar domains coils collagen monomers domains

complement immunity. system innate The and

collagen-like stalk Fig. the (see 2.19). does not specificity it gives ficolins acetylated for general sugars, a oligosaccharides but containing fibrinogen-like bind domain mannose-containing The carbohydrates. ficolins: and (ficolin-1), H-ficolin (ficolin-2), have (ficolin-3). L-ficolin M-ficolin three Humans and by synthesized and secreted synthesized liver the lung and in L- blood the M-ficolin H-ficolin are and blood; by circulate is cells.

MBL-associated with the forms in plasma inactive MASP-3, MBL zymogens. MBL complexes as which bind MASP-2, MASP-1, and serine proteases the molecule surface, binds that a When pathogen a MASP-1 change MBL conformational complex. MASP-2 activate it a to same cleave enables in MBL in to occurs and Activated MASP-2 C2 cleave and C4 then (Fig. components can complement 2.20). a and recognition MASP-2, MASP-1 activate surface oligomers by similarly form make complex of with Like a which ficolins microbial complement upon MBL, ficolin. that the bond. C4, thioester a contains C3, like buried that C4b (see as C3b conformational change When reactive described in it MASP-2 the C4, exposes C4a, thioester Fig. releases for 2.16). a allowing cleaves of binds (see this C4b it C2 nearby, bonds thioester where molecule microbial via then one the surface Fig. covalently to 2.20). protease to is form bound the serine to the by C4b2a, active lectin of C3 an is producing remains which that cleaved pathway. MASP-2, C2a, C4b convertase C2 (Remember, C2a complement exception nomenclature.) in is the of cleaves C4b2a C3 and many C3b. now C3a into molecules response. local The nearby bond covalently C3b the inflammatory and to released the C3a surface, fragments pathogen a initiates Fig. the by MBL pathway (see lectin The proceeds complement-activation like pathway initiated ficolins 2.20).

lectin experience MASP-2 more early indicating importance in during host respiratory of extracellular pathway or by infections the substantially defense. for childhood, Individuals deficient the MBL common bacteria mechanisms the This early innate particular childhood, defense are yet not susceptibility illustrates in when adaptive developed fully responses immune importance of

molecules Binding C3 ficolins to of an mediator. surface, to their cleave MASP-1 mannose-binding pathogen binds and or the surfaces cleaves carbohydrate C3a, C3b, induces microbial to many lectin produce ligands to inflammatory which and activate of on the protease covalent serine MASP-2. The that covalently important complement react in surfaces. is with C4, it of subsequent to and bond thioester exposing pathogen then cleaves MASP-2 the C4b confining to the attachment to pathogen C3b C4b activity surface the allows in surface. pathogen then C2 making to C2, C4b Fig. susceptible binds of C1, C1s. the complex C1r, activation complement a pathway first of 2.21 and in which is The C1q, classical protein is described tails drawing, heads to the to has in each bind forming C1q subunits and “a composed tails looking As like identical C1s, of with combine of molecules as bunch complex long been globular C1q:C1r2:C1s2. and C1r micrograph (yellow) tulips.” it of collagen-like two (red); is and six C1 the The shown directly zymogen cleaves to the C1s causing bind conformational the to of (proenzyme). can molecules and a heads which regions constant then surface, C1r, immunoglobulin the in pathogen or The activates change structure to convertase C3 is Fig. MBL–MASP it C2 function, overall form and in (see C4 identical similar C4b2a C1 the cleaving to the and complex The an has complex, 2.20). (×500,000) courtesy Photograph K.B.M. of Reid.

across but are milk in mother’s antibodies present transferred gone. the the maternal the placenta and are are and the A the the the lung. of of and collectin in bathes members D fluid (SP-A surfaces Other surfactant present proteins epithelial SP-D), family the that which surfaces making have subepithelial more pathogens, them macrophages enter coat There of by to the the to that phagocytosis alveoli. they left susceptible tissues the complement. and do SP-A associate SP-D MASPs, not do with activate not they Because

important our in lectin be as activator may MBL are plasma We used the abundant prototype have in more so the more here ficolins and pathway, than MBL of practice. but bacteria a recognizes and and as GlcNAc recognizes cell Gram-positive the acetylated acid, walls (GalNAc), GalNAc. N-acetylgalactosamine such contains lipoteichoic of component L-ficolin that particularly of sugars complement capsulated can variety also to bacteria. activate binding It a of after recognizes has and viridans, galactose, H-ficolin binding linked bacterial restricted activity the against Gram-positive specificity, a endocarditis. Aerococcus bacterium d-fucose M-ficolin cause residues; of been acetylated and to shows sugar a more also for only

complex is lectin the is 2-7 pathway. by initiated The and activation the pathway homologous classical to C1 of

or as sensor scheme, it the the pathway its lectin a C1. the In pathway, classical similar uses is complex, except that C1 overall pathogen known to examine with 10. pathogens to we immunity, now, C1 can also detail but with C1 some adaptive function the antibodies, more and in pathway in in interact we Chapter in describe Because immunity, directly which innate which classical interacts allows both

the and Like acts complex inactive C1s), C1 large their (C1q), as which MBL–MASP complex, subunit initially the proteases a in of is composed which serine two pathogen are (C1r form the sensor, (Fig. and 2.21). that collagen-like is amino-terminal domain of C1q carboxy-terminal contain a monomers globular composed and an hexamer a of domain. trimers, domains assemble bringing trimers globular through to interactions domains, collagen-like the The the head. of form a globular together together trimers Six their has C1q assemble these molecule, globular to by form heads a of which tails. collagen-like held six complete enzymes MASP-2, related gene related C1s likely somewhat all the common distantly more a MASP-1 five MASP-3; a for and of evolved to are from to and C1r and precursor. to closely have are duplication at the and C1q. to tetramers of complex C1r arms C1r:C1s with C1s the part form external fold being that into noncovalently of C1q, interact least and

C1q. of function the recognition The resides C1 globular in heads six of of its form more C1r; which two the in these of heads to a C1s interact a the generate change complex, or conformational of the serine C1r in leads cleaves then autocatalytic C1r:C1s active active to ligand, causes protease. with enzymatic an an activity activation this associated When the acts next of the classical C4 components C2. and activated on C1s The pathway, two surface C1s pathway the covalently C4 which to earlier C4b, described lectin as cleaves produce for binds to (see the pathogen Fig. 2.20). serine C1s is protease cleaved binds of produce one by which also to molecule C4b the then C2, C2a. the convertase and C3 the of the which This C4b2a, convertase both active classical pathways. lectin is C3 produces the as convertase classical part as often pathway, However, C4b2a classical is known was the discovered (see first the it of because Fig. C3 2.17). and classical their the listed in are forms, active in pathway, proteins Fig. The involved 2.22.

itself can several attach the of in surface pathogens to ways. C1q different is components bacteria, binding One some surface on including directly to by

immunity. innate The system and complement

cell and lipoteichoic Gram-positive certain on proteins of structures as such bacterial bacteria. walls acid the polyanionic molecules C-reactive protein, protein to plasma to C-reactive through second as bacterial that C in protein. polysaccharide—hence residues pneumococcal such phosphocholine is surface acute-phase in name A human the binding binds an in detail in 3. Chapter the acute-phase discuss proteins We response constant, immune via antibodies However, the of in an that their or have bind pathogens Fc, a bound sites. to 1-9) antigen-binding main (see Section regions to C1q function of is to effector adaptive C1q functions provided recognition complement immunity. of by links the thus stages response of C1q fighting the pathogen-specific generated adaptive usefulness has the might before infection, of the to immune an limit in first seem This antibodies. antibodies, of system apparent However, natural the produced absence immune by some are in called the antibodies, infection. and recognizing and cross-reactive, highly the antigens (that have affinity microbial even common is, pathogens many body’s some antigens). of a constituents for recognizing such phosphocholine membrane cells own These as antibodies self low are the response by to self be antigens, to but not consequence to immune do Natural may pathogens. antibodies seem be adaptive to microbiota in produced infection an response of commensal or of IgM is Most and class, considerable humans. known of isotype, represents circulating Sections in IgM (see amount 1-20) the antibody as 1-9 or the total natural and a (the C1q, as natural binding leading Streptococcus of most infection making efficient pneumococcus) an on of microbial is the to before dangerous. clearance the and effective of class pneumoniae complement bacteria after become surfaces they means antibodies IgM at activating such immediately antibody

which activation largely confined to is on surface it Complement initiated. the 2-8 is

of are and both pathways activation pathogen bind to lectin complement We the seen that classical proteins the have by that initiated surfaces. same this to C3 confined enzyme are also cascade site, that so occurs activation is that that important triggered During it the follows, the of surface on activating the events

Fig. lectin the C3 classical an pathogen. alternative activation forming or alternative can the by C3b convertase amplify complement molecules the and more on of pathway pathway depositing 2.23 The many C3b like of the complex its pathway deposited complement C4b2a, factor in factor or susceptible C3b pathogen The on alternative of cleavage results activation, is molecules it to B, that convertase deposition classical D. C3bBb by C3 of of by and of action, the the pathway lectin can the the making surface. bind

or on surfaces. host-cell in pathogen plasma the and not the pathogen This the by is of covalent surface. principally binding achieved C4b to proteins and C4 immunity, can or adjacent a product catalyzed C4b carbohydrates pathogen cleavage complex by ficolin MBL the is innate the that surface. to surface, bound cleavage the In bind pathogen on so or is thioester inactivated. this and rapidly cleaved not If C4b bond, reaction is bond form C4b irreversibly by the with water does is cells. diffusing becoming from attached its surface the activation to This microbial helps and prevent from of site to on healthy C4b host

C4b, cleavage remains pathogen when susceptible only surface, is C4b, it the confined to is with the thereby to bound C1s associated it C3 forming active by protease by where C2 C2a becomes C4b2a. and also convertase the serine of also C3 of thus and the the is C3b to confined surface C3a Cleavage to pathogen. C3b a Like thioester exposed is C4b, by (see makes covalent inactivated its unless rapidly hydrolysis bond Fig. and only activation complement 2.16), place. taken which therefore opsonizes has on the surface it are both and to phagocytes antibody bind when and Fc bound Opsonization also by (see 10-20). Sections as surface, receptors of is complement effective 1-20 C3b region antibodies for pathogen that Fc receptors the more have the of to able become complement linked bound C3b molecules any carbohydrate, covalent bond Because with is form the or or to themselves. proportion the C3b C4b are of C4b protein activated reactive forms antibody, and a when adjacent reactive the a will by antibody the phagocytosis. trigger complement is for cross-linked Antibody most that to is likely chemically efficient

of by for that pathogens. 2-9 the properdin pathway amplification alternative accelerated is The formation loop an is presence in C3b

probably a the pathways, it because the after is pathway activation the of most pathway the for discovered alternative second, defined. classical ‘alternative,’ ancient as Although named been so complement complement pathway or was had spontaneously be Its activated. feature to ability key its is alternative (see It has or lectin pathway C3 a the Fig. convertase, C4b2a convertase, C3 differs the classical pathways convertase the of unique from that 2.17). of The which to fragment bound protein is factor C3 Bb, is alternative the cleavage B. pathway of convertase C3b plasma a itself composed C3b, place C3bBb, in convertase, special a activation by producing can complement This more itself. it C3 because, has generate designated of C3b alternative as increase This means can pathway, whichever been that has by once the pathway production act to loop amplification an formed, rapidly. C3b some

activated can different pathway two in be The ways. alternative first The or is lectin classical action of the by the pathway. either pathways generated of B 2.23). linked C3b microbial these can and surface factor bind to by covalently a (Fig. of plasma factor enabling This B, a protease alters the conformation

system immunity. The and innate complement

C3 C3a and is convertase, more C3b. complex C3(H2O)Bb C3 cleaving The into a C3b cell unless to inactivated it surface is binds a rapidly

hydrolyzes in to to be B which (first C3(H2O), binds by and Complement spontaneously cleaved panel). enables C3 plasma B D factor the bound component factor factor give pathogen panel). attach ‘soluble C3a to can (second host convertase’ or to and resulting C3 which C3 cleaves The give C3b, surfaces cells (third factor convertase cell released remains to turn, C3 to bound which surface, and binds is bound Covalently (C3bBb), C3b Bb, cleaved is D Ba, B; rapidly factor C3b B a form in to factor panel). to by the which lectin pathways C4b2a (see convertase pathway This alternative in classical the in does as the Fig. convertase and C3 the functions 2.17).

called and cleave Ba it to into factor Bb. D with C3 the C3bBb Bb remains C3b, convertase. associated forming stably in way The C3 activating pathway C3(H2O), in ‘tickover’) involves second (known Fig. the shown spontaneous thioester of as alternative as hydrolysis the the form to bond of 2.24. of C3 a tickover and abundant C3(H2O). steady, in is plasma, causes production low-level short-lived a factor producing fluid-phase C3(H2O)Bb. B, D, which by bind is This factor cleaved C3 can convertase, C3(H2O) then can amounts tickover, cleave to many in C3 C3(H2O)Bb and small by of C3b. Although fluid-phase C3a only formed molecules C3 but by hydrolysis, any Much attaches the of C3b present. thioester microbes of is bond covalently this some via inactivated its to surfaces C3 formed from up in C3b C3b the leading by and B, a (see produced is the convertase of classical binds Fig. production C3b way no stepping and to factor pathways or lectin different this of formation 2.23).

C3 pathway On and short-lived. are the Bb convertases their own, alternative C3(H2O) very C3bBb plasma protein are, (Fig. stabilized (factor properdin however, binding P) the by They 2.25). in granules. is neutrophils and stored Properdin secondary made by activated the are neutrophils by It when pathogens. released presence is of microbial may Properdin recognition can some bind a surfaces. of some properties to have it receptor, pattern since Properdindeficient to meningitidis, susceptible with Neisseria meningitis. the are agent main bacterial particularly of infections patients to surfaces bind to thus the phagocytosis. may ability aiding complement by of removal these pathogens, to Properdin’s their pathway direct alternative activity bacterial the can to been by to that undergoing viral or cells by binding, Properdin also apoptosis and modified the or C3b antibody on deposition leading their or are infection, ischemia, damaged phagocytosis. facilitating mammalian cells bind of these removal have The alternative in are of distinctive components listed Fig. pathway the 2.26.

Fig. stabilizes 2.25 convertase the surfaces. alternative pathogen C3 on pathway Properdin complement-regulatory Bacterial properdin express convertase. not (factor and which P), favor the stabilizes proteins C3bBb the binding surfaces of do equivalent of of This activity the is convertase pathway. the C4b2a classical many the molecules C3b. C3bBb C3, surface with pathogen more bound then of cleaves coating

many pathogen C3b of molecules terminal the components a Opsonization, complex is C3 C3bBb activation of and convertase deposits on surface complement

Fig. by spares 2.27 cells, Complement host protected activation proteins. are complement-regulatory which on of decay-accelerating cell: membrane factor expressed (DAF), (MCP). rapidly C3bBb proteins and is receptor it inactivated host cells, 1 surface (CR1), cofactor complement by of the forms host the complement-regulatory proteolysis If by from binding surfaces Host-cell factor plasma. favor H also of the iC3b). and cleavage inactive by MCP, C3b DAF, protease produce Bb bound I factor catalyze to CR1, from displace CR1, and C3b, plasma the C3b factor of H the and as factor (known H

the extent C3 proteins 2-10 of the complement of Membrane plasma activation. and convertases and formation that stability determine regulate

host damaged pathogen activation mechanisms ensure normal a Several only not and cells, proceed cells tissues. that surface on of or the on on will complement host and any extent stability the dependent alternative initial on amplification C3 pathway, activation complement the via the is by After the convertase pathway of of C3bBb. critically positive negative and by controlled is stability regulatory proteins. This both by positive described how cells, as stabilizing or regulatory on have surfaces, acts those We a properdin foreign already bacteria C3bBb. of protein damaged such host as

protect injurious healthy membranes, host complement in in effects negative inappropriate of their host-cell surfaces. Several plasma present on the from and activation cells regulatory proteins, and convertase either dissociation C3b from These forming with complement-regulatory (Fig. rapid the proteins or interact its promote prevent 2.27). to B a factor as surface competes convertase has formed. a factor already for and can C3b that Bb displace cell known CD55) (DAF decay-accelerating on binding or For example, from membrane-attached protein the with an formation iC3b. be inactive derivative, can by to also prevented Convertase C3b cleaving proteolysis another I, CD46), (MCP proteins protein membrane a as plasma C3b-binding of protease, that act conjunction is as in or such achieved cofactors, host-cell factor cofactor (see with This by membrane Fig. 2.27). products, DAF MCP 1 Cell-surface convertase more complement distribution. it similarly CD35) as inactive catabolism (CR1, receptor tissue but to in inhibits of behaves C3b formation that promotes has to C3 it known also a and limited type the and a is Factor is acts binds B to Bb that C3b, factor convertase; for the factor compete from it I. cofactor in another to like plasma complement-regulatory H addition, in it protein able with displace and CR1, as their acid has cells present preferentially (see an Factor bound on cell sialic residues to affinity vertebrate for to it binds H the Fig. C3b because surfaces 2.18). proceed on express surface of damaged tissues normal alternative cells or on cells, host but proteins. the to regulatory of loop pathogen allowed that the the Thus, these not on negative a amplification on or is host pathway

pathway is alternative and of the (C4b2a) distinct lectin convertase of classical pathways from C3 (C3bBb). the that The molecularly 2.28). simplified proteins the of by the system relationships recognition evolutionary complement complement the However, different somewhat is understanding between of (Fig. close in major homologous B tandem complement closely factor encoded by the Thus are within genes and C2, located zymogens, the proteins related

complement The and system innate immunity.

human histocompatibility 6. complex (MHC) chromosome on pathogen convertases of Furthermore, C4, the to binding and that the covalently bonds both their provide C3 respective contain a partners, surface. thioester C3 means attaching

lectin the in component the seems D factor active of the and to classical Only protease enzyme singled its D. pathways: initiating the a activating of entirely Factor serine be one only as to equivalents the than unrelated as an system also circulate protease, functional alternative pathway out can complement rather zymogen. factor the cleavage than B because alternative activated other (through pathway both C3) and the safe bound is necessary factor substrate the B the to This of initiation has of no for bound to for host, D factor C3b. spontaneously plasma, the to alternative at This finds substrate complement where a that factor means allowed only low proceed. pathway D its in pathogen level very activation surfaces be can of and at

organisms. developed multicellular evolution the early of in Complement 2-11

in homologs of been factor C3 from and pathway’ vertebrates, prototypical was complement only a B invertebrates. have system but ‘alternative The discovered nonchordate and known originally ancestor in activated since first related all vertebrates. evolutionarily surprising by appearance the serine was not whose serine C3, inhibitor to is is which altogether and proteases, protease to is an cleaved α2-macroglobulin, modern This likely amplification and of the C3 in present as has echinoderm on factor of and is a an echinoderms homologs it B. ancestral stars) C3 is (which alternative include sea convertase loop and pathway also formed based by The origin, sea the urchins in coelomocytes These fluid. the called factors by phagocytic expressed present amoeboid coelomic are cells are Expression C3 of these cells present. by bacteria increases when and their function bacterial by seems to opsonize particles coelomocytes. to cells This foreign other and facilitate simple uptake system other. are in each related to C3 invertebrates clearly homologs all family of form TEPs. or proteins, a distinctive They the contain proteins, thioester the and linkage thioester to the protein mosquito In to bind directly production of to bacterial the response Gram-negative bacteria. in surfaces infection, phagocytosis TEP1 induced protein mediate Anopheles, the is and may of Some predate of of the symmetry, being C3 Bilateria—animals activity may evolution even with flatworms the form bilateral

Fig. factors the the lectin, close relationship classical There and a 2.28 pathways among activation. is alternative, of of complement evolutionary

genes that of either the products have then factors of or homologous are Most the in and sequence. diverged duplicated identical C4 and C4b are the unstable thioester homologous and C3b, C3 covalently fragments, which and proteins contain membranes. their The large by to bond bind and the by in C2 region arose genome and B gene proteins of genes adjacent encoding the The duplication. factor MHC are and factor regulatory many complement-regulatory sequence share C4BP proteins. proteins CR1, common H, to repeat The a a provided D. lectin associates in their activity divergence same this The binds convert enzyme pathway, latter MBL-associated with C1r:C1s; to pathways by antibody, C1 activating in function factor enzyme serine initiation: pathway the and is antibody the circumstance or the in into to pathway as lectin on a mannose-binding greatest certain binding complex protease protease, either serves the serine to serve bound alternative in classical specific the in the (MBL) to pathogens it is activity the surface; between (MASP),

Fig. complex. 2.29 by convertase a molecule cleaved is that when of a C3b C5 C5 captured component is part Complement classical to C3 when the As binds C3b2Bb. pathway panel, form or are convertase C3b convertase formed C3bBb the lectin pathway shown or to C4b2a alternative top C3 form C5 convertases either in the C4b2a3b, C5 (center to these in complexes binds panel). C3b active inflammatory Bb C5b panel shows is C2a and C5 bottom The the that to C5a. enzyme by cleaved or form mediator the cell the surface. is covalently and C5b bound C4b, C3b to Unlike not terminal of complement the production The C5b components. assembly of the initiates

anemones). in been C3, modern of and the B, the and (corals genomic some complement Anthozoa later-acting primitive sea evidence components representatives—because found has most factor

evolved targeting of system to that the appearance, activation have specific allow After pathways complement surfaces. microbial initial new of the by its seems acquisition the in pathway, evolve which to such some both is ficolin present first in urochordates. and the was The closely invertebrates, as vertebrates related likely the in Evolutionarily, collectins, predate also first the may which are the ficolins urochordates. seen of urochordate pathway ascidian (sea genome and complement C1q, of in component have collectins, squirt). identified classical been Homologs Ciona the the both of the MBL of cleave Ciona, and MASPs and have in that likely mammalian been C3. able be homologs may Two invertebrate they activate it also seems to identified onto Thus, complement the urochordates that C3 target in system specific system microbial recruitment expanded deposition by a minimal of been activation surfaces. appears of may the to have the echinoderms the MASPs of the ancestral and this and This initiating become collectin molecule later, namely, of evolved, complement collectin diversified C1q, activate pathway, used activation antibody complement pathway, system its and further evolved by C1r, the classical adaptive member use also much the components immunity complement that to the associated that already C1s. to an suggests C1q-like when the

of convertase numbers C3 activity. large Surface-bound 2-12 convertase deposits

the to present-day system. return We complement now three formation the the of pathways activation which at is The point C3 complement convertases converge. of of C3bBb, C3 subsequent C4b2a, events—they the alternative The and C3a. the convertase and pathway, of to the initiate the classical pathways, convertase C3b and same cleave lectin hydrolysis. thioester C3b otherwise through the bond inactivated molecules covalently to on by binds it adjacent is its surface; pathogen in C3 abundant C3 concentration of (see mg/ml, single of complement most of molecules 1000 plasma, the a can to bind convertase the active occurring in C3b Fig. up 1.2 is at protein and a vicinity 2.23). where the complement is pathogen coat of covalently the forms C3b the signal the Thus, of destruction the on activation ultimate by deposit a surface phagocytes. the pathogen, quantities bonded effect that to can C3b of of large infecting main

step next convertases. in the the is cascade the The complement C5 generation of proteins the C4, a of (TEPs) is of α2-macroglobulin, as the family C5 member same thioester-containing of and C3, proteins invertebrates. not important an but, and C5b specific active exerts protease a propagating the are it its downstream bond specific synthesis actions that form thioester fragments, which C4, and like is cleaved cascade. during of does in C3 C5a each C5 by complement into the binding by is C4b2a3b. the of pathways, C3b convertase formed C5 classical to the C4b2a and to lectin In a yield form C3b2Bb. The convertase to the alternative binding C5 C3b formed convertase pathway of is by the of to C3bBb the captured through acceptor susceptible rendered C3b, thus C5 and to by complexes C5 on serine A activity or an is is these binding site the to C2a cleavage by protease convertase of Bb. is binds because C4b2a is C5b than that cleavage reaction, or more C3, which form C5a, it generates C3bBb active cleaved to the be much to C3b limited complex. bound C5 can when to and C5 in turn only of This convertase generation large of on and Thus, more limited surface of activated C3a all smaller a pathogen, molecules, amount leads of the by to complement the pathways C5b C5a the a (Fig. C3b the number of of of the binding numbers release of three and molecules 2.29).

system innate immunity. and complement The

bound Ingestion pathogens the receptors phagocytes complement-tagged for mediated is complement of proteins. by 2-13 by

and The destruction of is action most cells. facilitate of phagocytic important uptake complement to by pathogens the phagocytes. occurs of This by the components specific bound complement receptors (CRs) recognition complement by on These complement C3b with its complement pathogens receptors a proteolytic function and of bind is opsonization opsonized derivatives. major components: of pathogens C4b relatively minor because than C3b opsonin generated. C4b as but more has so also is largely an a much role, acts

bound complement functions distributions, C5a are their C3a in and and listed, receptors Fig. The with for known components 2.30. regulator 2-10, receptor (see complement CR1, negative C3b described activation of is Section in Fig. The a 2.27). cells, neutrophils. expressed macrophages including many on immune and types CR1 of is phagocytosis, itself the by phagocytosis that it other immune stimulate presence macrophages. of mediators cannot but lead of activate Binding to to can CR1 C3b in For receptors activate bacteria C5a CR1 their (Fig. small can the ingest bound to example, complement macrophages fragment to 2.31). the by seven to domains. receptor C5a receptor, binds C5a membrane-spanning which macrophages, another has expressed generally known guanine-nucleotide-binding called and signals G as receptors are they type Section (GPCRs); this via proteins of proteins their 3-2. G-protein-coupled are in transduce intracellular Receptors discussed expressed macrophages, and is (GPR77), C5L2 a by neutrophils

Fig. proteins. and function 2.30 cell-surface complement Distribution for receptors of complement for variety are bound A and cleavage and specific products its (iC3b C3b C3dg). of receptors CR1 phagocytosis and CR3 to their in the bound inducing bacteria of surface. components are with important complement found features C3b CR2 CR2 the of and that share complex CR1 part B where B-cell cells, and with the C4b. complement-regulatory on proteins mainly is co-receptor bind structural is it β2 important phagocytosis. adhesion paired CR4 integrin II); known is whereas as CR4 and αX shall (CD11c), either composed in Appendix αM called is integrin 3, to of CR3, leukocyte (CD11b) Mac-1, we also or see function CR3 for only with integrins are in migration, (see integrin also respectively Chapter and The receptors. seven-span receptors G-protein-coupled for C3a are and C5a FDC, in cells; dendritic are not later chapters. in and immunity follicular are innate involved discussed these

Fig. anaphylatoxin C5a The of innate 2.31 immune opsonized phagocytosis can the an response. microorganisms in enhance to (left the C3b panel). Activation complement deposition of on microorganisms leads of the surface of panel). is on be phagocytosis bound complement its but the phagocytes, this receptor can the own by insufficient (center to on of CR1 induce surface C3b cell to for now through C5a, and CR1 phagocytose binding express anaphylatoxin the the C5a bound receptors panel). of (right microorganisms activate also Phagocytes will

Fig. of C3b by are complement different The recognized 2.32 cleavage products receptors. several C3b deposited alter on receptors. the that After it can with of undergo surface is changes conformational complement pathogens, its interaction receptors the iC3b, CR1. C3b, cleave from complement can and I but CR4, fragment producing ligand for a C3f CR3, is CR2, which not the and Factor MCP CR1 C3c, I bound. leaving iC3b Factor release C3dg to cleave and recognized is then C3dg by CR2.

that a decoy only are receptor activity binds to acts nonsignaling C5a of bacteria not as may When CR1, receptor. regulate receptor and C5a phagocytosed C3b the for can contribute the recruited tissue matrix, there. are with these connective fibronectin, phagocytes are to activation; phagocyte encountered such associated extracellular and also Proteins to as when activated

the by immunoglobulin I that that remain (also to CR3 the factor to forms pathogen CRIg (CD11c:CD18), complement known but (CD11b:CD18), receptors—CR2 (complement cleaved have been surface. of attached and of other family)—bind C3b Four as receptor CR4 CD21), is that that key derivatives, an C3b active convertase. of components cannot as iC3b, regulatory other cleave complement, such Like it into to mechanisms several form subject can microbial MCP and by to the remove factor surface the I C3b C3f, (Fig. bound leaving fragment cleaved to bound the form inactive be iC3b surface the small to 2.32). iC3b and CR4, CRIg. by complement several receptors—CR2, recognized is CR3, the on is stimulate own of receptor the phagocytosis. binding Unlike to binding of iC3b to CR3 sufficient CR1, to iC3b its the leaving to CR1 and iC3b C3c, bound C3dg to release the pathogen. Factor I cleave C3dg CR2. is recognized only by co-receptor as complex a of is found the the augment antigen-specific on CR2 cells through that immunoglobulin received receptor. signal can B part a if C3dg. cell coated a antigen the of receptor specific an pathogen will antigen whose with pathogen or receive binding for antigen on signal is this is also it a strong B Thus, antibody The a can strong therefore of contribute response. activation complement to producing

deficiencies. opsonization of various extracellular be complement in in pathogens inactive effects seen the can fragments C3b its importance and The by of destroying pneumoniae. in For of Streptococcus that in C3b a an extracellular catalyze including show molecules C3 to by example, deposition bacteria, increased range infection deficient individuals wide susceptibility or describe in and they the cause of complement We Chapter effects 13. the various diseases defects in

complement The and innate system immunity.

local 2-14 small proteins some fragments of complement initiate inflammatory response. The a

on and mast complement on Fig. and act receptors C5a cells The endothelial C3a fragments (see cells specific small responses. 2.30) to inflammatory produce local 3. discussed receptor, Like a Chapter detail C5a, C3a signals also more G-protein-coupled in in through of not is potent C4 inflammation, and C4a, at and lack receptor inactive C5a receptors, during C3a own. seems at inducing a is although its generated cleavage, to a shocklike 14. class, the of to seen When amounts produced circulatory discussed or in syndrome injected reaction that a IgE large induce involving a Chapter in systemically, C5a in collapse, allergic generalized producing and antibodies similar systemic C3a reaction are as anaphylatoxins. fragments therefore anaphylactic often small and Such shock, of is termed to referred complement these a both permeability vessels smooth activity, the cells vascular lining the and induce muscle C5a act on the specific contraction and adhesion has of to synthesis biological increase of endothelial and the C3a but C5a molecules. highest blood induce histamine activate factor-α that inflammatory and the release and cause such submucosal can cells In similar cytokine molecules C5a which tumor (TNF-α), the C3a as populate mast necrosis to addition, effects. tissues recruit an C3a the and phagocytic to site changes complement, cells infection by of C5a The and induced (Fig. antibody, of the fluid cells of the prompt the contributing initiation the the adaptive to nodes, to hastens 2.33), antigen-presenting the movement pathogen-bearing lymph increased in immune response. local and tissues

molecules and act increase vessels on blood cell-adhesion Small permeability complement-cleavage to vascular products

Migration (PMNs), leukocytes of lymphocytes and macrophages, polymorphonuclear increased. is Microbicidal increased is also activity and of PMNs macrophages

Fig. especially fragments, by small be inflammatory C5a. can complement responses 2.33 Local induced active: differentially small more active C4a is are is or inactive. C3a; complement C5a than The fragments weak on vascular inflammatory phagocytes vessels, cause endothelial increased and local local of stimulating C3a in to permeability, increase cells. binding directly responses C5a by and acting blood an blood increased flow, to activate also shown) (not release and mast mediators, such cells as C3a and to contribute inflammatory that the response. histamine TNF-α, C5a The in increase surrounding accumulation diameter the protein of tissue. in and leads to and the fluid permeability vessel bringing pathogens antigenic to lymph increases nodes. accumulation components their nearby drainage, Fluid lymphatic and in recruited participate The cells pathogen by enhancing antibodies, and phagocytosis. complement, thus clearance the increase directly phagocytes. The activity small of complement also fragments the can

of C8 Deficiency the Complement Component

these it the their sites surfaces increase toward directly also monocytes adherence their of migration to and their cells. neutrophils and to of ability particles; C5a on expression of CR3 the ingest antigen on CR1 vessel to walls, acts and increases also deposition, extent and to act with of pathogens phagocytes. in In this a concert C5a, and C4a, way, smaller by other the components hasten destruction complement to C3a

The certain pathogens. 2-15 form complement can proteins that membranes kill pores to terminal in polymerize

important of One is effects assembly of the terminal activation the of (Fig. complement complement of components the to 2.34) form membrane-attack a complex. reactions in of The complex formation are to shown Fig. the schematically this leading 2.35. membrane destroys lipid a bilayer The integrity. result in membrane the is end that pore gradient cell pathogen’s destroying pathogen the to thought proton across membrane. the kill This the by is

to C5b first membrane-attack The by complex C5 in (see the convertase formation of release of Fig. the is step cleavage a the C5 2.29). Fig. (see stages next the In their insertion the the components assembly the and complement membrane. C5b of later cell initiates 2.35), into binds The then of binds of one complex C5b6 the of begins C7. process when one molecule molecule C6, C5b and molecule one the exposure site of to with the a leads a C7, constituent the inserts lipid change in which bilayer. into molecules, on hydrophobic reaction conformational This these later when components lipid the proteins into bound the hydrophobic insert to and complex, allowing C9 they sites C8 exposed are Similar also the bilayer. to on are is a two proteins, C8α-γ. complex C8 C8β and of to C5b, binds domain C5b67 of the lipid insert protein complex bilayer. The and into to C8β allows hydrophobic of the C8β C8α-γ the the to binding membrane-associated molecules induces C8α-γ into of called 10–16 a C9 the the polymerization membrane-attack structure pore-forming complex. Finally, of lipid the associate has a internal with to The bilayer, face, external allowing complex but hydrophilic membrane-attack a hydrophobic it channel. the this bilayer. of nm, channel the across and solutes water passage diameter 10 lipid of The about is free allowing of to into proton homeostasis, the as destruction the lysozyme the eventual gradient and bilayer such of of lipid pathogen. pore penetration to cellular of the the leads the the enzymes The damage the loss membrane, cell, disruption across the

cell membrane-attack which demonstrations experimental the the the the dramatic, trigger to in used particularly very significance blood is complement in are red Although of complex cascade, membranes effect against antibodies

The and system complement innate immunity.

Fig. of of the pore lipid a a with again polymerization complex 2.35 of generates in membrane-attack bilayer the C9, exposure membrane. Assembly hydrophobic the The site. sequence of are are of 10 membrane. assembly shown channel their steps 16 in to the then a in appearance here to generate added the diameter and nm approximate Up in to C9 molecules form. schematic This killing the channel membrane, bacterial the complex cell a triggers of the C5b of disrupts bacterium. assembly of C7, order. one molecule C8, and in that each C6, membranes orientations, show hydrophobic membrane-attack exposing complexes and conformational electron the C8 two and C7 domains on changes, membrane. that into side The erythrocyte in insert with undergo end micrographs complex on. causes This moderate and Bhakdi Photographs of Tranum-Jensen. courtesy J. S. its quite host defense be the of and induce right, also to components serves limited. in in membrane own these to seems damage gonorrhea disease cause and to species, common form only associated that Neisseria far, with deficiencies have the complement susceptibility a meningitis. the C5–C9 of bacterial transmitted sexually components in been bacteria So defense earlier opsonizing are and host infection. complement the actions the components of important more Thus, cascade the clearly of inflammatory against for membrane-attack as complex 15, well a might this immunopathology. few the of Chapter important be role to pathogens, Formation we a seems will only see complex for the have although, in major in of killing

the host from complement destructive activation their of effects. protect and

fragments Complement pathogen bind produced complement hydrolysis. activated the the initiated nearby surface usually are usually pathogen or is rapidly are by that surface, and activation on a on inactivated proteins rate complement low sometimes these cells. bind a components Even will are at in on so, complement spontaneously and plasma, all activated host activated components and proteins complement of membrane-bound the and introduced host and Section activation. I regulate DAF that 2-10 MCP proteins factor the H soluble the factor alternative pathway (Fig. on these, pathogen various while membrane-bound soluble several proteins proceed at normal cells can to activation protect complement-control the and regulate steps to to host In cascade surfaces complement addition allowing complement other 2.36).

plasma (C1INH), a by of is C1 protease which serine controlled C1 inhibitor, The serpin. is the or activation inhibitor causes C1r:C1s (Fig. remains the the to bound pathogen dissociate them enzymes C1q, active and to from binds which C1INH to 2.37). way, able C1s to active is and C4 during limits In this time C2. the C1INH which cleave limits same plasma. the C1 spontaneous C1INH By means, of in the activation hereditary of deficiency and the angioedema fragments of complement the in C1INH C4 be spontaneous production which excess in can disease chronic to importance seen C2. cleaved leads activation (HAE), Its cleavage, patients C4b form convertase, such is which inactivated to in do the host in because plasma, activated fragments by cells rapidly The not large this hydrolysis combine damage from C3 normally

system innate immunity. complement The and

Fig. activation series from cells serve protect accidental by of Complement a host proteins damage. that to regulated 2.37 is cascade, of catalyzing on proteins. complexes covalently act of the degradation dissociating complement or enzymatic These complement different the bound stages the side shown the schematically of down on in the are figure, with the reactions cascade regulatory right. Stages the left complement MCP, alternative-pathway is by C3 CR1, H. convertase regulated DAF, factor The and similarly

form. the convertase does and not further swelling kinin, C2, However, is swell-ing—the into the causes most being peptide, dangerous to C2 a in extensive small that C2b, can the local lead the of that cleaved fragment larynx suffocation. an and similar in (discussed the uncontrolled of Section actions is to kinin of in fashion also the this system those of in lack a 3-3). protease has which Bradykinin, component disease, another plasma result of inhibition kallikrein, produced of as C2 kinin, activated tissue regulated C1INH. Kallikrein by also damage is and by is corrected Hereditary fully C1INH. by angioedema replacing is a disease deficiency C3a as similar, N kallikrein. rare (CPN), anaphylatoxins a C5a from well and that of as stems extremely metalloproteinase bradykinin and the human partial carboxypeptidase inactivates A inactivation C3a CPN bradykinin. serum delayed with deficiency exhibit recurrent to and Humans partial due angioedema of

prevent evolved a the triggering C3 a on deposited those complement surface on cannot and of groups cells pathogen, between of highly have the from small activated cell molecules fully host amounts on Since of bond the activation. or mechanisms C4 from reactive host thioester distinguish that C4 C3 acceptor of of pathway in mechanisms alternative the control (see Fig. context these introduced the We pathway classical also are regulators important (see the they but convertase of 2.27), Fig. 2.37, rows). second third and 2-10 cells. has bound proteins Section any inactivate that C3b host described C4b that or the to CR1, These its are and plasma are which I factor the MCP membrane and proteins. cofactors is bound C3b an and it MCP serine I factor but are Circulating they active can only and protease, CR1. C4b when cleave to thus cleaves iC3b permanently and these to then first circumstances, inactivating factor I into C3dg, it. further In C3b, C4d. and cleavage similarly inactivated is C4c into by C4b MCP C2, for CR1 and B activation. walls and the cannot thus Microbial instead cell sites as and breakdown lack promoting C4b, and C3b which factor binding of act promote complement deficiency. can I genetically I The of in be factor factor importance determined seen people with bacterial especially infections, ubiquitous Because depleted proteins of suffer pyogenic people uncontrolled complement bacteria. such and activation, with become repeated rapidly complement

for plasma most Fig. (C4BP) I, C4b-binding notably cofactor with also activity factor proteins protein (see There are 2.36). mainly It fluid in regulator acts binds the a of classical pathway phase. the as and C4b is at the to bound as microbial binds well surfaces. the in C3b Another cells host to C3b that is fluid that to helps membranes and bound as cell phase from distinguish H, which factor factor binding cells. higher affinity factor residues on C3b glycoproteins membrane H host allows The it of on to acid displace to host sialic in B for Also, bound proteins cell cofactor and MCP. at is C3b DAF by membranes by DAF, is cells, catabolized the host C3dg and for iC3b to factor is H, to binding activation and so with into factor that complement inhibited. effectively MCP compete Factor C3b bound I B and bound C3b surface amount C3bBb is H. formation favored activation of the which that not on C3 for In and of which more contrast, is B microbial attract The C3b DAF amplified. stimulates sialic factor thus microbial B greater complement factor express binding do MCP a and factor modifications on membranes, lack or convertase, acid

the H. is of to in tipping hemolytic condition cells reduced, surfaces on complement leads the atypical syndrome, platelets any in complement between and red the a proteins the by toward activation inflammation. balance the mutations predisposition critical or blood MCP, a of regulatory illustrated kidney factor is cell damage concentration functional for uremic activation and the inhibition of characterized regulatory and factor to proteins such heterozygous to balance I, and In by of individuals The individuals, significantly complement malfunction serious Another health is increased to related a problem

complement immunity. The and innate system

the macular leading single-nucleotide developed elderly blindness gene. H degeneration, risk been the countries, which in to in polymorphisms age-related linked has in the cause of factor of predominantly to be in complement this other either genes or for been found disease. have Polymorphisms protective also detrimental this inflammatory degenerative the to progression contribute efficiency the the regulation of either activation or alterations in powerful even system disorders. of the of Thus, effector can small or

cells. for C3b activation an MCP second the for on The or between surface-bound is inhibiting of factor DAF mechanism and competition complement binding host example to B proteins binding convertase and thereby By inhibit of these on C3b formation. binding the of cell-bound and to C3b, factor cell-bound C2 cell inhibiting the C4b surface, C4b B to competitively which DAF to MCP that through mediate C3bBb protection augment C4b2a against and of third and formed. is the also convertases already a mechanism, dissociation complement have promoting by these and dissociation CR1 molecules host-cell exhibiting through DAF, Like convertase cofactor membrane regulate that is, of both activity. complement is mechanisms—that the the among called (CCP) or domain. or and the that in consensus short C4b copies protein molecules proteins Japan) structural (SCR), the element homologous of repeat repeat, (especially All control the complement a one sushi the C3b bind the more share

deposition formation the complex for of addition that In mechanisms insertion are membranes, also to (MAC) C3 the preventing into cell prevent membranes. C4 inappropriate C3 convertase the on membrane-attack mechanisms inhibitory there and and the in onto polymerizes We 2-15 the action saw that C5b molecules membrane-attack of complex by created C5 convertase. Section cell to site mainly into complement MAC of The C5 site convertase, the inserts is, membranes complex that the to pathogen. of activation the a adjacent close on adjacent newly diffuse insert However, site activation may some of membranes. the and complement host-cell from membrane-attack formed into complexes and (also C5b678, vitronectin notably, their bind C5b6789 into complexes plasma as proteins, insertion the thereby Several C5b67, and to cell S-protein), membranes. including, known inhibit random (see CD59, inhibits the complex the or binding membranes that intrinsic C9 protein, of an contain Host-cell C5b678 Fig. protectin, also to row). 2.37, bottom glycosylphosphatidylinositol tail, cell other linked to a many the surface DAF and peripheral proteins. membrane (GPI) like are both by CD59 tails the of gene, involved on PIGA, the One synthesis GPI chromosome. the a by encoded of in X is enzymes to both fail hematopoietic mutation clone a of somatic with In a DAF CD59 function. in and people cells, gene in this red by This blood cell paroxysmal episodes causes lysis characterized is by which the complement. intravascular disease hemoglobinuria, nocturnal of result CD59 spontaneous activation of the Red that a lack to destruction as cascade. are complement of cells also susceptible blood only

proteins types Pathogens that inhibit activation. produce can 2-17 complement of several

pathogens and Bacterial this (Fig. activation evolved avoid have strategies of avoid to of defense by complement, innate elimination to various line thereby first 2.38). surfaces. host regulators own many host by attracting mimic pathogens surfaces employ their complement strategy that One is to to example, factor for H. complement-regulatory H factor the and recruits outer this the bind 2-10), such (fHbp), Neisseria proteins (see factor Section pathogen protein binding to to H which and that meningitidis surface Gram-negative C4BP For proteins as achieve is soluble produces the pathogen A express mechanism to

Fig. various evasion proteins pathogens. Complement 2.38 produced by

to PorA, which C4BP. protein binds membrane recruiting its and on inactivate pathogen and the consequences surface complement that of C4BP By C3b is avoid thereby the membrane, pathogen activation. factor is the to able deposited H to increased and defense to with pathogen. in Neisseria important are deficiencies complement susceptibility several this associated Complement against species, is

components is complement. that by Another secrete strategy proteins pathogens employed of to inhibit directly examples strategy. provides of of type Staphylococcus The pathogen Gram-positive aureus several this binds and recruitment of A the (Spa) protein Fc to Staphylococcal regions C1. immunoglobulins of activation with interferes the and specificity as in of purification This the biochemical was antibodies. binding technique used early an activation immunoglobulins bound pathogen cleaving staphylococcal (SAK) preventing complement phagocytosis. to staphylokinase the by avoiding and The membrane, acts protein and pathway classical the protein to inhibitor inhibits C4b2a, their (SCIN) complement activity. The C3 convertase, convertase, staphylococcal C3 the C3bBb, alternative binds and pathogens. by stages activation, formation of C5 other of the convertase, these Other of targets and proteins by inhibition including complement are produced this sometimes we Chapter system regulation pathogens. topic return evaded to 13 of how or the in fails will when by We is discuss immune complement

Summary.

is is pathogen of the an one recognition by complement infection. mechanisms into The against major system effective host defense which converted initial pathogens cascade antibody, can pathogen-bound is of a by a Complement indirectly by to plasma directly or be system proteins of leading activated that

innate The system complement immunity. and

on generates reactions and of occurs components pathogens effector active the various surface functions. that with complement surfaces, which pathways of triggered to pathogen is deposition and pattern There three by ficolins; other utilizes pathway, the the the pathway, for and C3 two lectin the proper-din, microbial augmented antibody recognition by the an pathway, MBL loop alternative the are and the onto provides classical by binding pathways. amplification receptors activation: directly triggered spontaneous surface; the the covalently pathways contributes cleavage of of to of binds which the early next cleavage surface in a in and reactions The all component. sequence events the activation to consist pathogen product larger which with the complement The cleaves convertase enzyme, of converge C3 C3b. C3 pathways formation the to active component a produce the complement large event of is molecules in activation. to central of binding pathogen numbers The C3b the opsonized its which are Bound C3b and its bound complement on C3b engulf by complement receptors fragments. fragments, cells, inactive phagocytic by components, especially recognized specific and inactive pathogens phagocytes, specific such neutrophils, of of C5 to and infection. on to trimeric recruit act cleavage The sites fragments receptors C3 small as G-protein-coupled and activities Together, uptake promote phagocytes. by of destruction the pathogens these C5 events make that C2a of bind initiate The late the binding to C3 Bb. it of itself the or to C3b cleavage by convertase complement, molecules susceptible of the which complex, a fragment assembly in membrane-attack of C5b triggers The larger can result the pathogens. lysis certain limit soluble components spontaneous and to complement binding proteins damage complement from from activation components host prevent the of act in plasma. or complement activated complement-regulatory of membrane-bound in host activation the of order to on to tissue A system tissues, inadvertent cells a infection the and and to produce counteract complement microbe. that the contribute host pathogens by membrane-associated soluble can variety Many activation of of proteins

Chapter to 2. Summary

has innate preexisting, described This of immunity. the components constitutive chapter molecules a simplest epithelial adaptations, and as mucus, innate to entry the various form and immunity. The cilia, pathogen antimicrobial such that body’s of are constant have barrier surfaces specialized provide system is more of The direct a complex microbes specialized complement system. that recognition a system combines with effector Of to innate the activate complement, that are immunity. three two devoted can pathways host expressed activation detect complement spontaneous by lectin alternative while pathway receptors membranes. pathway membranes, self that down-regulated recognition on on on relies molecules that microbial the relies The is pattern cells by cells receptors activation complement in which and on microbial C5a. The promote by phagocytic C3a of C3b complement recruited infection main recognized on microbial to clearance membranes, of event by accumulation to sites is is is the In some complex to directly. membrane-attack microbes addition, lyse initiates able that C5b tissues, damage. regulatory can autoimmune pathways host syndromes on cascade and in prevent result age-related is variation regulation The under to complement in and tissue attack genetic

Questions.

against β-lactam widely antibiotics active 2.1 are The Gram-positive Multiple bacteria. mainly Choice: used of transpeptidation inhibit that These major peptidoglycan, is a of in of component the synthesis the cell for survival bacterial microorganism. wall the step the critical bacterial to ultimately that target? an the following of antimicrobial same β-lactams the structure Which disrupt is enzyme functions that

Phospholipase A. A

B. Lysozyme

C. Defensins

their D. trimers Short to of oligomerize important lectin capacity (MBL) Answer: Histatins the is 2.2 function? mannose-binding Why for

that Multiple describes 2.3 the option Choose ficolins. correctly Choice:

and N-acetylglucosamine for (GlcNAc), A. the as such liver in carbohydrates lectin fucose domain, affinity C-type synthesized

affinity sugars, oligosaccharides liver the domain, B. in synthesized containing for acetylated Fibrinogen-like

lectin containing sugars, in C-type C. oligosaccharides affinity synthesized for the acetylated liver domain,

fill following lungs (GlcNAc), the the and below. in each fucose in word For N-acetylglucosamine with D. list and Fill-in-the-Blanks: as from the liver Fibrinogen-like best sentences, domain, for synthetized blanks of such the selected the carbohydrates 2.4 affinity will used be only Not used; be word once. all words should each

form MBLs, ________ ficolins ________. with Like oligomers and allows ________ ________. components oligomer and the complement Such interaction the cleave to are complex. C3 ________ these and the ________, they of permits cleaves convertase, a form membrane-attack which Once cleaved, the formation

activates covalently bond is in thioester pathogen’s to normally of that C3 2.5 pathway One Short Answer: way by the spontaneous which used the attach hydrolysis is the surface. to alternative the C3 a can proceed process convertase if is soluble? that pathway to this membrane-attack initiates complex alternative form How the

the red intravascular episodes blood of system. characterized the red cell and which by result ________ 2.6 of the is blood nocturnal of hemoglobinuria, pathway lysis, ________, Fill-in-the-Blanks: susceptible a ________ disease by expression lysis losing cells renders the them complement of Paroxysmal to

were would if factor develop the with of each proteins Matching: this complement-regulatory the 2.7 Match manifestation that defective: pathological following

A. C1INH 1. uremic Atypical syndrome hemolytic

B. factor I & Factor H 2. angioedema Hereditary

C. DAF 3. nocturnal and hemoglobinuria classical as C3 of the cryoglobulinemia Choice: 2.8 systemic erythematosus due pathway. in levels C4 to low Multiple complement Diseases with lupus activation the usually present such blood and Paroxysmal In low as C3 or C3 disease contrast, generally complement of such pathway. diseases to glomerulonephritis dense alternative activation deposit have the due glomerulonephritis? deposit C2 dense What would from C4 and C3 in a patient disease suffering of the or levels expected be

A. Normal

B. High

C. Low

Mucins and High D. a microbicidal direct activities. low 2.9 at True or False: exhibit C4 surface C3 mucosal secreted

Answer: ways. aureus complement and activation in each prevent different Staphylococcus Neisseria Short 2.10 meningitidis each how Explain so. does

or 2.11 False: Paneth cells such peptides, gut neutrophils Both the only as upon and secrete antimicrobial of True defensins, stimulation.

What Answer: convertase? 2.12 products are of C3 the Short two and downstream the result products of these clearance can Name from the events three formation microbe. of to lead that

and B that stronger and co-receptor serves breakdown as or False: a is augment expressed on to True (CR1) CD21 signaling C3dg receptor response. cells product) antibody a complement a (a C3b binds 2.13 trigger

References.

references. Section

caused in their that diverse are Infectious 2-1 living replicate agents by hosts. diseases

Diseases. Ahmed, Sher, R.: Infectious S.H.E., A., Kauffmann, of Immunology and 2002. ASM Press, Washington, DC:

ed. and Practice Bennett, Dolin, Mandell, of (eds): Principles and Infectious J.E., Diseases, G.L., 4th R. York: 1995. Churchill New Livingstone,

against 2-2 of the Epithelial surfaces first defense line of the infection. body provide

Hooper, and R.L., Gallo, L.V. skin intestine. : antimicrobial of and Epithelial the defense Nat. Rev. Immunol. 12:503–516. 2012,

of infection. focus must establish agents Infectious host overcome a defenses to innate 2-3

Gorbach, N.R. Bartlett, S.L., Blacklow, J.G., and 3rd (eds): Infectious ed. Diseases, 2003. Philadelphia: Wilkins, Williams & Lippincott

adaptive Hornef, for host Bacterial Normark, M.W., and strategies M.J., overcoming S.: Wick, responses. immune Rhen, M., and innate Nat. Immunol. 3:1033–1040. 2002,

produce and Epithelial proteins. 2-4 phagocytes of kinds cells several antimicrobial

Cash, Hooper, H.L., C.L., and Behrendt, L.H. C.V., Whitham, : direct an bacteria of Symbiotic intestinal expression lectin. bactericidal Science 313:1126–1130. 2006,

cathelicidins defensins, and histatins. R.: peptides: K., De Contreras, and Smet, antimicrobial Human Biotechnol. Lett. 2005, 27:1337–1347.

peptides Defensins: innate immunity. antimicrobial T.: of Ganz, Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2003, 3:710–720.

and J., Rizo, K.M., Propheter, Hooper, C.L., Rollins, Grabe, H., Callenberg, Derebe, M.G., Mukherjee, M., Partch, L.V. D., D.C., Jiang, Zheng, S., Q.X., attack a : C-type membrane pore-forming lectin. intestinal by Antibacterial 505:103–107. 2014, Nature

of in cathelicidins Zanetti, mammals. host the of defense role M.: The innate Curr. Mol. Issues Biol. 2005, 7:179–196.

destruction them C3b. microbial complement marks for surfaces coating and The system by features recognizes with of 2-5 them

Janssen, and F.J., P., B.J. Milder, Gros, : conformational driven Complement by changes. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2008, 8:48–58.

conformational reveals changes P.: and J.D., complement Gros, activity. A., Structure underlie Janssen, of A., C3b that B.J., Christodoulidou, Lambris, McCarthy, 444:213–216. Nature 2006,

component C3 Janssen, and insights Nilsson-Ekdahl, Huizinga, Raaijmakers, of H.C., K., Roos, complement of A., into Gros, B.J., P.: the provide evolution E.G., M.R., immunity. B., Structures Nilsson, and Daha, function 437:505–511. Nature 2005,

receptors microbial soluble to that The pathway lectin cascade. activate uses recognize 2-6 the complement surfaces

and D.A., A.J. S.S., Tenner, Bohlson, Fraser, and immune Complement : immediate recognition proteins MBL pattern protective long-term and signal that molecules are C1q functions. Mol. Immunol. 2007, 44:33–43.

of T.: the innate Fujita, in role pathway lectin-complement immunity. Evolution and its Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2002, 2:346–353.

L., Kocsis, B., Balczer, enzyme. al: Ambrus, G., et V., T., P., Náray-Szabó, Sim, autoactivating A., Végh, R.B., Bián, J., G., Gál, true Harmat, Barna, A insight serine activations. Structural lectin-associated protease-2 into mannose-binding Biol. J. Chem. 280:33435–33444. 2005,

the Závodszky, MASP-2. G., exclusive Gál, Revised MASP-1 Pál, of lectin-pathway Héja, complement P.: A., Kocsis, as revealing of P., Szász, Dobó, J., the of role activator K., mechanism activation D., serine Szilágyi, R., protease Proc. Acad. Natl Sci. 109:10498–10503. USA 2012,

of functions J.R.: Immunoregulatory proteins. surfactant Wright, Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2005, 5:58–68.

by the 2-7 pathway. activation homologous the is C1 The classical complex of is to pathway lectin and initiated

with M.R., that its F.D., Brouwer, A.: Arlaud, McGrath, region. Daha, through protein interacts Hack, complement M.C., globular G.J., protein head Roos, C1q and Evidence C.E., C-reactive Immunol. J. 176:2950–2957. 2006,

on largely is initiated. to the 2-8 Complement which activation it surface confined is

Beretta, Bergamaschini, inhibitor Zingale, L., of Agostoni, M., L.C., deficiency. M., A., and A.: clinical Cugno, Cicardi, C1 M., and Pathogenetic Colombo, aspects 199:366–376. Immunobiology 1998,

for is pathogens. C3b in 2-9 the presence formation properdin accelerated is by pathway The amplification loop alternative an that of

et L., M., Bogaard, Schipper, C.A., Mannens, Daha, M.R., M., Dankert, F.G., Sjoholm, Fijen, Schlesinger, al. van R., Nordin, den Truedsson, M., J., A.G., molecular Properdin and : association. disease basis deficiency: Mol. Immunol. 36:863–867. 1999,

Hourcade, C., D.E. and Kemper, and target in pattern recognition new : Properdin: roles clearance. Mol. Immunol. 45:4048–4056. 2008,

Atkinson, J.P., and D.E. Hourcade, D., L.M., Spitzer, Mitchell, providing complement activation a and platform target convertase Properdin de can for : assembly. specific by novo initiate binding surfaces Immunol. J. 179:2600–2608. 2007,

Xu, S.V., and Narayana, Y., Volanakis, J.E. the pathway Structural : alternative of convertase. biology Immunol. Rev. 180:123–135. 2001,

of activation. of C3 plasma the and complement extent regulate 2-10 convertases proteins determine and stability the formation Membrane that

complement-mediated T., response S., Biologic cells antibody in Golay, A., regulate M., G.M., F., Zaffaroni, Lazzari, monoclonal CD55 lymphoma of cell to Tedesco, anti-CD20 and Vaccari, rituximab and Borleri, lysis. Rambaldi, J., Introna, vitro: M.: B CD59 L., Bernasconi, Blood 2000, 95:3900–3908.

B.P. De Cordoba, Criado-Garcia, Rodriguez S., O.B., Morgan, O., Spiller, and human : protects CD59 from hepatoma up-regulation CD55 cells of complement attack. Cytokine-mediated and Clin. Exp. Immunol. 2000, 121:234–241.

cell-membrane nasal L., S., of Ophir, Rashkovsky, I., respiratory complement-mediated activation. epithelium regulators by Frolkis, complement from Protection and Varsano, lysis of Fishelson, human D., Z.: Am. J. Respir. Cell Mol. Biol. 15:731–737. 1996,

early organisms. developed of evolution the Complement in multicellular 2-11

Evolution its of Fujita, immunity. and role the pathway innate T.: lectin-complement in Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2002, 2:346–353.

H., 2-16 characterization L., Li, control J., and W.: Molecular Zhang, and of Wang, H., C., a pathways Zhikong of Xu, from cloning regulate Q., thioester-containing proteins all Chlamys Complement farreri. three Song, Gao, Zhao, scallop protein Mol. Immunol. 44:3492–3500. 2007,

C3b deposits C3 large activity. 2-12 of convertase numbers Surface-bound

Pangburn, M.K. N., and Rawal, complement. of Structure/function : convertases of C5 Int. Immunopharmacol. 2001, 1:415–422.

pathogens Ingestion of by mediated proteins. complement the by 2-13 bound receptors phagocytes for is complement-tagged

unique a sensor Complement: Gasque, signals. innate danger immune P.: for Mol. Immunol. 2004, 41:1089–1098.

Elliott, of N.M., macrophage complement pathogens. van Gorgani, Lookeren S.J., Jr., K.J., Kljavin, Diehl, K.Y., N.N., Ghilardi, for N., Katschke, and circulating CRIg: a M.: Campagne, Scales, required J.M., Helmy, L., receptor phagocytosis Cell 2006, 124:915–927.

complement inflammatory fragments initiate local small The 2-14 proteins some response. of a

S.R. Barnum, anaphylatoxin C4a: : in only. name an J. Innate Immun. 2015, 7:333-9.

inflammatory diseases. Kohl, J.: noninfectious and and Anaphylatoxins infectious Mol. Immunol. 38:175–187. 2001,

L., R.: C3a Schraufstatter, Trieu, K., cascades C5a Sikora, transduction Complement I.U., P., DiScipio, in cells. signal induce different Sriramarao, endothelial and and J. Immunol. 2002, 169:2102–2110.

can terminal kill complement pathogens. pores in form certain membranes The polymerize proteins 2-15 to that

Structure complement D.X., of mechanism reveals in defense. membrane Beringer, Hadders, of C8α-MACPF P.: Gros, attack M.A., immune and Science 317:1552–1554. 2007,

Parker, C.L., J.M. and Sodetz, subunits human bacterial killing: Role essential. the : not C8 complement-mediated of C8γ that in is evidence Mol. Immunol. 2002, 39:453–458.

J.J., Sodetz, Plumb, M.E., J.M. and Scibek, the : C8α C9: complement human subunit. role Binding the in modules to of N-terminal of C8 2002, Biochemistry 41:14546–14551.

protect the from host effects. activation their complement destructive and

B.D. Gelfand, Atkinson, Ambati, and J., J.P., degeneration. macular Immunology : of age-related Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2013, 13:438–451.

J.P., and Goodship, Atkinson, T.H. syndrome. and uremic factor the hemolytic H Complement : Exp. J. Med. 2007, 204:1245–1248.

E., Wagner, M.M. Zhang, Jiang, H., and H., Frank, regulator alternative 1 pathway. : Complement inhibitor the is of complement a J. Exp. Med. 194:1609–1616. 2001,

Molina, not Song, and T., complement vivo for Miwa, W.C.: erythrocyte H., in B., DAF, but Hilliard, attack. Crry, Zhou, protection spontaneous L., indispensable CD59 from is and murine 99:3707–3716. Blood 2002,

Morgan, Neal, activation complement Gasque, Rushmere, neurons deficiency render pathway human of B.P., susceptible classical regulators lysis. S.K., membrane Singhrao, and P.: Spontaneous N.K., J.W., to and Am. Pathol. J. 157:905–918. 2000,

and G.P., Smith, Smith, inhibitors. Membrane-targeted R.A.: complement Mol. Immunol. 38:249–255. 2001,

M.A., Postel, Gallins, M.A., Pericak-Vance, E.A., Haines, Hauser, L.M., Scott, J.L. Schmidt, P., Spencer, Olson, S., K.L., and Agarwal, A., W.K., age-related effect macular of factor B and degeneration. variants 2 component complement Protective in : complement Hum. Mol. Genet. 2007, 16:1986–1992.

Agarwal, K.L., A., Anderson, Olson, Postel, P., Schnetz-Boutaud, L.M., W.K., N., J.L. Haines, Spencer, B.M., E.A., M.A., Gallins, and Pericak-Vance, Scott, degeneration. risk macular polymorphism R102G C3 : increases of age-related Hum. Mol. Genet. 17:1821–1824. 2008,

of produce inhibit proteins can types that complement Pathogens 2-17 several activation.

Blom, and P., Dahlback, Lindahl, B., Rytkonen, Jonsson, G., A.M., Vasquez, A.B. A., regulator human IV novel and : A type complement interaction of between protein. the gonorrhoeae pili C4B-binding Neisseria J. Immunol. 166:6764–6770. 2001,

M., and Rappuoli, van J.A. Gros, D., P., Scarselli, R., Strijp, Serruto, staphylococci learning complement of and meningococci. : from Molecular mechanisms evasion: Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 2010, 8:393–399.

Innate of The Immunity Induced Responses

protect we epithelial secreted barriers, infection. immediately with complement from innate the In the antimicrobial the and 2 act system—that upon defenses—such proteins, introduced as microbes Chapter body to encounter ready beneath that that for invading lie We the the and stand and epithelial complement. to flagged have engulf introduced destruction cells also barriers microorganisms phagocytic been by digest cells These initiate molecules and also innate new response, that infection. inflammatory response an the effector phagocytic to circulating next site inducing phase of of phagocytes immune recruits the the these cellular they through the of chapter or of how system destroy they this responses orchestrate downstream production (chemoattractant and innate describe we cytokines). how cause, the and inflammatory In damage detect phagocytic how chemokines they pathogens, microbes cells cytokines immune (NK of cells pathogens. host of defenses cells)—that the to natural also We against other immune cells the cells innate viruses killer (ILCs) innate diverse intracellular introduce array and including innate system—a lymphoid other contribute specialized cleared dendritic full will in adaptive that responses, immunity, initiate the cells not infection infection Also response is so by innate if of immune ensue. a this stage immune

Pattern the by cells recognition of system. immune innate

basis long enormous for capacity of the appreciated. immune The system’s antigen has adaptive recognition been of only microbial recognition basis was in innate products late immune the discovered of the sensors by contrast, 1990s. In considered pathogen-associated recognition few relatively was of Chapter examples surfaces PAMPs, recognition molecular we have patterns, seen of be by to or restricted to complement Initially, already 2). and innate (see microbial such previously a much receptors discriminating of in the related we come that been have flexibility that a recognition number last among had realize molecules, exists are of discovery In closely an than increasing innate greater number of with capable to of years, innate several the thought.

examines receptors of that immune pathogens signal first response. for cellular innate chapter the and recognize this a part cellular The microorganisms body’s patterns not cells. many present structure are the on do host of occur on Regular but own molecular and such similar as and molecules, neutrophils, features on they described 2. are Chapter the expressed cells, are dendritic and that ficolins recognize macrophages, histatins, such to secreted in Receptors contrasted antigen-specific are in Fig. adaptive recognition pattern these general of the of immunity receptors of (PRRs) those with characteristics receptors The 3.1. transformation, innate cellular mediate by recognize some can self-derived be or innate insight indicate is immune induced that that to responses such proteins new stress, A cells. molecules host damage, infection, receptors that and also recognized indicator be or this the in (TLRs). termed have by of ‘damageassociated been receptors pathogen DAMPs, molecules involved class Such can as molecular molecules patterns,’ recognition, receptors such some in Toll-like the and

immune of system. recognition by the cells Pattern innate

innate Induced responses to infection.

Fig. characteristics innate 3.1 and adaptive Comparison immune the of molecules of the recognition of systems. unique during the germline-encoded uses of receptors adaptive uses assembled segments while gene incomplete immune The immune system antigen from system lymphocyte specificity receptors development. innate system clonally receptors their lymphocytes adaptive the progeny. immune individual Antigen of and on distributed are expressed given system immune are cell expressed Typically, of all on of non-clonally, they cells are the that a the type. is, innate receptors NK different several However, of NK from families, express one from cells individual making combinations various NK cells receptors another. A particular NK all be expressed receptor on NK not may cells.

Coordination relies on the provided response of receptors. of the by many types innate immune information phagocytic membrane-bound (discussed their histatins can as receptors; localization in receptors; such their basis 2); and cellular on of signaling serum, Chapter signaling receptors receptors. and the recognition free in into the main function: ficolins Pattern groups and four classified membrane-bound be receptors cytoplasmic they microbes the Phagocytic for phagocytosis signal primarily receptors recognize. of including infection, guide group the chemotactic receptors, PRRs receptors, diverse cells cytokine and A receptors, including receptors, can help of and to those activity to control effector sites. sites of other of at molecules

activate properties chapter mechanisms. part receptors phagocytic receptors the look of phagocytic In and first recognition of microbial the at we that killing this signaling of systems of system cytoplasmic sensing infections discovered we pathogen Next discovered, the microbial recognition an that first receptors sensor Toll-like DNA. or by ancient and describe to evolutionarily (TLRs), detect be innate several foreign the and signaling, cell-wall intracellular foreign systems RNA, the recently of components,

and are entering microbes 3-1 After many tissues, phagocytes. killed recognized, by ingested,

resident host, crosses the a is microorganism replicate barrier an begins in most tissues phagocytic by the cells. cases, and epithelial immediately it to of recognized If in and in of cells cells. granulocytes, phagocytic main innate monocytes, The system macrophages immune classes and are dendritic the at phagocyte most homeostasis. tissues normal are major population Macrophages the in resident development, monocytes. at either enter progenitor life, or that arise then steady self-renew can circulating embryonic They the cells state from during during and from tissues the (AGM), liver, the region sac, still embryonic yolk is the these aorta–gonad–mesonephros origins Studies relative the an fetal dorsal contribution although or near aorta the either progenitors called the embryonic debated. that of from arise suggest along layer tissue: the gastrointestinal themselves; layer large intercellular spaces the around of blood tissue in numbers and example, alveoli for especially Macrophages tract; found the the submucosal sacs the in (alveoli)—and submucosal in the in bronchi, connective of interstitium—the in some are lung in air and the

by Pattern cells system. the of innate recognition immune

vessels they where remove senescent and spleen, throughout the cells. in the blood liver; tissue liver. example, the for neural historically different Macrophages in in different cells tissues names, were given Kupffer in microglial and cells factor dependent on these receptor same two is stimulating in types and a 34 as tissues (M-CSF). macrophage-colony cells interleukin self-renewal of the that of cytokine acts is called (IL-34) The on produced these

During leave from into can tissues. enter arise to inflammation, or the also monocytes that from circulation macrophages infection two both in the and in marrow develop and in Monocytes bone blood main human the circulate mouse as populations. humans, into activated and 90% co-receptor CD14, described monocytes are during expresses In differentiating for monocytes circulating inflammatory and that monocyte tissues ‘classical’ a a PRR the or function entering of later, by infection macrophages. monocyte surface this levels marker expresses the of mice, high Ly6C. population In in roll that endothelium the the are monocytes’ the rather freely A population along blood. smaller circulating ‘patrolling than CD14 survey to humans, the thought In endothelium see not macrophages. injury tissue a to express and differentiate Section of do they receptor but Fc into type and CD16, are for 10-21), (FcγRIII; low mice, Ly6C. of they In express levels

neutrophils, major eosinophils, phagocytes second granulocytes, family and which the include of comprises basophils. The these, the activity involved phagocytic against have cells the greatest neutrophils in most infectious Of innate are agents. immunity immediately and that not or tissues. they Also in present leukocytes cells called short-lived blood healthy polymorphonuclear are the abundant in polys), (PMNs, but are are neutrophilic role recognize, pathogens and an many because and have Macrophages granulocytes aid immune they of important adaptive response. an the in can destroy innate without ingest, immunity an invertebrates scavenge mechanism represent pathogens both cells innate in vertebrates. of incoming found immunity, as are and they ancient that Phagocytic

the phagocytes third that cells reside lymphoid system tissues. is class peripheral the dendritic in organs of in and in The immature immune cells (or cells: functional types classical) (cDCs) dendritic cells conventional main and are dendritic two There plasmacytoid (pDCs). of dendritic they migrate to cells within body lymphoid cells myeloid blood primarily from that the branch progenitors the marrow potential, organs. bone peripheral Both of types throughout and and to of the from via tissues arise ingest macrophages their neutrophils, and break of direct but, in microbes, and front-line, down the is primary killing microbes. not role unlike cells Dendritic defense large-scale immune cDCs generate of can ingested role activate is immune and A major that antigens order adaptive to peptide an microbes induce response. cells process T to in that They types to in cytokines of response infection. also cells produce microbial recognition other against activate cDCs and innate between act a as considered thus are bridge adaptive to immune responses. or detail the as part considered type to pDCs of cytokines I of interferons, immunity; and discussed innate interferons, later a are major are antiviral are known chapter. of in in be producers class they

tract, cells macrophages and soon mucosa first to system, the through the of of are reinforced encounter gut Because the infection. microorganisms submucosal are neutrophils body the of by recruitment numbers pathogens, but respiratory to tissues the skin, of urogenital enter sites or most large they most in the means Macrophages cell-surface recognize molecules those discriminate pathogens surface and can pathogens of that receptors and the of by the neutrophils between host. of distinct are have immunity. Although and functions innate macrophages phagocytic, both and properties neutrophils in they

MOVIE 3.1

Dectin-1 MOVIE 3.2 Macrophages Bound and scavenger (CD36) material that receptors phagosomes CTLD receptor and phagocytic receptor Fc broken bind I/II, receptor receptor mannose complement MARCO) in microbes receptor (˜-glucan have receptor Dectin-1 lipid in receptor lipid their phagolysosomes internalized receptor components mannose receptors scavenger down receptor) complement (SR-A is

a neutrophil, or dendritic on the the when surface phagocytosis with of receptors macrophage, the cell—interacts is process of surface. initiated certain microbial The cell—typically large and pathogen then is bound The by phagocyte a plasma known phagosome. as endocytic internalized membrane surrounded membrane-enclosed in the a first vesicle contents generate with lysosomal The more the which phagolysosome, a fuses are one to or released. in lysosomes phagosome radicals, and also (Fig. produce superoxide kill and acidified, highly phagolysosome that together reactive processes enzymatic acquires oxide which enzymes, and microbe nitric undergoes the antimicrobial becomes The peptides 3.2). contain of and highly microbes, secondary specialized the for Neutrophils and granules types cytoplasmic killing of granules—the 2-4. are intracellular granules in Section different primary described antimicrobial peptides These fuse phagosomes, and releasing enzymes microbe. the that granules additional with attack Another by of not phagocytes. the endocytosis, into pathway degraded restricted which extracellular and receptor-mediated taken can up which cells material, compartment to material, including is microbial be endosomal is its and of a also extracellular large up cells can fluid pathogens which process called phagocytes ingested. in other by nonspecific Dendritic take contents are and macropinocytosis, amounts

express phagocytosis trigger the although bound pathways such other microbes them, to responses through number receptors and as of stimulate neutrophils intracellular of cytokine constitutively a production. cell-surface Macrophages that signal killing also to and some of the These several members family include (see lectin-like receptors Fig. C-type phagocytic 3.2). in common expressed example, fungal β-1,3-linked recognizes macrophages walls (polymers particular. and glucans For by which and is of cell Dectin-1 strongly components glucose), neutrophils are of Dendritic several 9. in to be cells uptake well as which lectin-like will Dectin-1, phagocytic and other relation as Chapter receptors, antigen also express in discussed processing presentation C-type pathogen for to including cells, resistance once an C-type bacteria, important by lectin, (MR) suspected in expressed mannose and receptor have mannosylated various role recognizes the viruses; present to was Another on microbes. macrophages it dendritic and some ligands, fungi, lack with support However, do receptor not this this mice experiments that idea. now glycoproteins whose host chains is inflammation. side mainly during macrophage as which function extracellular mannose a such clearance carbohydrate receptor concentrations lysosomal thought are mannose-containing as The raised have hydrolases, receptor to and for β-glucuronidase and

anionic low-density various phagocytic recognize receptors, acetylated polymers and of lipoproteins. A called macrophages, scavenger on receptors second set consisting structurally at molecular different least families. are These heterogeneous, of six receptors (see collagen scavenger Fig. are proteins composed receptors of domains A Class membrane trimers of 3.2).

Fig. microbes that them receptors Macrophages by to 3.2 up phagocytosis. express take enable tissues panel: to pathogens. to among macrophages residing first the respond in cells body encounter First and are throughout the microbes, carbohydrates that and bound in particular material. cell-surface induce They phagocytosis carry the to bind on lipids, various and receptors of molecules lectin-like Dectin-1 domain lectin-like C-type around of a single (CTLD). Second panel: is a family built member C-type the in a carbohydrate-recognition on general Lectins based are (CRD). domain and mannose receptor many macrophage with cysteine-rich amino The CTLDs, at terminus. contains a a fibronectin-like domain region its domains and Class MARCO form from scavenger A are collagen-like as such trimers. built receptors B receptor and class lipids. internalizes protein CD36 receptor scavenger that is The recognizes a bind Various internalize complement bacteria. complement-coated receptors and form hydrolases. ingested phagocytosis down which is material lysosomes phagosomes, into in is with Third the to of intracellular which panel: acidified an material taken phagolysosome by broken fuse lysosomal receptor-bound

innate by system. immune cells of Pattern recognition the

They various specificity cell-wall SR-A components structure), bacteria, internalize MARCO which with of their bacterial collagenous (macrophage understood. help a the bind and although SR-A is poorly all to include receptor and I, basis II, B bind high-density lipids. internalize they and Class receptors lipoproteins, scavenger including fatty binds many receptors these One ligands, acids. of which long-chain is CD36,

macrophage third importance of set and Chapters phagocytosis receptors in A crucial the Fc receptors complement 1 introduced neutrophil in receptors 2. and of is and microbes range facilitate bind microbes have to that the or of the to antibodies These complement-coated of surface phagocytosis to and of bound microorganisms. wide a receptors

3-2 efficiency of increased link receptors killing. recognition phagocytes G-protein-coupled with intracellular microbe on

microbe inside death microbes and of of neutrophils generally Phagocytosis is by the phagocyte. by the followed the macrophages receptors neutrophils As to phagocytic and signal antimicrobial macrophages the as well that stimulate other receptors, have killing. receptors belong G-protein-coupled receptors family of which segments. the characterized evolutionarily are These (GPCRs), by ancient membrane-spanning seven to C5a Section complement infection are 2-14) inflammation. to direct chemokines, to immune phagocytes (see to Members sites because as they system promoting many this family and function the such recruiting to crucial also anaphylatoxins fragment of and responses of

unique is bacteria a receptor polypeptides. recognizing bacterial of presence senses a G-protein-coupled that receptor of (fMLF) by the fMet-Leu-Phe feature The synthesis (fMet) not an in eukaryotes. acid but with in present N-formylmethionine an residue, in Protein bacteria is initiated amino typically prokaryotes which has other for The it fMLF peptide formylmethionyl-leucyl motifs. a although phenylalanine, affinity, binds receptor named also a is tripeptide, after high it that Bacterial to pathways source ligand. polypeptides signaling concentrated move intracellular to direct receptor activate of cell binding the most the this the toward reactive of in fMLF microbicidal Signaling receptor through (ROS) production the also phagolysosome. induces species the oxygen the microbes the C5a similar lectin when usually the 2-14), classical receptor. fragment presence small (see or signals Section pathway complement fMLF by The a generated and pathways C5 as of of by the recognizes receptor are of the activated, such be to infection directly C5a or previous of both sensing responses indicate can a products bacterial by and cell guides site stimulation monocytes antimicrobial that increased of messengers and neutrophils a by Thus, microbe. these these recognition activated toward unique leads as of activity; receptors

called member binding by distinguish G named intracellular GTPases family sometimes a proteins so to them G ‘small’ activates GTP-binding of typified ligand proteins, of because to of Ras. The heterotrimeric the referred are as a from class G-protein-coupled receptors proteins G GTPases the subunit to Heterotrimeric proteins of is are of which (Fig. subunits: similar and Gα, three composed Gβ, the α small Gγ, 3.3). state, bound inactive, GDP α the a with molecule the In is G protein associated and to the not is of resting receptor, subunit. the results to GDP GTP. allow its Ligand in bind the the with G it in and receptor protein changes the protein, G induces replacement conformational the which displacement binding of from the that a Gγ a subunit of dissociates complex Gα the subunit. and Gβ The and a into active components, two consisting G protein with intracellular signaling of signal. and other components interact these can the transmit to Each amplify molecules wide of can G a variety activate downstream proteins enzymatic

MOVIE 3.3

respiratory a in subunits receptor GDP Rac, G Respiratory terminates °˛ the the proteins protein Before GTP other GTP Cdc42 ˜ protein GDP, with is Rho, Chemotaxis GDP to subunit ˜ with releases or into GTPases burst conformational and protein associate of reassociate G chemokine heterotrimeric GDP Cdc42 and the protein cleaves binds a G burst ˜°˛GTP of allowing associated enables Ligand protein to chemotaxis G subunits, binding G and stimulates The binding not G Signaling GDP both causes GPCR fMet-Leu-Phe which Inactive ligand can protein ˜ the °˛ GTP has the it activate which or Activation Rac/Rho GPCR a bound to dissociates and change

Fig. signal intracellular 3.3 G G-protein-coupled by coupling heterotrimeric receptors proteins. with heterotrimeric chemokine G-protein-coupled GTP-binding known as fMet-Leu-Phe panel: receptors such (fMLF) signal and the First through G receptors proteins as proteins. (GPCRs) protein of and In β inactive subunit subunits. the α GDP the γ the associated with is binds state, and G the change displacement results binding a by Second receptor binding interact GDP in the α a of ligand receptor conformational the protein, subunit. allows panel: which and GTP to with the to that the the G the of induces of of of protein proteins binding dissociation G triggers GTP can the subunit, into the Third each the the the membrane. subunit of which α face other cell activate panel: inner and the at βγ signaling indirectly Rho, of and case macrophages Cdc42. the GTPase whereas the the subunit in of G activated In the activates α protein activates and subunit Rac GTPases fMLF neutrophils, the indirectly βγ the oxidase, the these a resulting in assembly proteins NADPH the in respiratory of result burst. actions The of acts and by signaling Chemokine pathway a chemotaxis. activates similar when response activated the GTP the hydrolyzes and intrinsic GDP, subunit α the to activity reassociate. subunits βγ of α and The Fourth panel: ceases GTPase GTP by hydrolysis. the rate and The rate which hydrolysis subunits of regulated (not GTPase-activating of intrinsic α accelerate proteins signaling is GTP is additional slow, by shown), relatively

cyclic C, produces to the messenger inositol phospholipase whose targets, gives which cyclase, Ca2+. the second the as (IP3) 1,3,5-trisphosphate rise such AMP; and adenylate of release free activation messenger and second

Rho fMLF several metabolism, activation receptors gene through by and C5a Signaling and cell GTPase small family influences division expression, motility, cell of proteins. Rac α Fig. (see The G the indirectly and protein indirectly of βγsubunit while activates activated small the activates Cdc42 subunit GTPase the Rho, 3.3). Activation (GEFs) GTPases guanine Fig. of factors exchange by (see nucleotide is these controlled exchange GTP 7.4, to for GTPase. which GDP the bound PREX1 G protein protein), directly The fMLF (phosphatidylinositol which can exchanger 1 Rac Rac. GEF by activated proteins activate the activate 3,4,5-trisphosphate-dependent synergizes 7-19), including by of receptors the of activity members types can activate Rac and and also C5a. family Other their GEFs, controlled with Vav activity, (see are actions other the fMLF Section of that

and have of and to The helps Rac the ingested that macrophages activation capacity Rho neutrophils pathogens. increase microbicidal of products microbes, macrophages engulfed (Fig. variety of and neutrophils phagocytosing microorganism kill help the a Upon produce that to toxic 3.4). important these and as the oxide reactive (O2–) (NO), hydrogen Section anion described (H2O2). in ROS, and peptides such antimicrobial of the as species most are 2-4, The super-oxide nitrogen nitric such peroxide by Nitric including is (iNOS2), whose expression fMLF. by synthase, produced high-output nitric of oxide of oxide is a form a NOS2 variety induced inducible stimuli,

the in Activation involved is C5a generating receptors fMLF of ROS. directly and membrane-associated called generated multicomponent, Superoxide NADPH phagocyte a is oxidase, by also oxidase. because it is In phagocytes, is inactive this unstimulated enzyme fully not assembled. maturation of after gp91), appears localized of the macrophages set (composed complex it One lysosomes p22 the of neutrophils, in and phagolysosomes. resting b558 subunits, is plasma in membranes and and of cytochrome the are in and components, p47, The p67, the other p40, cytosol. phagocytes cytochrome 3.5). (Fig. of functional complete, cytosolic NADPH to the with phagolysosome a subunits in b558 induces the the oxidase to join Activation membrane-associated membrane form which to process to oxidase. promote assemble the to participate and of NADPH the cytosolic Rac, activating the in components C5a the functions membrane movement by active fMLF the receptors The

Pattern innate by of immune recognition system. the cells

˜-Defensins °-defensin (HNP1–4), macrophage Cathelicidin,

inducing azurocidin, HBD4, permeability cathelicidin, bacterial Antimicrobial protein (BPI), lactoferricin peptides

hypohalite oxygen-derived Superoxide or H2O2, nitrogen bactericidal – •OH, products oxygen peroxide Acidifcation pH°3.5–4.0, bacteriostatic hydroxyl hydrogen radical NO 1O2 oxides Toxic , OCl– oxide •, singlet Nitric Toxic O2

Lysozyme: vitamin cell B12-binding of proteases): (sequesters down and digests Fe2+), Acid some Lactoferrin (e.g., break elastase walls Gram-positive other bacteria ingested microbes protein hydrolases

is cell, a known the in NADPH increase respiratory as the burst. transient reaction by oxidase The oxygen which in consumption results the phagolysosome, lumen enzyme of by It (SOD) superoxide the generates is the H2O2. converted superoxide into within this and dismutase anion (•OH), reactions range from hypochlorite including enzymatic (OBr–). H2O2, ROS and Further produce (OCl–), chemical hydroxyl toxic a radical hypobromite the of and have by pathogen complement neutrophils that and way, recognition previous In ingested polypeptides recognition microbes direct receptors. their of phagocytic macrophages or killing system bacterially the derived a potent this activates via mechanism the within the also released host can be extracellular into enzymes, However, reactive species tissue and because oxygen activation are cells. environment membrane-disrupting damage toxic extensive hydrolytic phagocyte peptides, to can cause and

infection. role to their an use above the responder in described early respiratory as Neutrophils burst to the to infection a of cells, bloodstream. be they recruited need are tissue-resident and not Neutrophils from site sole Their kill to ingest and function is microorganisms. soon have in some and are macrophages dying present round types much phagocytosis in secondary they eventually accomplished of acute and larger used numbers Although short-lived, of than infection, they after up primary neutrophils a granules. are their dying that wounds pyogenic, in or by streptococci and bacteria. capsulated pus staphylococci, are pus-forming, component which the in as forms certain thus major infected known Dead bacteria as abscesses of extracellular are a and and such neutrophils to continue and new cells are generate contrast, lysosomes. Macrophages, long-lived in

less called do microorganisms are burst to deficiency their that infection. have so an oxygen the not characteristic of a means disease the the of able derivatives chronic and with ingested and genetic which NADPH respiratory Patients oxidase, produce granulomatous (CGD) a toxic clear disease kill phagocytes mutations CGD from of an cytochrome heritable b558. most that gene subunit arises The encoding in gp91 form the inactivating the is X-linked disease of common infections, susceptible and remain in People defect bacterial though with for susceptible life. infancy, especially to fungal they this unusually are recessive very has but and deficiency, autosomal p47phox deficiency, of One oxidase CGD. NADPH causes low of form milder activity a detectable form

Fig. or microorganisms. Bactericidal after by produced phagocytes released agents uptake 3.4 of listed act toxic agents microbes phagolysosome. the can directly are directly Most and of in the to these the be They substances cells. secreted and also toxic environment, many to into extracellular can are host of the phagocyte extracellular hindering in and environment, to inaccessible Other rendering nutrients them essential microbial microbes products sequester growth. that the activates of Besides degrade bacteriostatic hydrolases lysosomes vacuole. or contents acid being many the directly acidification of bactericidal, also the

fMet-Leu-Phe with are fuse phagosomes Rac2, taken into and O2–OCl–H2O2phagosomeprimarygranuleNADPHoxidasesecondarygranulegp91p22Rac2fMLFlysosomeBacterial and Phagosomes primary activate granules. secondary peptides up bacteria functional O2 leading in a assembly to oxidase of . membrane, – Rac2 generation NADPH phagolysosome induces of the of matrix kill granule p67p47p40Neutrophils engulf and infux proteases microbes primarygranulesecondarygranulemicrobelysosomeK+K+K+SOD Acidifcation which a from granule releases bind ion as result to they the

Fig. The the of phagocyte by microbicidal 3.5 activation-induced initiated respiratory NADPH is in burst oxidase. assembly phagocytes panel: granules, pathogens, granules highly of of in contain kinds the cytoplasmic different uptake the for First neutrophils as killing and and primary the and are specialized first panel. shown several secondary such antimicrobial peptides These granules enzymes. contain and p47, and (p40, subunits the are components resting the (gp91 and the neutrophils, cytosol. membrane; of the plasma in located other NADPH oxidase b558 are localized in p67) the Second cytochrome in p22) panel: oxidase which of phagolysosome, to assembly of the by phagocytic C5a membrane the the with synergizes the Rac2 fusion secondary by phagosome oxidase primary by lysosomes Signaling receptors complete, active induce or of granules. and and activate fMLF formed receptors has the NADPH in and the and oxygen, the superoxide electron lumen active oxygen panel: of radicals cofactor and other forming phagolysosome. oxidase in to the transfers ion (blue) molecular its the from Third NADPH O2– an free FAD acidification to are ions into and the charged then superoxide vesicle. ion, increasing neutralize the hydrogen Potassium of drawn the phagolysosome and to enzymes matrix, proteases. Acidification such by and their from proteoglycan granule lysosomal as their dissociates cathepsin leading (yellow) cleavage elastase activation G ferrous heme-containing converted ions to myeloperoxidase, by microorganisms, the (Fe2+) can to to hydroxyl peroxide kill (•OH) be superoxide by is (SOD) enzyme, a which converted reaction microbicidal chemical and dismutase (OCl–) (H2O2), O2– by radical. can hypochlorite and with hydrogen

mechanism destruction that is killing to of at another engulfed by neutrophils novel use directed rather extracellular phagocytosis, In microbes pathogens. addition is extracellular rather form and being apoptosis, a which the during unique degraded cell space in neutrophils undergo During some of as into occurs released infection, death nuclear than forms chromatin, a the activated

3.6). MOVIE traps, 3.4 extracellular neutrophil matrix NETs fibril or known (Fig. as which efficiently macrophages. by other NETs then or neutrophils more phagocytosed microorganisms, to be capture act may which contribute with may and NET formation requires their patients to susceptibility microorganisms. generation formation, of to the ROS, reduced have CGD NET

an and infecting respiratory burst be to infection pathogens can an sufficient Macrophages can and becoming immediately produce phagocytose prevent from the encountering microorganism, established. this upon innate the that immunologist In believed Metchnikoff nineteenth the response century, the Élie

recognition of Pattern system. immune the cells innate by

immunity the all defenses; of host that infection. overcome macrophages studying on rely he sea innate encompassed invertebrates to entirely star as indeed, such was is a important on not response a that humans an the innate to that line this new host. must in to is of microorganism Although can passed the establish of macrophages provides overcome an be front and if vertebrates, case infection be still defense other

have, variety and of to developed neutrophils. by immediate Pathogens strategies a avoid macrophages destruction however, polysaccharide with a phagocytic pathogenic any themselves Many capsule coat recognized is bacteria by receptor. extracellular that thick not microbial the thereby complement system such cases, however, receptors, for can them 2. Chapter C3b, described coat flagging complement them with phagocytosis recognize and In via as surfaces in Other with evolved by lysosomes. inside fusion example, macrophage for grow have and to phagosomes ways inhibiting their pathogens, acidification mycobacteria, innate the to infection. a devices, numbers focus to establish in overwhelm body the sufficient must enter host immediate defenses of microorganism and a Without such

response. Microbial an initiate damage and 3-3 recognition tissue inflammatory

to and is release important chemokines, of activation immune microbes of and cells chemical called tissue small the macrophages macrophages interaction and cytokines proteins mediators. other between other effect the An and from the tissue neutrophils to allow proteins monocytes of induce plasma to and these the a and the attract enter state in inflammation blood. tissue, the infection, proteins Collectively, of is usually hours or An within infection response inflammatory initiated wounding. as products Macrophages pro-inflammatory to macrophage. by by and microbial expressed between specific the interactions are and stimulated chemokines such and cytokines, microbes receptors TNF-α, secrete We some will to it the the contributes cytokines of host general but inflammation and interact how with later defense. pathogens aspects chapter, describe first examine in we how

roles essential Inflammation infection. has in combating three deliver cells of the into and molecules sites is The microorganisms. so of destruction invading and increase blood first additional from infection, the effector to is the blood to induce provides barrier which clotting, local infection second The to of the a in the spread physical bloodstream. The promote is of tissue. repair injured to third the

pain, redness, vessels, responses heat, in are at the shown blood types of four change characterized Fig. an the swelling site by in infection, of as reflecting Inflammatory local and 3.7. a leading the velocity in The blood flow—hence redness—and in reduction inner to diameter, especially local blood increased vessels. flow, the small and first the vascular of an along of is blood walls increase heat the The activation of that is vessel second change to blood promote the cell-adhesion endothelial express binding molecules lining the circulating of leukocytes. cells endothelium of allows leukocytes the process molecules extravasation. the combination migrate and to adhesion as tissues, a and attach flow known to slowed The blood into initiated parenchymal by are these macrophages chemokines cells. activated All produced and pro-inflammatory changes by the cytokines and

has the attracted inflammation white Once site cells neutrophils. to begun, first are blood the followed (Fig. are by These monocytes adhesion produce their but cytokines, lack are inflammatory from of and which expression can are activation G-protein-coupled receptor monocytes distinguishable 3.8), the macrophages pro-inflammatory various by called of E1, commonly upon

Fig. and bacteria can (NETs) Neutrophil trap extracellular fungi. traps 3.6

human forming activated strain of a stimulated (pink flexneri scanning neutrophils Shigella electron This neutrophils arrows). virulent rods) of with indicated infected (blue, by micrograph shows the NETs trapped within visible Bacteria NETs are (lower arrow). Photo Arturo Zychlinsky. of courtesy

Fig. inflammatory initiate stimulates Infection chemokines and an response. macrophages that cytokines 3.7 to release blood and site tissue by of their infection of Cytokines cells walls. at local dilation endothelial of produced in macrophages the cause vessels the small the changes by chemokines this of out the neutrophils These such movement activated infected by vessel into guided and of the produced tissue; and (extravasation) is changes the movement leukocytes, blood monocytes, macrophages. to lead the as also allowing tissues. leak more vessels the become to fluid proteins blood plasma and The into permeable, redness, site infection. of signs characteristic of changes cause inflammatory swelling and the the at heat, these Together, pain,

Fig. 3.8 Monocytes circulating and blood into infected the in tissues. inflamed migrate the cells to vessel the the blood Adhesion the of molecules endothelium. on wall vascular and endothelial it capture monocyte to cause adhere the migrate across endothelium underlying endothelium then into the tissue. Chemokines to the monocyte the vascular bound signal to monocyte, of inflammatory now monocyte, migrate, during The the toward to an differentiating under into the chemokines of influence responses, inflammatory site continues infection. released (not cells the dendritic are they able receive to their differentiate from leaving into also the signals shown), that depending Monocytes on blood environment.

F4/80. called dendritic to on give environment. are they tissues, signals cells in rise able from the that Monocytes depending their receive also to enter also lymphocytes other of inflammation, site. leukocytes such later the and In as the eosinophils stages infected

change permeability. major in third in an blood vessels increase vascular is local The their endothelial proteins Thus, an walls joined the separated, blood cells and local accumulation tightly in from vessel of the of tissue. lining instead leading exit fluid being to together, the the and become blood defense. that in and proteins tissues edema, MBL This as in complement the and swelling, or such pain—as well plasma host the accounts as of aid for accumulation changes are endothelium occur as The generally a as known activation. that endothelial inflammation result in of infection, microvessels the of blood. of the site in via The in fourth spread the the pathogen change, prevents clotting

later of are mediators blood as pathogens of by cells. and a of variety white by released neutrophils by inflammatory induced macrophages, a the changes recognition and other consequence These Macrophages pathways enzymatic that degrade leukotrienes, rapidly of platelet-activating neutrophils and by inflammation—prostaglandins, factor and mediators membrane phospholipids. (PAF)—which lipid secrete are produced Their cytokines that are and the chemokines actions of are by and secreted those followed synthesized

system. of innate the cells immune by Pattern recognition

and monocytes pathogens. macrophages in to by inflammatory response simply of The factor-α potent a is necrosis known example, tumor (TNF-α, endothelial cells. as TNF), also activator for cytokine related detail We TNF-αand in describe in 3-15. Section more cytokines

and increasing neutrophils endothelium. phagocytes vascular a Besides chemoattractant permeability molecules burst adhesion on respiratory monocytes, the also certain as expression and for in acting promotes of stimulating C5a by the inflammation inducing and stimulated mast cathelicidins. inflammatory their activates 1-4), cells histamine (see as are the TNF-α containing release small also to as Section molecule which granules C5a and local well

the vessels injury wounding immediately two cascades. has occurred, triggers protective enzyme If to blood proteases system damage several plasma to the is pressure, tissue One polypeptides blood generate that by regulate that and pain. kinin triggered of coagulation, is which of mediator injury. not the of produced bradykinin, here, tissue site the is promote will plasma vascular to permeability its Although the inflammatory components influx increases fully one we proteins describe to peptide vasoactive causes pain. It also which unpleasant to to leads of the immobilization affected draws infection. victim, to helps of the and the problem attention of to the spread part the body, the Although pain limit

present outside cascade after coagulation also full description in blood vessels, damage system another is although The the triggered our protease blood is to scope. is its that prevent role activation whose to normal formation fibrin Its to a leads loss. the is clot, of blood innate the With regard the and prevents bloodstream. encases physically into the clot however, their entry microorganisms to immunity, infectious have triggered tissue and important cascades to has pathogens if so gross cells, are in the roles The they also activated injury response or even by not the and endothelial coagulation wounding kinin inflammatory can occurred. of control proteins causes of the Thus, cells tissues that the minutes a and response infection. influx of pathogen, by may within penetration inflammatory an the also barrier limit of the spread the Coagulation of physical a in to forms form blood infection. clots autoimmune can of trauma, infection disorders. tissues ischemia, microbes, or physical to such Damage absence as the and metabolic by occur in changes clot activation can infection, addition injury, such to with in system occur, associated and formation. In the neutrophil sterile kinin the also many such recruitment, of of as

ancient system. receptors an 3-4 pathogen-recognition Toll-like represent

sensors receptors (PAMPs). (PRRs), Section function for 1-5 recognition introduced pathogen-associated as molecular patterns which pattern is signaling that by is the production macrophages by components. Cytokine a of variety by these wide induced pathogen result PRRs of chemokine and these recognition purified were The requirement of innate by mechanisms Jr., was to immune based receptors driving Janeway, antigens. Charles responses the on before of existence adjuvants known, in for predicted first was of Physiology example Medicine. Nobel part awarded Hoffmann such a Jules or he receptor, which 2011 Prize of for the discovered in the dorso-ventral Toll was The melanogaster. embryo the as of earlier patterning fruitfly a identified the receptor controlling protein gene correct Drosophila against Toll in several the induces mechanisms, including adult such and the critical as for 1996, signaling Hoffmann antimicrobial peptides expression is discovered fungal drosomycin, pathogens. of Gram-positive defense bacteria and host-defense that fly, in But

antimicrobial Mutations Toll activated susceptibility led in and by decreased adult or production Drosophila fly the of of the signaling to in Toll proteins peptides

Fig. in Drosophila for responses required 3.9 antifungal is melanogaster. Toll

that wild-type infection. Toll Flies in dramatically are susceptible flies more are the fungal than to receptor deficient the Toll-deficient Aspergillus This uncontrolled pathogen the fly. illustrated (arrow) weak here a growth fumigatus normally hyphal by is in of courtesy J.A. Photo of Hoffmann.

to (Fig. MOVIE 3.5 fungal infections 3.9). other called found Subsequently, in Toll-like associated infection. bacterial, receptors to animals, and viral, mammals, which with homologs resistance they in fungal are (TLRs), were Toll, including of proteins TLR defense. the association host means plants, In this proteins regions ligand-binding domains domains of of of peptides, with resembling involved are the production of antimicrobial ancient the these indicating with in

are Mammalian molecular activated by different patterns. receptors pathogen-associated many 3-5 Toll-like

and expressed TLR humans mice. 12 There 10 in genes are in that recognizing not to Each TLR molecular of devoted cells. in set are vertebrate is distinct found patterns a healthy essentially general MAMPs. are pathogen-associated nonpathogenic are pathogenic these molecules (PAMPs), patterns called or both sometimes molecular of called and so components patterns, microorganisms, molecular Initially and microbial-associated and Between molecules characteristic bacteria, of viruses. Gram-positive and TLRs Gram-negative them, mammalian fungi, the recognize of acids cell (LPS) of walls membrane these, lipoteichoic Among Gram-positive the (see bacterial lipopolysaccharide outer the Gram-negative Fig. the bacteria and of particularly 2.9) of and system, by TLRs. by recognized the the important recognition immune are innate are bacteria in components also structure. have microbial repetitive Other a of abundant dinucleotides made of Bacterial repeats subunit, and unmethylated mammalian CpG (which flagellin are methylated often has repeated a in flagella DNA are bacterial DNA). of to the species. is In many intermediate be modifications viral used and viral part cycle, infections, double-stranded RNA from it viral distinguish contains can host the that RNA normal frequently a RNA life

in known microbial listed mammalian are The Fig. 3.10. TLRs and ligands their antigen genes, relatively immune are system. Because the TLR limited of TLRs adaptive specificity have the there receptors with few compared the in cells, cells, of of responses including by recognize cells, of stromal many expressed initiation certain enabling types pathogenic macrophages, antimicrobial cells, the they epithelial elements B many and are cells, most can However, tissues. microbes and dendritic

in sensors microbes TLRs present for are extracellular spaces. TLRs others components are cells they or Some detect pathogens mammalian phagocytosis, membranes have that intracellularly by cell-surface taken their or in (Fig. located similar of endocytosis, but endosomes, the where macropinocytosis receptor-mediated receptors Drosophila are into 3.11). been Toll, to 18–25 leucine-rich single-pass TLRs region transmembrane with of of proteins are a composed extracellular copies (LRR). repeat an for the 20–25 around adaptable on TLR horseshoe-shaped LRRs LLR that of protein ligand protein composed (concave) inner multiple Each create binding both and surfaces. is recognition amino and outer and scaffold is a of (convex) acids, a mammalian a when induces by dimer, activated or changes Signaling of a ligand TLRs conformational preformed induces in dimer. is a TLR of binding formation receptor mammalian signaling domain, cytoplasmic the All TIR-type TLR their receptor) domains, (for for cytoplasmic tail have also which found with tail in cytokine other interleukin-1β(IL-1β). and is interacts other TIR a in of in the molecules, proteins usually the Toll–IL-1 the the the sensed For contact presence years with mammalian or they known microbes means. some was whether indirect direct of they microbial it products whether after TLRs not of by made discovery not instead pathogen binds when directly, of a it does a it protein, cleaved is products version self but Toll, activated for Spätzle. recognize example, Drosophila cascade the Drosophila these other molecules, that pathogen-recognition cleavage in the has proteolytic ends direct and trigger

immune Pattern innate system. cells by the recognition of

Fig. Innate receptors. immune by Toll-like recognition 3.10 direct is generally the surface. by pathogen patterns, interaction mouse recognizes molecular microbial known molecules human the one with Each or whose more TLRs specificity on of or Toll-like form Some heterodimers TLR-6:TLR-2). proteins and receptor (e.g., TLR-1:TLR-2 LPS, lipopolysaccharide.

Spätzle. of pattern is receptor. a this classical not sense In Toll recognition their X-ray mammalian bound mammalian direct TLRs TLRs contact with ligands ligands. dimeric that microbial of However, show make structures to several at crystal least some

Fig. Toll-like the 3.11 mammalian cellular of locations receptors. The

simplicity. repeat are TLRs but the copies of LRRs leucine-rich only (LRR), these depict 18–25 extracellular cartoons proteins region for 9 contains transmembrane whose on located Some of are they dendritic where pathogen and molecules. cells, to surface macrophages, extracellular able are TLRs detect the cell cells, other are act dimers. to as TLRs thought dimeric rest that form shown here; are homodimers. heterodimers those Only the in form act as microbial recognize accessible DNA, such down. can components, in intracellularly, only that microbe walls been has after of broken are the TLRs endosomes, located the as bacterial and Gram-negative derived The by diacyl recognized Gram-positive cell bacterial are respectively, the the from TLR-1:TLR-2, the of lipopeptides heterodimeric lipoproteins surfaces. TLR-6:TLR-2 and receptors triacyl acid lipoteichoic walls of and

TLR-6 receptors lipoproteins by triacyl TLR-1, acid TLR-2, and and Mammalian lipoteichoic are and are Gram-negative that ligands, of the diacyl bacteria. including activated cell-surface various and cells. eosinophils, are macrophages, They found mast on cells, dendritic basophils, of TLR-6. and TLR-1, heterodimers Ligand TLR-2 the TLR-2 binding and of induces formation or of TLR-1 The (Fig. of crystal lipopeptide to triacyl induces X-ray exactly structure and it how synthetic shows ligand a bound dimerization TLR-2 3.12). bind the chains of the TLR-1. while TLR-2, to the third convex lipid the surface of surface binds of convex Two to three Dimerization initiate with other signaling. proximity brings the cytoplasmic to each of TLR domains close the TIR chains into presumed are TLR-2 with to the diacyl occur the dimerization induce interactions of lipopeptide ligands Similar TLR-6. and that (see ligand Dectin-1, long-chain scavenger β-glucans in The acids, which binds CD36, receptor cooperate fatty recognition. both TLR-2 3-1), which with binds Section and

intestinal protein cells, dendritic surface and is a bacterial on of subunit TLR-5 it recognizes cell flagellin, flagella. expressed of macrophages, cells; the epithelial the conserved flagellar flagellin assembled filament. highly and a in inaccessible on recognizes site is that TLR-5 buried which is the that activated This the flagellin, space. produced bacteria the is extracellular breakdown of monomeric by means only by in receptor flagellated recognize express TLR-12, and the protein. with Mice, humans, TLR-5 ability intact TLR-11 share but to which an not epithelial is and dendritic liver, bladder cells. also and macrophages by kidney, TLR-11 cells, expressed and by

the in not and expressed by is macrophages epithelial and TLR-12 TLR-11, cells, tissues cells in also dendritic where is more TLR-11 hematopoietic expressed than expressed. broadly is but is expressed the Escherichia by develop coli, caused mice not infections yet TLR-11-deficient ligand TLR-11 of strains uropathogenic has although urinary bacterial been for identified. TLR-11 Plasmodium that falciparum. both parasites and and recognize as protozoan such Toxoplasma function gondii an overlapping TLR-12 have in absent present in mammalian They that protein are profilins. to but in profilin actin-binding protozoan the motifs protein bind but dendritic conventional profilin, dominant T. and macrophages role. in for required are gondii TLR-12 both a TLR-11 and plays activation more TLR-12 by cells severe develop on tissue TLR-11 with lacking infection mice more normal than Mice injury

Fig. patterns fatty-acid of polypeptide and backbone. a chains molecular recognition dimerization dimers; of TLR-1 by TLR1:TLR2 pathogen-associated activate to induces bound 3.12 TLR-2 Direct can has TLRs the three it fatty-acid bind Two signaling. chains pocket a to and the surface the TLR-2 convex bacterial directly cell of and lipoproteins (middle associates binding TLR-2 chain surfaces panel), on (left are the surface with a located on in channel can TLR-1 the where triacyl third convex ectodomain, hydrophobic and recognize they panel). lipopeptides. bringing two dimerization for the of of TLR-1, their subunits inducing side the chains and triacyl domains sites extracellular TLR have of lipid surfaces binding of convex The is together panel), (TIR) ligand the to that cytoplasmic (right lipid crystal receptor the synthetic signaling. In their a Toll–IL-1 initiate structure domains of Lee. Structure courtesy Jie-Oh

the system. Pattern by immune of innate recognition cells

whereas after rapidly Toxoplasma, infection. lacking die mice TLR-12 humans, mice. in expressed in but is TLR-10 TLR-10 a is pseudogene Its known. currently are not ligand and function

all are Not receptors. mammalian cell-surface TLRs of in they TLRs transported reticulum. the membranes located via to are endoplasmic recognize endosomes, which the are acids nucleic The that only (dsRNA), those expressed not which replicative of intermediate it TLR-3 dendritic with conventional a recognizes genomes. by double-stranded RNA cells, RNA cells; is is macrophages, viruses, types and epithelial many intestinal of the TLR-containing either RNA fuses of incoming genomes, vesicle TLRs such viruses the the are as encounters and dying or when cells viruses rotavirus, phagosome or with internalized phagocytosis direct by endosome. replicating, with the double-stranded endocytosis by it which endocytic dsRNA is in of the analysis TLR-3 that Crystallographic dsRNA. to shows binds directly ligand-binding the terminus The has terminus. membrane-proximal TLR-3 amino two on near sites (the a and carboxy one contact ectodomain for domain) second the dsRNA: together that TLR-3 intracellular a to and dimerization the The allows twofold activates symmetry brings dsRNA signaling. of it two to TIR inducing TLR-3 of simultaneously ectodomains, domains bind can verified poly I:C induce artificially signaling. to This be using by often functions synthetic used polymer I:C poly pathway. A cytidylic acid, binds this and as to TLR-3 and poly of analog experimentally composed is dsRNA; to activate inosinic of I:C an the by acting failure control a herpes Mutations simplex dominantly a have which loss-of-function of mutant to is ectodomain caused been human TLR-3, associated receptor, virus. the with that encephalitis in produce

and TLR-3, endosomal TLR-8, nucleotide are viruses. the recognition in sensors TLR-9, TLR-7, like involved of are expressed TLR-7 and cells, by B primarily TLR-8 plasmacytoid macrophages. monocytes cells, by expressed is dendritic eosinophils; and TLR-9 and not TLR-7 (ssRNA), but present in and mammalian healthy nucleus endosomes. cytoplasm component is a by confined and TLR-8 which are and of it is the RNA cells, to normally single-stranded is activated West those of ssRNA. (such as (such orthomyxoviruses example, Many Nile flaviviruses for of and virus virus), influenza) as consist genomes, When the or are cells, for by TLR-7. exposing they endosomes endocytosed by and particles uncoated in lysosomes, of extracellular macrophages dendritic the ssRNA of acidic are these environment recognition genome viruses such impaired as viruses lacking immune Mice to responses have influenza. TLR-7 activated In be abnormal self-derived by ssRNA. may TLR-7 settings, extracellular from released Normally, the RNases cells injury. degrade during tissue apoptotic ssRNA a of was nephritis, disease. an mouse condition contribute of self of recognition to model lupus in the kidney, ssRNA inflammatory But to observed TLR-7 erythematosus, of human have suggesting a risk this with studies increased in role lupus polymorphisms disease. associated autoimmune systemic the potential are that in gene disease the TLR-7 identified Several as for The established as TLR-7. been not from role systems has clearly TLR-8 mouse model for unmethylated recognizes dinucleotides. CpG TLR-9 genomes, methylated by mammalian the DNA DNA dinucleotides In genomic CpG in are heavily methyltransferases. cytosine on another But genomes dinucleotides the and pattern. CpG represent in many remain and unmethylated bacteria of pathogen-associated molecular viruses,

TLR-9 with transmembrane relies delivery the interaction protein, and of reticulum composed their specific a which UNC93B1, The 12 to endoplasmic is the TLR-7, domains. on endosome of TLR-3, from by this defects TLRs. signaling in protein lacking these Mice endosomal have of pathogens, herpes chapter. do viral to other impair been are to this many identified other similarly TLR-3 mutations presumably viral simplex in discussed sensors, to as not deficiency, causing Rare human UNC93B1 encephalitis, which immunity existence susceptibility later of the but because in have

in recognizes and association 3-6 CD14. lipopolysaccharide proteins host bacterial with the TLR-4 accessory MD-2

directly. mammalian ligands all Not TLRs their so bind is important TLR-4 macrophages, immune-system dendritic responding bacterial by numerous infections. and of types expressed in and and cells is including several cells, sensing to of TLR-4 and LPS bacteria indirect. the that recognizes partly Gram-negative direct by is partly a mechanism known and the as of circulatory collapse LPS of shock. a causes The systemic systems, condition a respiratory injection uncontrolled of These which systemic or from dramatic an as humans septic effects infection, are in results shock, seen bacterial sepsis. LPS In systemic permeability, particularly 3-15), Section causing an overwhelming in infections. induces this role an case, secretion containing vascular (see TNF-α undesirable LPS local cytokines, of effect of normal its as function shock sensitive such typhimurium, Salmonella of highly but LPS-bearing a resistant to LPS-induced mice TLR-4 mice. pathogen natural septic lacking are are pathogens Mutant to for identified in from naturally the was mouse TLR-4 gene LPS by receptor In of its the which cloning cytoplasmic of occurring signal. ability mutation positional as to that with fact, the strain, receptor’s harbors TLR-4 C3H/HeJ the LPS-resistant a interferes tail Bruce Nobel the this 2011 to For Prize was awarded partly or Physiology discovery, Buetler. in Medicine

bacteria per a but core LPS variable composition a with among polysaccharide essentially fatty-acid number chains in lipid, lipid different an molecule. of varies of amphipathic A, attached to consists MD-2. uses TLR-4 recognize ectodomain of To protein, an LPS, accessory the LPS. the initially the TLR-4 trafficking is surface to necessary the within cell correct of both and to the of binds cell for for MD-2 TLR-4 recognition and of Fig. TLR-4, shown off to one curved of in side the section ectodomain binding with central MD-2 as the associates 3.13. TLR4–MD-2 hydrophobic five exposed pocket LPS, MD-2. surface of lipid TLR-4, deep but chain of LPS while chains lipid a complex sixth of on to a encounters When remains directly MD-2, the the to not bind the bind that of This parts convex last backbone ectodomain, lipid the TLR-4 second inducing activates to a signaling intracellular dimerization side LPS can TLR-4 chain of pathways. and polysaccharide then

by involves accessory other besides LPS activation proteins MD-2. TLR-4 two membrane infections detached the and host be tissues. the bacteria, during normally it extracellular component become outer Gram-negative integral by from in picked is membrane of of present and the LPS-binding fluid LPS protein in up While can the blood in an protein neutrophils, and present LPS-binding dendritic is second macrophages, of transferred is cells. protein, CD14, surface a to LPS the from which on CD14 accessory dendritic TLR-4. protein macrophages also as cells on but receptor, acts and act a own, can for it phagocytic an as On its

IRF expression the TLRs transcription of cytokines I interferons. activate inflammatory and factors and AP-1, NFκB, induce type to 3-7

factors, (IFN-α of antiviral and IFN-β), result responses intracellular cytokines, that the types Signaling interferons. together peptides, TLRs the by cell various chemotactic induces in -β interferon-α the inflammatory type mammalian of antimicrobial range and and diverse in production I a cytokines achieves pathways this TLR that transcription factors. signaling different each by activate activating several signaling different TIR domains interact TLR that them of earlier, with cytoplasmic ligand-induced ectodomains cytoplasmic brings signaling. intracellular As allowing TIR to initiate the dimerization two of the mentioned adaptor domains together, molecules There are

immune the of innate system. by cells recognition Pattern

used TRAM. MyD88, as mammalian by four (also MAL TIRAP), known such adaptors and TRIF, TLRs: different combinations the of different adaptors these of (Fig. interact domains is TIR with significant TLRs that the It 3.14). Most which their required MyD88, is signaling. for TLRs with only interact

Fig. TLR-4 LPS association the protein in 3.13 MD-2. accessory recognizes with MD-2, the side of of LPS. complex a and symmetrical TLR-4, a: Panel view shown and green in are blue. polypeptide dark backbones TLR-4 of region the the LRR and region lacks entire structure (shown in composed dark The the blue), green intracellular extracellular signaling but domain. shows of TLR-4, shown blue. light in protein The is MD-2 in inserted Five acyl (shown a hydrophobic the MD-2. are into LPS of chains within red) pocket a glycan and TLR-4 of of The one with remainder LPS the monomer. lipid surface (orange) chain contact convex the make structure of molecule is the b: MD-2 (outer) that to its makes to view LPS surface, top on shows other Panel contact TLR-4 the subunit an with the subunit. molecule one convex that attached while an TLR-4 binding to MD-2 the side one The off region. LRR protein binds TLR-4 of and binding orientation MD-2 relative Panel to of of c: schematic illustration LPS TLR-4. Jie-Oh Structures of courtesy Lee.

Fig. pathways. Mammalian TIR-domain TLRs signaling 3.14 downstream to with activate different interact molecules adaptor are adaptor-like, adaptor-inducing factor by molecules The adaptor (myeloid 88), TLRs differentiation mammalian IFN-β), MAL TIRAP, TIR-containing and (MyD88 TRIF adaptor molecule). for domain-containing also MyD88 used as (TRIF-related four known signaling TRAM protein), (TIR adaptor TLRs interact with which only All TRIF. MyD88, interacts TLR-3, except with interactions TLRs. known table The pattern the adaptor for known the of indicates

TRIF. interacts only with TLR-3 use TLRs MAL, TRAM. paired paired Other either with or MyD88 with TRIF and requires (TLR-2/1 the by heterodimers TLR-2 TLR-2/6) MyD88/MAL. Signaling adaptor both TLR-4. used TLR-4 which TRIF/TRAM, endosomal during signaling by uses is signaling pairs, these MyD88/MAL of and be which choice of of signals adaptor the the activated Importantly, TLR. several influences downstream will by the

(Fig. Signaling most NFκB factor transcription by the TLRs activates activated the by to factor DIF, Drosophila Toll. which 3.15), is related protein transcription through such they c-Jun, 1 of through TLRs factor signaling a interferon protein several mitogen-activated involving activator the pathway, also regulatory members (MAPKs). activate yet family the (AP-1) activate (IRF) second factor kinases family, and another Mammalian as members pathway of pro-inflammatory factors. AP-1 expression primarily and cytokines act to of induce and the NFκB chemotactic is The particularly IRF5, related interferons, cytokines. type whereas important IRF3 are factors the pro-inflammatory a in antiviral IRF7 of production factor, IRF for I involved and inducing how various we explain transcription their in of will describe we chapter, cytokine exert how cytokines the actions. various TLR signaling induces genes; those will the Here later

use triggered by first consider We MyD88. that the signaling TLRs pathway domains protein adaptor. are MyD88 Two for an its responsible of as function at in TIR MyD88 TLR domain TIR tails. with that associates the terminus domains carboxy has its the a cytoplasmic has programmed amino of was a identified named death MyD88 its cell terminus, signaling involved it because in first in so apoptosis, At a proteins domain, death. type a MyD88 present in associates The other proteins. death signaling death with intracellular domain similar domain humans. are rare recurrent signaling, for since with in Both immunodeficiency by either associated domain characterized bacterial infections domains MyD88 in mutations are required domains. serine–threonine (IL-1receptor and death activates recruits and kinase domain 4) IRAK1—via MyD88 associated protein their death two kinases—IRAK4 The scaffold, this performs that the IRAK then recruits it phosphorylated and produce complex enzymes uses are other by a signaling two functions: IRAKs. to that scaffold This recruit molecules

factor receptor-associated ligase, (see acts an IRAK Fig. is 6), the with the TRAF6 a (together TRIKA1) that ligase recruits an Uve1A necrosis form in complex its cooperation ubiquitin ubiquitin UBC13, cofactor To (tumor which E3 called E2 factor signaling scaffold, and enzyme 3.15). another chemical polymers. thereby generate combined bond) ubiquitin which be and The another protein of UBC13 ubiquitin and (unite to activity molecule molecule, is with a one TRAF-6 to protein, can ligate on signaling the carboxy the 63 linkages polyubiquitin the involved and ubiquitin linkages. The lysine of between terminus next, in one K63 contains forming linear other that to produced including other and extended platform—or a be be polyubiquitin itself, chains This polymer on as bind free can as to polyubiquitin TRAF-6 initiated act molecules. produce or polymers, can signaling proteins, scaffold—that ubiquitin TAB1, TAB2, Fig. polyubiquitin-binding serine–threonine consisting the the the complex and adaptor proteins of a Next, recruits TAK1 (see scaffold kinase signaling 3.15). by kinase TAK1 brought certain TAK1 activating being signaling scaffold, MAPKs, MAPK14 terminal activated By the phosphorylated is (JNK) and the IRAK by such MAPK). c-Jun (p38 propagates onto as and complex, cytokine AP-1-family that transcribe genes. These factors activate transcription then

IKKβ, essential (also the NFκB complex, IKKα, phosphorylates proteins: activates IKKγ and three for kinase IκB NEMO, composed and is also of modifier). as (IKK) known which TAK1 to polyubiquitin functions complex the into which by IKK with proximity brings NEMO binding chains, TAK1. TAK1

innate of system. immune Pattern by the recognition cells

I˜B IKK IKK°, TAK1 MyD88 E3 ligase) with IKK° chain IKK˝ TAK1 ligase) IRAK4, is a phosphorylates and (E2 I˜B cytokine (E3 polyubiquitin ligase cytokine induce releasing genes is IKK˛IKK˝ p65 into nucleus p50 activation NF˜B of for the MAL Dimerized degraded, to recruit creating associates IRAK4IRAK1 (NEMO) TAK1 IRAK1 and UBC13, which expression I˜B TRAF-6 TAK1 the nucleus I˜B NF˜B scaffold TRAF-6 ubiquitin polyubiquitinated, activating TAB1/2 I˜B TRAF-6 NF˜B phosphorylates IKK TLRs degradation of ubiquitin TAB1/2 Uve1A genes IKK°/˛

Fig. cytokines. the expression NFκB, which the induces activate TLR can pro-inflammatory of factor signaling 3.15 transcription panel: brought via other proximity TIR their are by into signal which their each cytoplasmic of TLRs First ectodomains. dimerization domains, to ligand-induced and signaling. protein to TLRs others the adaptor the MyD88/MAL Some MyD88, pair initiate use use IRAK1 ubiquitin and in IRAK4, ligase domain TRAF-6. MyD88 with death serine–threonine association recruits kinases E3 the The the TRAF-6, IRAK activity. phosphorylates undergoes and autoactivation its E3 activating ligase panel: with lysine through and ligase Second cofactor 63 generate (K63). (yellow TRAF-6 attachment triangles) cooperates of scaffolds polyubiquitin by its (UBC13) ubiquitin a an E2 to (Uve1A) adaptor factor-β-activated (transforming kinase the TAK1 recruits (TAK1-binding of TAB1 1) scaffold complex TAB2. of kinase and This 1) composed protein proteins, and a two proteins growth with IRAK bind to and to TAK1 become proximity phosphorylated function to TAB1 TAB2 into (red dot). bringing polyubiquitin, Third activated activates complex. the kinase TAK1 IκB panel: IKK, to subunit brings complex First, polyubiquitin and the into (NEMO) IKK to the IKKγ scaffold binds proximity the TAK1. and IKKβ. TAK1 phosphorylates activates then IKKβ cytoplasmic the inhibitor then phosphorylates of IκB, NFκB. degradation. phosphorylated its leads (not shown) of process Fourth a panel: ubiquitination is by that targeted IκB to many inflammatory into the cytokines. subunits, including composed two nucleus, releases of transcription encoding This is the which and p50 driving genes p65, of those NFκB, mitogen-activated factors and which transcription shown). JNK of stimulates phosphorylate kinases TAK1 protein the also (MAPKs) and p38, activate (not AP-1 activation

and activates phosphorylates IKKβ. with a (inhibitor then phosphorylates IκB confused IKKβ. IKKβ should be of whose is molecule distinct which name κB), not is cytoplasmic constitutively binds protein which IκB subunits, of NFκB, and two that to composed a p50 is p65. factor transcription the cytoplasm. proteins IκB The of binding the in traps the NFκB IKK IL-6. the the of cytokines can where Phosphorylation such pro-inflammatory TNF-α, as this by nucleus, of NFκB into IL-1β, degradation and drive it induces IκB, genes transcription releases and for of second half of immune The response described these the in innate the in are actions chapter. cytokines this outcome on of vary which type activation the TLR depending it also in cell can The occurs. intestine cells activation the example, of of For the as Toll-like of peptides, production cells ancient mammalian (see of of in via MyD88 epithelial the specialized Section TLR-4 results Paneth the such 2-4) a function proteins. in example antimicrobial

of is bacterial to of pathogens. the the alerting to immune ability of presence NFκB to their role The crucial activate TLRs system deficiency, IRAK4 inactivating Rare which, in cause in humans IRAK4 characterized by deficiency, recurrent mutations is of like MyD88 an instances bacterial immunodeficiency, infections. known in human defects. developmental X-linked is as immunodeficiency immunodeficiency by dysplasia NEMO syndrome both or Mutations and and characterized a hypohidrotic NEMO which deficiency, produce ectodermal

family. TLR-8, The of the members TLR-7, IRF nucleic-acid-sensing and TLRs—TLR-3, TLR-9—activate in reside the serine proteins become threonine IRF on phosphorylated and inactive cytoplasm in and residues they are until

and cells (dsRNA). dendritic viral panel: double-stranded TLR-3, expressed RNA Left senses macrophages, by chains. E3 the which TLR-3 TRAF3 ligase to K63-linked protein polyubiquitin TRIF, generate adaptor recruits the signaling uses (TRAF family member-associated which kinase kinases and kinase (TANK-binding activator), threonine NFκB scaffold the recruits TBK1 This (IκB with and TANK ε) serine– NEMO associate IKKε 1). induces interferon factor IRF3 the dot) enters (red of phosphorylates expression type TBK1 nucleus then IRF3, transcription I the and genes. and TLR-7, Right dendritic panel: plasmacytoid single-stranded (ssRNA) through RNA by expressed and signals cells, detects MyD88. is highly Here, recruits also and plasmacytoid cells. dendritic phosphorylates which directly in IRF7, expressed IRAK1 interferons. IRF7 the enters nucleus I type to induce expression of then

carboxy their termini. nucleus factors. as transcription move then to They the active important and are IRF7 I interferons. expression type the of and IRF3 IRF Of particularly members, family for signaling antiviral nine TLR interacts cells, the adaptor by conventional TIR cytoplasmic and expressed protein the For dendritic with macrophages domain TRIF. TLR-3, TRAF6, the TRIF ligase E3 a with TRAF3, like generates ubiquitin interacts scaffold. which, polyubiquitin TLR-3 a which complex the scaffold this kinases signaling, TBK1, and multiprotein IRF3 phosphorylate recruits IKKε containing (Fig. In 3.16). by vivo also binding response by TLR-4 TLR-3, but by in triggers IRF3 functional induced compared and that weak elusive. TLR-4 TRIF, is the remains induced with role pathway relatively this its through TLR-9 TLR-8, and In signal TLR-3, TLR-7, MyD88. uniquely to contrast TLR-9 the signaling complex TIR and IRAK1/IRAK4 plasmacytoid MyD88 recruits described TLR-7 For above. domain in as the cells, dendritic generate recruiting scaffold. that a a Here, carries signaling function beyond IRAK the complex TRAFs distinct out dendritic In these cells. expressed with IRF7, cells, can is IRAK1 physically plasmacytoid highly by also associate which interferons by to to type IRF7 leading of induction This Fig. phosphorylated I (see become IRAK1, allows 3.16). I plays IRF for factors type pro-inflammatory genes; in role of regulate IRF5, cytokines. Not interferon all the example, a induction

antibacterial ability antiviral as needed. stimulate can activate collective either responses that or IRFs means TLRs both and to of they NFκB The infections has deficiency, In human to no extra IRAK4 example, susceptibility noted. been for viral IRF is of antiviral activation affected. interferons not production impaired the that and is suggest would not This innate of activated. by will types immunity cells, by depending stromal some different type cells on differ generated responses in cell epithelial involved what of is and some respects TLRs being expressed in and the are and

receptors of infection and cellular The bacterial sensors intracellular are NOD-like damage. 3-8

TLRs, are extracellular on membrane or being cell’s primarily vesicles, the plasma products. of microbial The endocytic sensors expressed families cytoplasm. of the the and of in innate that the discovery been have microbial sensors Since mammalian identified products TLRs, Toll additional detect (NLRs). and sensors (NOD), these nucleotidebinding oligomerization collectively, group located a cytoplasmic domains centrally microbial receptors other of pathways; has cellular products or that damage large domain or are signaling NOD-like One that innate the variable detect activate of pathway distinct the pro-inflammatory the the as NLRs inflammatory trigger Some initiate other NLRs induces to cell production TLRs, that while NFκB a responses death activate and cytokines. same a NLRs plant receptors family that (R) ancient immunity innate because pathogens proteins are of are NLR considered defenses resistance of against The are the very homologs. part

contain. basis protein other on of they the can be domains of Subfamilies distinguished NLRs the (Fig. amino-terminal recruitment an (CARD) The domain caspase has NOD subfamily 3.17). proteases proteases), many by cell are which including family recognized in apoptosis. of death intracellular a was initially called acid in important caspases leading CARD those pathways, to (for cysteine-aspartic domains signaling is related to the with domain to CARD TIR dimerize induce MyD88 on can (Fig. in CARD and death proteins other structurally 3.18). through cell-wall peptidoglycans, bacterial of binding occurs although recognize via it or whether not this proteins. proteins direct accessory is fragments known NOD diaminopimelic such Gram-positive Listeria, product breakdown and acid as a as some peptidoglycans of such Gram-negative bacteria NOD1 senses (iE-DAP), Salmonella bacteria γ-glutamyl of

recognition innate of by immune system. cells Pattern the

cIAP1/2 RIP2 domain RIP2 which IKK°IKK˛ bacteria, muramyl NOD of NF˜B NOD iE-DAP I˜B CARD in NF˜B bacterial recruitment TAB1/2 TAK1 inactive form cytoplasm TAK1, intracellular leading polyubiquitin dipeptide cytoplasm of an LRR activates RIP2, Binding reside XIAP to proteins proteins NEMO to NOD CARD NOD ligands activation in or induces the

Fig. pro-inflammatory 3.17 the of peptidoglycans bacteria NFκB bacterial activate and recognizing by sense expression of presence Intracellular genes. to the NOD induce proteins

NOD2 most in bacteria. muramyl is whereas peptidoglycans of the which dipeptide present (MDP), recognizes to be infection, also have lysosomes that from in transporter mice oligopeptide of cytoplasm materials ligands. enter but NOD result transported intracellular lacking an ligands a may is greatly responses as NOD1 the captured endocytosis, (SLC15A4) since reduced by may present

its (see the When known serine–threonine kinase RICK Fig. as NOD1 RIP2 it CARD-containing recognizes and NOD2 recruits RIPK2) or (also ligand, 3.17). associates in activity the cIAP1, generates scaffold RIP2 cIAP2, signaling. ligases E3 as polyubiquitin and a whose with TLR XIAP, scaffold and in IKK TAK1 Fig. NFκB activation recruits of in as This results and shown 3.15. for (NO), then the of bacteria NFκB intracellular involved of production nitric and parasites. expression enzymes the induces which and genes inflammatory cytokines oxide for toxic to in is to bacterial routinely that keeping NOD In are their as role of bacteria. with sensors exposed cells components, in proteins expressed are cross the the an cells to that and succeeded These epithelial body. have and macrophages forming dendritic must entering in that establish cells infection the the barrier bacteria ingest body, include that bacteria in and dendritic as Macrophages cells as TLRs express NOD2, NOD1 are by both pathways. and activated and well cells, epithelial innate as an function infections, is activator bacterial a NOD1 In immunity. of may important NOD1 also responses against activator of and systemic from that to blood amounts via are It transported intestinal sufficient microbiota in seems peptidoglycans

panel: they serve First reside the cytoplasm, an inactive in state as for proteins sensors in NOD components. various bacterial where bacterial is NOD2. peptidoglycans Second which produces by dipeptide, muramyl of degradation cell-wall recognized panel: diaminopimelic walls. breakdown (iE-DAP), cell γ-glutamyl of Gram-negative recognizes a product NOD1 bacterial acid aggregation, of NOD2 recruitment protein), and NOD1 (cellular of XIAP associates allowing the inhibitor induces cIAP1 CARD-dependent including with (X-linked binding of serine– The threonine E3 apoptosis which to ligands 1), these ligases, RIP2, or of apoptosis cIAP2. inhibitor kinase ligase recruited association of 3.15. in activation IKK with leads scaffold, and to Fig. complex produces shown This NFκB, this the TAK1 the polyubiquitin of TLR in signaling, as a as E3 the and activity scaffold and pathway, as is required In signaling. a scaffold acts RIP2 XIAP, activity not for this to kinase RIP2 recruit

Fig. in 3.18 immune signaling domains molecules. various contained Protein-interaction Signaling that assembly protein-interaction domains contain the proteins complexes. mediate of larger the indicated of that table contain in examples domain. chapter The discussed proteins this shows MyD88, TIR death with IRAK1/4 domain, one via may domain interact and Proteins adaptor with the protein via which such its more as domain its (DD). can than have TLRs

3.6 MOVIE

Fig. NLRP3 damage activates cytokines. inflammasome pro-inflammatory produce Cellular to the 3.19

activation. that and The LRR (HSP90 NLRP3 with prevent SGT1) associates domain chaperones NLRP3 of molecules cell; to multiple receptor may toxins allows of the of Damage extracellular NOD their by K+ the activation to induce and by through of (also NACHT chaperones ions bacterial these pore-forming NLRP3 domains ATP from or efflux interactions aggregate caused dissociate P2X7 this the domain). called NLRP3 cells from text). and intermediates disruption also of can Reactive (ROS) lysosomes NLRP3 (see activate oxygen aggregated close the ASC NLRP3 which domains brings adaptor pyrin of then multiple domains protein with (PYCARD). NLRP3 interact The into the pyrin conformation proximity, CARD turn in ASC This domains 1. the CARD the conformation aggregate which aggregates of pro-caspase domains, form cleaves of that the immature aggregation mature cleavage itself then cytokines, of induces the cytokines caspase secreted. are 1 active 1, This to procaspase releasing proteolytic the of forms pro-inflammatory which

activation of basal increase neutrophils. such this activated A to show even NOD neutrophils that Trypanosoma may in in lacking explain parasite lack mice NOD1 way increased ligands, as reduction susceptibility the pathogens cruzi. why

2). specialized Paneth (see of being role, in expression αand seems have more potent of antimicrobial NOD2 cells the regulates as the where such β-defensins expressed gut, it peptides a the the to Chapter strongly this, are known inflammatory mutations with in as Consistent 15). with the loss-of-function NOD2 Crohn’s humans in bowel (discussed associated Chapter disease condition in this that NFκB. the and condition activate ability with domain NOD2 carry mutations impair LRR in Some its sense patients of to MDP antimicrobial natural characteristic the to the weakening the thought peptides, and this inflammation diminish intestinal production thereby and function defensins of barrier of of to other epithelium the is disease. leading This joints, mutations early-onset human and as such by tissues spontaneous inflammation the associated eyes, which disorders are syndrome, and in Gain-of-function or skin. are with the the in inflammatory Blau sarcoidosis in NOD2 liver, characterized to domain seem ligand, absence Activating in an response in the the in the cascade NOD promote leading the to mutations inflammatory pathogens. absence of inappropriate of signaling NLRX1 NOD NLRC5, well their but and there members function NOD2, Besides and currently of family, proteins as understood. is the are NOD1 the other such less

death cell an through inflammation. and to induce cellular proteins inflammasome or to damage infection 3-9 NLRP react

amino as and family. CARD pyrin has termini, known of the at is a of subfamily in the place their domain NLRP domain proteins NLR Another other (Fig. the with interact Pyrin to and pyrin and structurally TIR are domains related domains domains, CARD 3.19). NLR containing have domains. 14 Humans proteins pyrin or active (also under details still as of investigation. best known its the NLRP3 cryopyrin), NALP3 although molecular are activation is The characterized NLRP3 an cytoplasm, in in the inactive resides form

keep Potassium conformation chaperones dissociation induces in with ef˜ux causing pro-caspase of forms oligomers an cleavage 1 inactive proteolytic NLRP3 NLRP3 that ASC of

of recognition the system. Pattern by cells innate immune

chaperone may are where (see protein HSP90 state heat-shock to LRR and NLRP3 the an which hold its inactive SGT1, in thought the bind co-chaperone domains Fig. 3.19). intracellular of NLRP3 reactive reduced the events the or species generation lysosomes to particulate Several seem (ROS), matter. signaling: oxygen of potassium, by crystalline or induce disruption Staphylococcus bacteria toxins. of example, potassium as loss through with, during intracellular produce intracellular The for that pore-forming can infection efflux aureus such occur K+ Also, the death a nearby itself ATP would release which is of P2X7, purinergic channel, cells the allow potassium extracellular ion receptor space; ATP efflux. activate can and into this by In HSP90 NLRP3 dissociation that it concentration reduction model, one SGT1. is signaling of causing and K+ intracellular the triggers of the ROS-induced NLRP3 model of proteins activation thioredoxin A oxidization intermediate called proposed for (TRX). involves collectively the sensor causes of dissociation of are by protein proteins bound ROS the TRX to thioredoxin-interacting TXNIP TRX. from but TRX (TXNIP), Normally oxidation HSP90 TXNIP NLRP3, displace and The again activation. free SGT1 may its causing from then monomers domains activation cases, and induce NLRP3 LLR signaling. of these In of involves aggregation their NOD both via multiple to active of potassium by unknown of may of sulfate, such the as of matter, particulate lead alum, a rupture salt the aluminum the and Finally, can crystalline protease adjuvant lysosomes B, phagocytosis an cathepsin which activate NLRP3 mechanism. release to

death a through activating as cell Rather (see known of leads complex cytokines signaling Fig. as to NOD2 in inflammasome the NOD1 and pro-inflammatory NLRP3 multiprotein the to of formation signaling, NFκB than and generation 3.19). stages. several of proceeds the in inflammasome Activation specific The first event. several or a molecules, aggregation domains by NLRP3 other LRR NLRP is trigger recognition of the or of molecules, protein This aggregation ASC another interact with of named induces called PYCARD). pyrin domains NLRP3 pyrin of to (also domains the CARD and adaptor ASC domain. is carboxy-terminal pyrin an of protein composed a domain an amino-terminal polymeric (Fig. are to domains able Pyrin each structures CARD form filamentous and 3.20). the center domains ASC further interaction filament, and a CARD ASC the facing The with in outward. polymeric with NLRP3 domains of drives pyrin formation the of inactive These 1, pro-caspase protease with CARD domains then domains initiating interact the CARD of

Fig. and The several of domains. polymers inflammasome created protein composed CARD aggregated filamentous by is pyrin 3.20

formed caspase the domain an of AIM2, Top by full-length structures pyrin 1. panel: CARD of ASC, domain the and micrograph electron of a with The dark central nm) (15 represents staining gold-labeled antibody. anti-ASC region outward filaments the polymer the composed represent caspase long of The 1 domain. CARD inflammasome Bottom panel: Schematic of NLRP3 assembly. interpretation structure. regions and of into filamentous In a caspase 1 ASC CARD aggregate this model, 1. NLRP3 aggregation The of translates pro-caspase adaptor of aggregation into ASC of Hao courtesy Electron Wu. micrograph

caspase into 1 discrete CARD-dependent polymerization its filaments. the 1, to pro-caspase domains. seems trigger its autoinhibitory which from releases This caspase active of the fragment autocleavage aggregation 1 into pro-inflammatory IL-1β out Fig. (see processing Active then IL-18, caspase ATP-dependent cytokines, 1 their active particularly and of forms proteolytic the carries 3.19). called mechanism induces the with death’) death cell unknown cell form pro-inflammatory (‘fiery release because also through of is pyroptosis upon that these an of rupture. associated activation Caspase a inflammation 1 cytokines of

cells a activation For other must cytokines, step of or and translate induce which pro-forms IL-1β, that inflammatory produce in priming to IL-18, inflammasome mRNAs cytokines. the the first encode occur ensure infections. can This inflammasome may during priming from which primarily signaling, activation TLR step help that result proceeds of be can example, subsequent for poly cells For (see experimentally the TLR-3 used to prime inflammasome. the 3-5) triggering I:C agonist Section

NLR form other 1 caspase Several these cytokines. members pro-inflammatory ASC with and activate that inflammasomes family and MDP, expressed by but factors. is NLRP1 be activated in monocytes and similar also can to directly is by highly other dendritic activated NOD2, cells which endopeptidase, factor, by evade lethal pathogen system macrophages. example, the Bacillus immune For to killing anthrax anthracis an allows called the expresses pyroptosis does macrophages. cleaving in Lethal the NLRP1 infected inflammasome and an activating inducing this factor by NLRP1, NLRC4 systems NLR transport through host to specialized nutrients to two acts bacterial proteins, cells serve secretion proteins access NAIP5, enter cells. adaptor from NAIP2 various pathogens an used that materials with detect by or and into that as other Salmonella needle-like component III pathogen secretion macromolecular (T3SS), a One the PrgJ, of from complex. system a the is typhimurium, protein, type such infection together enters recognized Upon cytoplasm NAIP2. Salmonella, by by is with of NLRC4 host cells and PrgJ the functioning be by with and flagellin cells with case conjunction via NAIP5. this bacterial is but T3SS, may Extracellular the PrgJ host recognized recognized flagellin enter also by in TLR5, in NLRC4 can Some this proteins lacking to since innate mice certain negatively resistance pathogens. increased immunity, may such NLRP6, exhibit as protein regulate NLR normal normal and where in promoting the into intestine appears positive play secretion is cells. of However, highly mucosal goblet NLRP6 expressed role it mucus barrier required the granules function to epithelium, a for intestinal in by is forms acylated and with humans an 1 to caspase which present in recognizes IL-18. not mice, IL-1β is but ASC NLRP7, and lipopeptides produce microbial and inflammasome like NLRP6, it proposed but Less about have initially inhibitory an was known to function. NLRP12, is role although lacking of Yersinia the bacterium of Subsequent bacterial NLRP12 recognition still this basis the suggest to of that bubonic certain has the including a in and plague, studies species, detection response is possible unclear. mice it pestis, causes

can contain lack also but PYHIN involve in pyrin present domain activation the proteins the NLR family. domains N-terminal family, of LRR Inflammasome the which an In domain, the have HIN H mediates of DNA proteins PYHIN for domain, that named DNA inversion flagellar HIN place of inversion) a (H LRR recombinase an between antigens. so Salmonella proteins are and 13 in There humans, mice. PYHIN in four of HIN triggers these, AIM2 activation pyrin and (absent double-stranded melanoma DNA recognizes the interactions 2), ASC. genomes one domain in caspase domain with through In 1 to been of by cytoplasm located tularemia. agent the to responses increased in its virus, important role vaccinia has and demonstrated vivo AIM2-deficient the AIM2 in causative is and Francisella susceptibility the tularensis, for by vitro mice infection in of is contains be two Section viral The domains; inducible in the and IFI16 is recognizes (interferon and primarily HIN below 16) will related located nucleus cell in protein double-stranded 3-11. it described protein DNA,

detect protease caspase inflammasome intracellular uses (caspase A ‘non-canonical’ to 11 1-independent) LPS. the pathway being confused was difference as The 1 a on genetic experimental discovery specific between because mouse this caspase dependent strains. of initially of pathway gene and 5. caspases is Casp4 to homologous human by 11 Caspase and murine 4 the is encoded to found 1 mice The (Casp1) of 3-20) be Section (see was caspase to disrupted and originally administration which shock the gene induced LPS. lethal studied were in by resistant initially acted conclude This the led that inflammatory to caspase response to LPS. researchers in 1 gene. this natural discovered the inactivated a related also mutation carried that later mouse researchers that But strain Casp4 during genetic Because genes mouse other reside to 2 on 9, segregate mouse backcrosses other of strains. Casp1 subsequent independently chromosome Casp4 failed the experimental and kilobases within they each to 11. and 1 lack to caspase mice in thought caspase Thus, protein initially both 1 fact lacked only caspase lacking Casp4 1 caspase to generated transgene; mice mice only became by these as shock. a susceptible expressing LPS-induced were functional Later, also generated were were to resistant be Mice to these and caspase 11, only found LPS-induced lacked that shock. not LPS-induced is results thought, caspase as for that These shock. indicated caspase originally 1 and responsible 11, of but processing 11 not for for pyroptosis, IL-1β responsible IL-18. inducing Caspase is or TLR-4 non-canonical activated the that was TLR-4 It remain suspected for susceptible lacking shock. that imflammasome, sensor since not mice was LPS-induced the to LPS is example LPS the an sensor, caspase an is itself that that a it and suggested 11 has molecule. a sensor making of protein intracellular Recent evidence effector both

been activation with diseases. has Inappropriate inflammasome associated various caused crystals mystery. cartilaginous to known in deposition many but years by crystals, how monosodium tissues inflammation urate urate been a the inflammation of has was for the Gout cause the cytokines urate the NLRP3 the mechanism to known gout. unclear, are crystals is symptoms precise the which associated inflammasome, with still of inflammatory Although induces activate and they NOD of inappropriately, inherited NLRP2 in cause of the domain the can diseases, in the in are Mutations occurs infection. activate inflammation some which absence inflammasomes NLRP3 of and autoinflammatory with periodic Chapter cold syndromes, in NLRP3 humans in syndrome as inflammatory such familial more syndrome are associated 13). detail Muckle–Wells in and fever hereditary (discussed Mutations in show conditions cytokines such these with as production spontaneous of from patients IL-1β. Macrophages inflammatory with the of inflammasome in pathogens can 13. discuss interfere Chapter will formation We how also

induce I activate The RIG-I-like MAVS RNAs cytoplasmic 3-10 detect type production pro-inflammatory viral to and cytokines. and receptors interferon

and detect TLR-7, and extracellular RNAs pathway. the endocytic DNAs enter TLR-9 the that TLR-3, from cell viral the By within viral are RNAs sensed RIG-I-like a proteins contrast, of called family by a receptors separate cell (RLRs). produced by using proteins helicase-like carboxy serve in sensors viral their viral These binding RNA to domain an RNAs terminal. as The subgroup acid a a family RLR helicase-like is and tetrapeptide amino DEAD-box domain of motif ‘DExH’ has proteins. activate proteins that RLR amino-terminal The with CARD and domains two interact adaptor contain proteins also

Fig. viral cytoplasmic sensors other RIG-I are 3.21 and RNA. of RLRs

First conformations. viral are panel: detecting RNA, and auto-inhibited and MDA-5 before in cytoplasmic RIG-I inactive, The protein attached mitochondrial is MAVS to membrane. outer adaptor the to CARD dsRNA of become to 5ʹ-triphosphate MDA-5, by conformation MAVS. the the their with by Second free uncapped detection interact domains of RIG-I, RNA amino-terminal or panel: of viral CARD domain changes although the of involves interaction unclear. from E3 This still TRIM25 details structural polyubiquitin ligases the K63-linked are or generation Riplet, text) the to region of proline-rich to and a polyubiquitin K63-linked panel: leads TRAFs additional the MAVS Third interact with aggregation of induces generation scaffold. (see recruits (see scaffold in As TBK1 signaling, TLR Figs. IKK and this complexes and to 3.16) I IRF cytokines, type interferons and activate 3.15 pro-inflammatory and respectively. producing NFκB,

type signaling I bound. interferons are to when viral RNAs produce discovered be (retinoic these first I). was The sensors acid-inducible gene RIG-I of to several and types serves is expressed infections. RIG-I an sensor widely of kinds cell across and for tissues intracellular as several picornaviruses. RIG-I to of susceptible paramyxoviruses, are by kinds rhabdoviruses, single-stranded in including but not Mice orthomyxoviruses, and viruses, highly infection RNA deficient flaviviruses,

RNA between transcripts. by the at differences end RNA sensing viral host discriminates RIG-I single-stranded of and 5ʹ its addition a Eukaryotic that undergoes in is the enzymatic to contains modification nucleus RNA transcribed initial the the capping of by 5ʹ-triphosphate. and called subsequent group nucleotide on a 7-methylguanosine 5ʹ-triphosphate normally their this RNA Most nucleus, RNA genomes viruses, in the not not undergo and however, occurs, do where modification. replicate capping do determined that have genome. end studies 5ʹ-triphosphate viral the Biochemical unmodified ssRNA RIG-I of the senses RNA unmodified RIG-I. do have 5ʹ-triphosphate, the ssRNA other as many transcripts the they Flavivirus viruses, are transcripts by and of detected a covalent the 5ʹ-triphosphate RNA, them. protein so is RIG-I the end the of 5ʹ replicate is poliovirus to by explains attachment viral sensing picornaviruses, that hepatitis which absent, in include involved the and In A, not the viral which contrast, mechanism a that why of involves

(melanoma is MDA-5 structure but in senses to helicard, it 5), also RIG-I, dsRNA. called differentiation-associated similar contrast these are two indicating host MDA-5 susceptible in defense. In mice, to deficient RIG-I-deficient but have distinct sensors of RNAs mice viral picornaviruses, in crucial to that roles associated in RIG-I have mutations these not Inactivating but mutations MDA-5 with or of human been reported, alleles immunodeficiency. were domain lacks RLR DHX58) helicase retains by (encoded CARD a The LGP2 family but domains. member have RIG-I recognition in and MDA-5 LGP2 cooperate impaired LGP2 the RIG-I appears antiviral or lacking responses mice mediated since viral MDA-5. by with of to normally RNA, viruses. on domain, in This its helicase recognition response depend production since to in impaired appears mice, result disrupt RNA mutations viral ATPase cooperative various its to LGP2 in by IFN-β activity that

for appropriate RNAs signaling viral Sensing leads MDA-5 type viral infection activates that against and defense I RIG-I production 3.21). to (Fig. by interferon of CARD and stabilized the interactions configuration infection and that RIG-I in by viruses, autoinhibited an helicase is are domains. Before in by MDA-5 the between cytoplasm for when infection disrupted of upon MDA-5, with two or domains the CARD interactions. helicase the viral are These other freeing RIG-I interactions RNA domains associates can two free amino-proximal more The second polyubiquitin on by 3-7), the Section linkages RNF153), E3 then Riplet or polyubiquitin either CARD which the (encoded TRIM25 K63-linked recruit including CARD as portion domains scaffolds ligases, within (see and initiate of chains domain. a but called protein protein). Precise MAVS and help downstream adaptor signaling (mitochondrial appears RIG-I MDA-5 unclear, are antiviral to this details interact with scaffold to membrane MAVS attached RIG-I domain a CARD bind mitochondrial outer MDA-5. is the and contains and may that may aggregation initiate of MAVS. domains, the CARD inflammasome, aggregation as of This in ubiquitin various family signals state, by E3 propagates MAVS ligases, including and recruiting In TRAF3, TRAF6. TRAF2, TRAF this TRAF5, and importance TLR-3 signaling their of K63linked of TBK1 ligase may The activation differ between but leads further relative to of production described I as polyubiquitin production type of IRF3 each for types, Fig. interferons, and cell (see E3 activation of NFκB. also 3.16), to and protection by have conferred the viruses RLRs. Some thwart evolved countermeasures to example, are though virus cytoplasm. transcripts RNA even genome of translated viral the produced the in but be must the capped some in negative-sense RNA infection not replicates For nucleus, during influenza influenza the infection. The and activity the TRIM25, influenza RIG-I exert protein interrupts nonstructural 1(NS1) thereby A might antiviral of actions inhibits against that

DNA interferons. STING type through of sensors signal 3-11 production Cytosolic to I induce

the such Innate sensors that origin. cap, between use recognize 5ʹ cytoplasmic host RNA modifications, viral as specific to discriminate and the restricted DNA of nucleus, various cytoplasm viral, located infection. may in become the or protozoan stages during DNA to Host is generally microbial, but Several interferon the have of response to infections. lead in production DNA cytoplasmic I to of can innate sensors that identified been type pathway, in identified was interferon of type a interferons. functional One the for induce of (stimulator can I of genes), DNA-sensing expression STING component that proteins screen TMEM173) and tetraspan an STING by is domain form into carboxy-terminal STING interacts reticulum homodimer. the inactive by transmembrane amino-terminal (encoded membrane its anchored to an the domain; cytoplasm extends endoplasmic to

(c-di-AMP). on diguanylate diadenylate (CDNs), cyclic of serve STING based its a bacterial monophosphate sensor cyclic to of cyclic and infection, dinucleotides recognition is (c-di-GMP) including known intracellular monophosphate as genomes. messengers These are and by molecules present bacterial are most enzymes second bacterial produced in the activate of signaling conformation homodimer. STING CDNs the changing by STING and TBK1, recruits production IRF3, to homodimer in This activates type turn (Fig. which I phosphorylates interferon and activates leading (see TLR-3 Figs. and signaling similar MAVS to 3.22), by 3.21). 3.16 and contain becomes amino are STING sequence carboxy at when their TRIF of activated. a termini serine-phosphorylated that MAVS, similar and each acid motif TLR3), these molecules (downstream appears allowing when IRF3 both recruits this TBK1 that to phosphorylated be by phosphorylated, motif, efficiently and It activated TBK1. IRF3, and

susceptible are mice a also role plays STING viral infections, STING lacking herpesvirus. in since by to infection whether was unclear it recently, But until

which enters nucleus the the genes induces and type I of phosphorylate activates STING kinase interferon IRF3, expression TBK1 to

panel: from resides in First DNA of a double-stranded serves viruses. (dsDNA) the as and sensor cGAS cytoplasm stimulated, of leading (cGAMP). dsDNA, When its binds enzymatic cyclic-GMP-AMP is cGAS to production activity such Bacteria cyclic (c-di-GMP) that monophosphate produce infect as cells and messengers diadenylate including diguanylate cyclic (c-di-AMP). dinucleotides, second cyclic monophosphate Second other and dinucleotides ER the STING activate can the membrane. on bind bacterial present cGAMP panel: dimer and still STING panel: the Third although details this unclear. TBK1, in state activates of are this interaction activates described Active TBK1 as IRF3, Fig. in 3.16.

acted directly DNA an DNA viral only unknown viral or downstream recognized sensor. STING of generated molecule messenger live activated that introduction that STING. It even infection, found DNA without second of the cells, into another was second monophosphate-adenosine cyclic cGAMP. GMP-AMP), or as (cyclic identified guano-sine messenger This monophosphate was of both the activates CDNs, STING dimer and signaling. cGAMP, subunits like binds STING bacterial result presence also acting of a the DNA This upstream sensor STING. of suggested previously enzyme, cGAMP produces DNA to named Purification of in for the a response synthase. cytosolic which enzyme identified cyclic cGAS, was that unknown GAMP second molecule polymerases. cyclic the nucleotidyltransferase messenger and includes of generates cyclase adenylate family (NTase) a in DNA contains present protein which enzymes, various the motif enzyme that AMP) cGAS (the bind and directly cGAS to stimulates the DNA, enzymatic and from produce cGAMP in activity can to this STING. activating ATP cytosolic its GTP cytoplasm, harboring cGAS herpesvirus importance demonstrating an its Mice increased susceptibility inactivated immunity. show to gene in infection,

several about There their the known DNA mechanism and sensors, of their in is candidate or recognition activity. other are but signaling, vivo less related rather a activating TBK1, AIM2, sensing appears (IFN-γ-inducible acts DNA pathway. and IFI16 to an than is 16) IRF3 protein through but in function inflammasome member STING, to family and PYHIN than through and family, DDX41 41) appears a member polypeptide related (DEAD the but an signal box to STING DEAD-box is RLR RIG-I is MAVS. to of rather recombination unknown. is the 11 STING sense but immunity cytosolic role homolog in its innate to pathway, currently (meitotic DNA activate double-stranded MRE11A a) can

effects the in immune sensors macrophages Activation of dendritic far-reaching innate on and 3-12 response.

tissue co-stimulatory activation macrophages functions of Section (see cells production, and sensing activating of pathways effector molecules cytokine of and the 1-15). outcome the another innate Besides induction is on dendritic later link them book, important describe We immune in the in now more these they an detail and provide between innate responses. but will because adaptive mention macrophages and (CD80) are sensors and cell-surface are co-stimulatory in dendritic molecules TLRs the innate B7.1 to (Fig. response Two recognition important tissue proteins pathogen such induced by B7.2 (CD86), as cells on which 3.23). important cells CD4 B7 T particularly response, specific adaptive an step recognized co-stimulatory is activation activating of the cells, by receptors in B7.2 their immune by expressed are by and immune adaptive B7.1 responses. and

protein have their co-injected that induce that to been antigens activity immunogenicity. co-stimulatory are such with mixtures in LPS Substances enhance years used as for co-stimulatory empirically I, molecules that cells are adjuvants adjuvants A-1), contain components best induce known found Appendix as Section These and macrophages microbial it cytokines. was tissue that and express substances dendritic and to (see the we of the shall functional the infections 9 As adaptive to immune influence produced see response in cytokines that response the 11, and develops. in Chapters character ensure different immune system adaptive by In to among module the innate way ability appropriate the response. of this types discriminate of pathogens to organism of an immune used is the

distinct downstream pathogen-recognition of Toll Drosophila a signaling in is 3-13 set molecules. of

how innate Before invertebrate at are leaving look used TLRs, NODs and shall Toll, sensing, in immunity. innate briefly we pattern but is detect that recognition against pathogens Toll bacterial both is is proteins Drosophila, not Although downstream fungal receptor, (Fig. and other in to Toll a defense central pathogens itself of 3.24). of genes components In bind proteins there encoding that cell peptidoglycan 13 walls. Drosophila, (PGRPs) bacterial peptidoglycan-recognition are the (GNBPs), binding and family, Another LPS Gram-negative the β-1,3-linked glucans. proteins recognizes rather and, Gram-positive than Gram-negative bacteria unexpectedly, fungi, bacteria. recognize GNBPs from GNBP1 cooperate peptidoglycan recognition Gram-positive the PGRP-SA in The and family bacteria. of members They the serine Grass, terminates protein the a cascade protease interact with which proteolytic in cleavage a Spätzle. called that of initiates a forms cleaved which response. induces One dimerization, to homodimer the Toll antimicrobial fragments that turn and its of the binds in stimulates recognition and Spätzle of of causing protein, also cleavage Toll. the cascade, activation proteolytic GNBP3, fungus-specific activates A

In fat-body part system. of are cells act the as hemocytes fly’s and immune phagocytic Drosophila, cells that When antimicrobial binds and peptides. to the Toll, secrete dimer synthesize Spätzle hemocytes pathway transcription Drosophila is which Toll factor signaling mammalian a NFκB. related called activates DIF, to The in for the as drosomycin. of peptides such DIF enters antimicrobial the transcription nucleus genes and induces factor pathway, Gram-negative in recognize induces Imd bacteria. peptides which that by Drosophila is family, signaling to production Drosophila particular Relish, (immunodeficiency) Another the of the in NFκB response triggered antimicrobial PGRPs the in Relish signaling. peptides the and by cecropin, antimicrobial the are expression peptides induces Toll diptericin, distinct from induced of which attacin, to infection Thus, kinds pathogens. of by Imd and different the activate pathways effector mechanisms eliminate Toll in mammalian act have Drosophila. been identified, PGRP but than homologs Four differently functions is peptidoglycans. as secreted bacterial and One, an to PGLYRP-2, amidase hydrolyze with present action in are neutrophil peptidoglycan. bacteriostatic others a cell-wall through The exert interactions and granules bacterial

Fig. to to initiate immunity adaptive stimulating and LPS induces activating cells. changes in migrate them by cells, Bacterial T 3.23 dendritic ability phagocytic the activate skin and the but lack are to in panel: cells immature T dendritic highly Top macropinocytic, lymphocytes. skin degrade the Dendritic products cells microbes ingest and them. residing their and in During two types are sensors by the changes. activated infection, induces dendritic cells of innate a activation various the and bacterial lymphatic Second the begin and cells migrate tissues and to system the out the of panel: dendritic mature. enter the ingest to T ability gain but to They the lose cells. ability antigen stimulate regional nodes, panel: in mature become lymph the cells. dendritic they Third the their the surface their and of the molecules molecules (B7.2). of expression the CD86 co-stimulatory molecules, MHC (B7.1) increasing They cell-surface of number change CD80 on character and

Fig. is pathogen 3.24 activated of by as a Drosophila cascade Toll initiated a proteolytic recognition. result protein in peptidoglycan-recognition binding Spätzle pathogens cleavage and cooperate protein The of GNBP1 the PGRP-SA a bacterial Drosophila in protease and (first cascade the the activate protease recognition leads Gram-negative the first that protein to panel). of alters Cleavage the Spätzle, to induce (second it Toll enabling of Toll panel). and dimerization conformation bind (third panel), protein its initiates pathway domains cytoplasmic recruit that leading which the dMyD88 to similar inhibitor NFκB mammals. release the in a cytoplasmic of very to TIR signaling Toll’s from adaptor the encoding The of transcription factor peptides. antimicrobial which DIF, the Drosophila genes of then version nucleus NFκB and activates is enters the transcription recognition yet and Fungal the the production pathway, of Spätzle fungi are proteins although leads antimicrobial to by of for as also peptides unidentified. this cleavage recognition

invertebrates TLR have NOD in 3-14 and some extensive primitive undergone and diversification chordates. both genes

only but domains, are to of some TLR innate mammalian LRR diversified have greater a especially dozen repertoire genes, recognition their containing organisms much There degree. about those receptors, a 222 sea urchin 200 an genes, than more and more in 200 has genes than genome. Strongylocentrotus receptor genes, its The unprecedented TLR receptor different NOD-like scavenger purpuratus an to similar genes from urchin four be of single number gene. likely are for are also receptors, The that to proteins involved example, there signaling in the being, increased these has that sea mammalian MyD88 be the may downstream of that no the in organisms. signaling number family similar there NFκB the is factors, apparent sea outcome urchin suggesting of in of to in very the transcription increase However, other as such targets, TLR that ultimate

TLR urchin Sea two genes into categories. fall broad is 11 divergent set of One small a genes. in the is few family other stable The a genes, large in changing suggesting evolutionary regions; contrast TLRs. of with family, together sequence of receptor large show degree specificities, LRR mammalian the within high pseudogenes rapidly rapid particular 211 which with of variation turnover, this, this number indicates a domains TLRs of the be based generate unknown, hypervariability is sea to in receptors. a specificity on used the highly LRR diversified the pathogen-recognition pathogen Toll-like urchin could Although system similar some belong. which in A to expansion chordates, phylum occurred the of innate has receptors vertebrates immune an is (the nonvertebrate lacking lancelet) adaptive a system. Amphioxus chordate The than scavenger more and contains genome NOD-like 71 than TLRs, more amphioxus receptors. receptors, 200 100 As jawless LRR-containing to immunity—uses in T-cell-based rearrangement vertebrate we (see adaptive primitive provide will lack 5-18). version fish, proteins see adaptive 5, which a Chapter of Section immunoglobulinand somatic gene immunity a of lineage—the

Summary.

induce cells Innate systems cellular microbes and rapid recognize express that well defenses immune responses. delayed receptor as several as microbes receptors lectin-like macrophages, phagocytosis. help dendritic rapidly through and Several eliminate cells neutrophils, scavenger and on bacterial of synergize the oxidase activation activating and innate reactive in complement ability) phagosomes the system’s NADPH the for phagocytic pathogen-recognition fMLF (which intermediates. oxygen C5a can with by for receptors be to antimicrobial G-protein-coupled peptide receptors in produced generate (TLRs) and in detect cell microbes activate endosomes Toll-like cell on membranes pathways. receptors outside signaling of defense host and the several the the surface of cytokines type downstream cytokines, IL-1β, pro-inflammatory these and induce receptors IRF pathways I and IL-6, NFκB including antiviral The and interferons. TNF-α, including cytosol. Other microbial families detect the infection receptor in within NOD of proteins the NFκB detect pro-inflammatory products and bacterial cytokines. the cytosol and activate production microbial certain of well related or as damage, The NLR stress signs as detects cellular proteins family of components. generates NLRs pyroptosis, through death. a which inflammasome, signal and the induces pro-inflammatory cell of form cytokines RIG-I and pathway, STING of MDA-5 by MAVS cytosolic of DNA, the presence interferons. of induce such sensors RNAs the viral sensing infection the type activate viral pathways and cGAS, I while both as detect pathway; these activate course pathogens those of sensors response in of variety defense the by of molecules of essential signaling The and cytokines, and primary chemokines, have co-stimulatory pathways genes, for infection. immune roles a including activated in later induce these all directing in that immediate adaptive the

to innate infection. responses Induced

described pathogen by innate now of in immediate We sensors an the section. the induced as the immunity consequence of responses examine recognition last will the that inflammation. cytokines on maintain focus produce will We phagocytes—neutrophils, they macrophages, the induce cells—and and major and dendritic cellular immune of sites as such responses, coordinate infection. neutrophils the chemokines the will that recruitment many to other of introduce we cells First, of families and and cytokines and movement blood coordinate We to out into of of various circulating molecules that induced will immune cells blood in cells on vessels blood tissues. are endothelial on of discuss infected the cells the adhesion the and the detail and consider chemokines cytokines in of microbes. infecting promote We continued destruction how some will macrophage-derived of helping fresh achieved of phase to recruitment This the augment molecules, immune and the liver innate both by as acute-phase complement. another the that actions produces proteins of which response—in phagocytes stimulating inducing production opsonizing and by act response—the the is other also and class type interferons, immune or the innate examine cells, defense the viruses include antiviral to and finally NK contribute action against the to We mechanism lymphoid of known intracellular pathogens. of of will interferons, which the innate growing ILCs, long at cells I look a ILCs diverse of immune to to exert response effector infection. rapid innate contribute function a that array effector innate of by various amplify sensor provided producing types response the cells, and respond cytokine by They to signals cytokines. early the immune precision. greater system mechanisms same innate that by much of the an cleared innate an response, not but effector adaptive is them many targets the response ensue uses used infection by induced with will If serve this parts focus the book. for on immunity of here a described adaptive in The therefore mechanisms primer later the as effector

families distinct receptors 3-15 into proteins. their Cytokines fall structurally and of related

to various specific binding in stimulus, that released in (about and Cytokines an receptors. that small 25 responses response body, through usually are the by are to activating proteins kDa) cells induce an affecting adjacent manner, the the that paracrine act affecting behavior of cytokine, in releases can or the cell autocrine a in Cytokines cells. manner, cytokines are to cells, in distant manner, stable act although enough an Some endocrine affecting even this

Fig. receptors families with each receptor 3.25 a belong proteins, to of Cytokine structure. distinctive the after receptor. of through cytokines Many named receptors hematopoietin the member, first erythropoietin signal receptor superfamily, its homodimeric structure. receptors, includes are and basis hematopoietin The on receptor into of subdivided sequence and the protein which families heterodimeric superfamily Examples first are in the three of these given rows. a share chain they that chain receptor; class the β α defines have ligand specificity receptors I an that other with common confers cytokine signaling often the Heterodimeric intracellular function. or receptors the γ of may chain class no have Heterodimeric include interferons interferon-like cytokine for receptors or cytokines. and II receptors common the through All pathway. signal receptors JAK-STAT cytokine the dimers and TIR as through extracellular domains signal family domains tails and through IL-1 The receptor in cytoplasmic their MyD88. have immunoglobulin chemokine receptors latter Other tumor of family, the family G-protein-coupled large and very cytokine (TNFR) receptors. of the factor the belonging necrosis superfamilies the are receptor family to receptor secreted. rather may the with and of The TNFR as cell family being associated act trimers ligands the membrane be than

to depends their circulation in on on the the their and half-life ability blood. enter by leukocytes, many interleukin (IL) called or nomenclature IL-2). by, standardized and name acting example, to by number In followed (for attempt an secreted molecules are a a for develop cytokines on, IL-1 the in still However, not of somewhat included and with faced thus immunology are this a confusing system; cytokines difficult task. students are all The their in listed receptors, together alphabetically, Appendix with cytokines are III.

the (described be grouped IL-1 family—and structure in interferons can by likewise superfamily, family, 3-7), Section families—the into hematopoietin be (Fig. Cytokines receptors and can their TNF the grouped the 3.25). and IL-1 notably IL-1β, IL-18. family IL-1α, 11 contains members, The Most this members that as cleaved inactive (removing amino-terminal to the are proproteins family an of peptide) produce produced are mature cytokine. proprotein cleaved the are this both and forms its for is rule to IL-1α, active. biologically exception which The in earlier, action are to mature caspase response discussed activation. and TLR through IL-1β the produced signaling by of As and macrophages IL-18 inflammasome 1 TIR IL-1-family domains tails their The have receptors NFκB TLRs. for earlier by cytoplasmic described and in pathway signal the functions receptor protein, second that accessory (IL1RAP), protein IL-1 concert IL-1 for transduction. in IL-1 transmembrane with receptor required The signal a the is

and differentiation erythropoietin as blood interleukins includes as is (which with growth and hematopoietin The innate red development) non-immune-system and such hormone, quite cell adaptive superfamily stimulates in immunity. cytokines well roles as of large growth factors and cytokine new this is the and member which production a superfamily, of granulocytes IL-6 GM-CSF, is marrow. monocytes in of bone the stimulates the as Many activated members of family. the cells T soluble made the cytokines are by of hematopoietin receptors for ligand tyrosine dimers receptors cytokines when The that hematopoietin the binds. kinase-associated form their are cytokine intracellular the Dimerization tyrosine receptor. initiates the from signaling with of associated domains the cytoplasmic kinases but subunits, others cytokine two different subunits. of of two Some are identical receptors composed types have important is different cytokine subunit An occur. variety signaling that combinations the receptor of feature of large

GM-CSF a (no Heterodimeric erythropoietin common factor IFN-°, growth IL-5, chain, for chain, Receptors a CXCR1–5, IL-13, and Receptors IFN-˛, CCR1–10, (TNF) Fas °chain) common chain °c Homodimeric I for or IL-9, growth and CX3CR1 IFN-˜, or ˛c factor hormone Receptors IL-3, share IL-1 CD131 with CD40, chain) IL-10 receptors Tumor receptor ˛chain). Heterodimeric CD27, (common a for IL-4, necrosis receptors Receptors (Apo1, XCR1, common receptors and CD132 °c IL-2, receptors CD95), CD30, II, common IL-15 nerve family IL-7, receptors (common share for a family receptor family receptor also chain, third subunit receptor Chemokine high-affnity TNF IL-2R˜(CD25) IL-2 ˛c a has

cytokines subfamilies and divided by further their be can characterized functional into similarities These genetic also receptors linkage. and genome, are cells. linked closely IL-4, the in IL-5, together same IL-13, instance, related For and kinds GM-CSF IL-3, their of they the are by often genes and structurally, produced are I of related bind In addition, to family the cytokine receptors. which receptors, to closely belong class they β form IL-5, a subgroup a The that receptors common GM-CSF chain. IL-3, shares and receptor. by of is of I receptors defined Another use subgroup chain the class IL-2 (γc) common γ cytokine of the the shared receptors gene the IL-2, IL-21, is is on chromosome. This by IL-9, chain by IL-7, encoded a for cytokines located IL-4, and IL-15, X and the for combined to signaling due are several that and Section immunodeficiency for inactivate 13-3). cytokines—IL-7, IL-15, the (X-linked (see severe cause lymphocyte IL-2—that inactivation of Mutations SCID) required pathways development γc normal an X-linked a is cytokine a the family. distantly receptors hematopoietin the of for of receptor similarities IFN-γ More small some member with related, family receptor to heterodimeric the receptor. so-called II for cytokine IL-10 include and receptors) interferon class known receptors and (also IFN-β, as receptors the These IFN-α hematopoietin combinations interferon all activate through different receptors with effects. JAK–STAT The STATs of and signal below the described pathway and different

The TNF of prototype, important adaptive than innate contains more TNF-α family, functions with and which in cytokines 17 is immunity. the members the other them that limits TNF transmembrane family and action. of their of are many of a cytokines, immunologically important properties gives distinct Unlike characteristic proteins, the most range in some Some, membrane circumstances. released also can however, be the from homotrimers also of consisting subunit, usually different a occur. some although as heterotrimers subunits are of membrane-bound They found but called initially can be as membrane-bound a simply (sometimes expressed membrane. TNF) is cytokine the TNF-α from trimeric released of two mediated either TNF receptors. effects of The by are TNF-α is a including receptor expressed lymphocytes. of on is TNF I (TNFR-I) by largely macrophages, and cells range whereas cells, TNFR-II expressed wide endothelial become activated. receptors family cluster above for receptors and are the have cytokines unrelated described also TNF to of The to the structurally to cytokines these produced are the induces identical of subunits. Since as receptor binding the cytokines clustering of TNF-family three trimers, in TRAF where activate see signaling uses non-canonical members receptors that described we pathway activated pathway. 7, The NFκB is the the so-called by signaling Chapter these family of to

in listed chemokine are IV, recognize. the of chemokines they with along family receptor the Appendix Members structure described have 7-transmembrane 3-2. with as Section in signal receptors These a interacting by G-proteins and

hematopoietin factors. JAK transcription STAT with family Cytokine tyrosine are receptors of of the kinases, activate associated the 3-16 family which

of (JAK) thus family cytokine with two tyrosine of god of kinases Roman kinase receptors two-headed noncovalently the and protein tandem The kinase-like Janus. hematopoietin resemble the have associated mythical are family—so Janus they because the signaling chains called domains family: Tyk2. four Jak2, are members the Jak3, Jak1, JAK There and of deficient kinase show must for each family different phenotypes, individual mice JAK members As

Chapter of Innate Responses Immunity 3: Induced The

MOVIE 3.7

Fig. JAK–STAT signal called cytokine the receptors a rapid pathway pathway. 3.26 Many using

act via receptors cytokines with First that many associated kinases are (JAKs). panel: Janus cytoplasmic specific consists chains, each associated at with receptor of least two a JAK. The in of Second then (red tyrosines and tails. the two dots) to brings specific allowing the together, to chains phosphorylate panel: activate binding receptor each the ligand JAKs and other, phosphorylate that domain an activation, cytosol The (signal proteins homodimerizes have tails. tyrosinephosphorylated an the N-terminal STAT in of transcription) receptor and the that to family activator before and domain SH2 of binds transducer STATs homodimers panel: Third binding, phosphorylated are upon STAT by JAKs. the proteins on domain reconfigure to panel: STAT. into a STAT binding Fourth SH2 is stabilized phosphorylation, residues phosphotyrosine dimer by other that the after immunity. bind a of then to the for transcription variety important adaptive where nucleus, They genes of the they activate translocate and to

a have distinct function. cytokines signaling by γc by above. Jak3 example, is used of the for For described several is SCID Mutations Jak3 cause form not that X-linked. inactivate a that of

clustering chains The phosphorylation close activity. into causing kinase a its the residue of stimulates proximity, tyrosine each or JAKs brings receptor on JAK dimerization that of signaling receptors associated their then residues. The JAKs activated phosphorylate specific on tyrosine amino transcription transducers binding transcription the of of site specific in This of found it, factors creates family (STATs) in particular by SH2 acid and activators (Fig. proteins, is domains members a other a signal surrounding known sequence and that phosphotyrosine, recognized as 3.26).

inactive and form STATs receptors. an There the in (1–4, 5b, are seven until by 6), activated 5a, in reside cytokine which cytoplasm form due most at to the homodimers, a interaction individual of homotypic termini specific proteins. Before STATs present the amino STAT between activation, domains within of the on by sequence proteins. activated various receptor specificity of the different The each domains each distinctive phosphotyrosine recognition STAT STAT determined receptor by the SH2 the is which tyrosine JAK, an STAT particular the phosphorylate activated STAT. in receptor terminus STAT residue Recruitment then a to conserved the carboxy brings the of activated can close a the to of other protein domain which a the to STAT, with a can high the each DNA of This of that phosphotyrosine binds in affinity. leads configuration SH2 forming the to rearrangement, bind STAT predominantly typically form of homodimers, Activated activating with a cytokine STAT. STATs type one STAT1 homodimers. whereas activates IL-4 STAT6 generates homodimers, example, STAT1 For IFN-γ activates and generating STAT6, can several be heterodimers receptors formed. cytokine and activate can STAT Other some STATs, that expression transcription of enters to as where and phosphorylated regulate the lymphocytes. particular of can The factor STAT growth a dimer the of subsets acts genes selected nucleus, initiate differentiation it

that on signaling by complex phosphorylation, Since the cells receptor signaling. these tyrosine one by is phosphatases terminate depends dephosphorylation of tyrosine receptors can way in variety have of A of the tyrosine JAKs, implicated cytokine been STATs. phosphatases dephosphorylation and receptors, is phosphatases which multiple by as include nonreceptor expressed and the PTPN11), cells. receptor tyrosine SHP-2 SHP-1 hematopoietic transmembrane on PTPN6 These and many the tyrosine (encoded isoforms phosphatase CD45, and Cytokine involving inhibitors be specific are cytokine negative signaling feedback by can terminated by also activation. induced that of terminate signaling The and a (SOCS) the of hormone receptors. cytokine of signaling proteins class are cytokine many that suppressor inhibitors recruit kinases ubiquitination for kinase and can the SOCS directly, or inhibit they and to that them STATs. JAKs SH2 JAK the receptor, contain phosphorylated JAK proteins direct receptor, compete domain degradation subsequent can and and the of an and signaling its receptor after had inhibit by STAT thus effect. induced has activation, the proteins SOCS are cytokine increased importance receptors, from TLRs. develop which caused infiltrate multiorgan receptors, can Their γc-containing be SOCS1-deficient seen and in mice, by signaling interferon a inflammatory activated seem of pathway degradation and which proteins STAT the be receptors Another class the of proteins, (PIAS) of promoting inhibitory involved protein in consists also inhibitors of to components.

active nucleus the to macrophages phosphorylated translocate of JAKs in 3-17 infection. initiate dendritic dimers and sites the released JAK into dimer bind STAT to effector Chemokines that activated phosphorylated turn gene are factors kinase Transcription (STATs) recruit cells form transcription and receptors, by to the by STATs Phosphorylated cells

macrophages are to immunity, in by these All cytokines and innate produced and the that both have adaptive summarized systemic immune effects local contribute and innate Fig. in important responses 3.27. as TLRs, may phagocytes The and through dendritic can in cells. different by various result receptors, involve cells variation expressed and classes cytokines dendritic some signaling stimulated of in the the by macrophages and different recognition of such pathogens phase be immune way activated, released appropriate as in host defense. This orchestrate cytokines the next the one which is of responses selectively can activation In dendritic response by and macrophages to PRRs,

Fig. chemokines products IL-1β, and include to IL-12, macrophages Important and dendritic and secreted in cytokines response by IL-6, 3.27 cells bacterial TNF-α. CXCL8, that TNF-α an helps a inflammatory contain infections. is of to local inducer response has many 3-20). also which in systemic effects, (discussed of harmful It are Section The

Mobilization chemokine the permeability, leads Induces site local of CD4 drainage vascular effects vascular cells of and Local NK is helping entry to cells lymph neutrophils endothelium Activates vascular IL-6 of of Systemic Activates T Shock endothelium Production inflammatory and range tissues Fever Chemotactic infection which the Increased effector Fever effects cells to Lymphocyte of to Increases acute-phase to recruits destruction in increased to Activates CXCL8TNF-°IL-6 differentiation IgG, a TH1 site cytokines production into involved the macrophages and Activated protein complement, of increased neutrophils, also antibody Induces cells Local tissue attract increases activation access secrete cells metabolites lymphocytes ˜uid of and nodes infection. IL-12IL-1˜Fever to Activates of factor CXCL8 response, cells T basophils, production a acute-phase TNF-α role effective in the in in fever, inducing liver IL-6, various the and host defense which favors crucial response ways. inducing IL-1β, and have favors into natural CD4 cells activates differentiation adaptive (NK) the immunity. IL-12 subset of the and TH1 killer T cells in

3.8 MOVIE

Fig. 3.28 human selected chemokines. Properties of near the two Chemokines CXC the by a but two separated acid. the related cysteine adjacent CC residues which which residues groups: have in distinct single are into mainly amino terminus; and amino cysteine chemokines, the chemokines, equivalent fall 4. one chemokines in region chromosome of clustered CC humans, for the genes mostly are In a cluster chromosome genes for on mainly Genes found chemokine 17. CXC are in receptors, on sets act chemokines groups different of two G-proteincoupled receptors. of The all which of are chemokines designated to CC receptors CCR1–10. bind bind CXC to designated receptors chemokines CXCR1–7. types, are expressed used different particular attract and a so a chemokine particular type. can cell to cell on Different be receptors a CXC In chemokines cysteine with Glu-Leu-Arg promote neutrophils. of general, before the migration motif the tripeptide immediately first an type. example CXCL8 of this is 5, chemokines, and interact Most CXC those lack receptors with other the motif. 4, this that of including CXCR3, range two has types. two and three cells that and amino in acts is to and a one surface from forms, protein, that for the acid cell cysteines, membrane Fractalkine is is the exists endothelial residues it it epithelial cell serves it the released unusual the in adhesion a between a express tethered that an it, chemoattractant respects: as where several wide as and of soluble form of more of chemokines receptors and given their IV. comprehensive list in is Appendix A

CXCL8 cytokines a IL-6, includes that as chemokine cells diverse (formerly known of IL-1β, secrete IL-12, group TNF-α, the IL-8). and

by family known as the infection a earliest cytokines tissues phases Among in of of released chemoattractant of chemokines. are the cytokines members directed proteins in movement resulting the nearby the cells, toward induce of responsive source of small in chemokine. These chemotaxis the cells the their chemokines IV. detected in assays, they initially with are Because first a variety were nomenclature were in functional which standardized of names, given Appendix along listed the related (see their Section 3-2). and in receptors acid are amino G-protein-coupled receptors are All chemokines sequence, lead signaling cell’s causes cell The the changes that in migration. in stimulated to directed changes adhesiveness pathway by cytoskeleton chemokines and those be not produced cells, of only types system. many and the Chemokines released can immune different by of the system of of and sites immune innate neutrophils, from as function infection. chemoattractants leukocytes, monocytes, blood effector immunity they In recruiting for other the mainly into cells immunity, we Chapters learn will in as lymphocytes also adaptive guide They in 9–11. development chemokines of new in also vessels). and angiogenesis growth and lymphocyte Some migration (the blood function in reflect their their function this may are cells be lymphocytes. and case There chemokines, multiplicity importance than the in locations, to to known seems correct which in striking their 50 of delivering main more cells innate that chemokines the by of human or are listed affect that immune produced Fig. Some are in their with properties. 3.28 along

into related mainly fall two Chemokines distinct but groups. CC cysteine chemokines in the cysteine terminus, amino by two corresponding acid. a CXC the separated residues near are chemokines residues amino whereas two have single adjacent CC and lymphocytes, promote migration types. cell other the The chemokines of monocytes, receptor become is CCR2B, migration to bloodstream attracts innate the example relevant through their tissue to One the immunity CCL2, monocytes which from inducing macrophages. is by contrast, promoted chemokines. neutrophil In CXC migration CXCL8, into the acting migrate them and leave through and blood neutrophils bone the to induces CXCR2, mobilizes surrounding marrow from tissues. similar complementary therefore CXCL8 immune attracting monocytes response, functions innate and in but respectively. CCL2 the and have neutrophils

in cell of role is The recruitment twofold. chemokines of sites triggering First, rolling by molecules endothelial conformation of into as leukocyte adhesion binding as a the on in at the integrins. rolls converting leukocyte inflammation, cells this stable change known along they it act cells, on strongly the bind changes the blood squeezing their by ligands to between conformational cross enable cells. endothelial to vessel allows the leukocyte the which integrins These walls to endothelial Second, of extracellular gradient of directs the matrix cells. of molecules along bound to migration leukocyte the chemokine endothelial chemokine the the the and a surfaces gradient toward in site increases This concentration of infection. the

occur viruses, gout. crystals or are in as that by bacterial in physical response variety such a damage, cell agents Chemokines produced wide urate to silica, and types alum, of cause products, the that fMLF chemoattractants act peptides, also neutrophils. and bacterial for as C5a, and Complement such as fragments C3a chemokine the direct needed. to they Thus, or sites to of induces where gradients tissues are infection phagocytes can physical that the damage production at arrive Neutrophils numbers of rapidly in infection. large a site simultaneously, of accumulate recruitment less of The are site circulation. monocytes the at but more the slowly infection, perhaps abundant occurs because they they in the not sites are the and that only target CCL2 so with to there. cells, the of fragment their infection and chemokines complement C5a encounter but, process, are activate armed respective CXCL8 neutrophils The pathogens and brought they they to deal potential monocytes in the C5a antimicrobial neutrophils contents and to radicals (see the signaling to induce CXCL8 release burst oxide augment the to granule by respiratory 3-2). or Section nitric and in that oxygen stored generates serves induced particular, neutrophils In their

act cell alone recruitment. do not Chemokines in that the to molecules leukocytes the such action TNF-α require blood cytokines and on Section induce They vessel wall vasoactive mediators as endothelial necessary close adhesion of (see bring to the 3-3) cells. chapters, where of the We in are response. return in discussed the context the to adaptive will they immune later chemokines the by to the we describe enter monocytes step extravasation to the which neutrophils step however, that we to process by turn enable Now, adhere sites. endothelium, then and infected leukocytes and shall molecules

response.

sites is of infection recruitment activated of innate most functions of phagocytes one important The the of immunity. to induced response cell-adhesion molecules inflammatory part endothelial blood is by as the of cells Recruitment vessels. local of occurs the on are and mediated that of the surface we Here

MOVIE 3.9

that Innate the of Immunity Induced Chapter recruitment The functions participate inflammatory 3: those Responses in consider of

after of days establishment an to infection. hours in the the MOVIE cells 3.10

to complement significant the of As their barrier a the components, molecules functions understanding is nomenclature. cell-adhesion with to adhesion on of originally analyze easy leukocytes, antibodies were them. are specific monoclonal the relatively those functionally, directed named especially Most which molecules, effects against after their no relation Their to structural therefore bear class. names For actually members leukocyte two are LFA-3 the different LFA-2, protein instance, families. LFA-1, antigens of functional and Fig. In according and alongside grouped which structure, their sites form 3.29, immunity innate shown expression, adhesion names, the molecular schematic relevant to of ligands. in to their molecules are is different families of are structural for Three molecules recruitment. important adhesion leukocyte a are lectin-like membrane binds glycoproteins The with that groups. distal selectins domain carbohydrate specific and endothelium family Fig. oligosaccharide activated binding on (see initiate to this passing on are endothelium–leukocyte of fucosylated interactions induced by leukocytes Members ligands 3.29).

the is depends the tighter heterodimeric on to to intercellular adhesion step due integrin leukocytes. adhesion, the of of proteins leukocyte (ICAMs) on molecules recruitment family which next on in binding The endothelium contain proteins, are immunoglobulin-like large proteins immunoglobulins. to to belong single-pass membrane ICAMs of similar those superfamily protein of the that domains which regions composed The extracellular immunoglobulin-like of of domains. ICAMs are several integrin molecule is An composed

Fig. involved Adhesion in leukocyte interactions. molecules 3.29 migration, homing, integrins, and leukocyte the the role cell–cell families have immunoglobulin interactions: adhesion selectins, of superfamily. in the of a proteins molecules structural and Several their example shows from interactions. The schematic members leukocyte family, and cellular each their an in adhesive interactions, figure that participate ligand a in list other of family representations of distribution, family are immune other inflammation innate members mechanisms. shown The in those participate and here that to limited 11. and Chapters will participate and in considered molecules others The same in adaptive immunity 9 be and in structural these the The identified the different of molecules their in confusing which is were rather related it often characteristics. way reflects first the than molecules nomenclature families because Alternative given in are names of parentheses. the for molecules adhesion each Sulfated recognized is E-selectin, present is oligosaccharide the circulating sialyl-LewisX, an cell-surface which on glycoproteins of Pand leukocytes. by

Bind extracellular matrix. cell-adhesion ˜°LFA-1 Integrins to molecules and Mac-1, CD49d:CD29) cells β, Fibronectin NK NK ˜L:°2 ICAM-1, protein (CR4, dendritic adhesion monocytes, macrophages, cells p150.95, of Dendritic there numerous different cells, and transmembrane chains, ˜M:°2 CD11c:CD18) cells are iC3b (VLA-5, ICAM-1, CD11a:CD18) Monocytes, ÿbrinogen T macrophages, ˜X:°2 NK CD11b:CD18) Monocytes, α cells, cells, which of Neutrophils, iC3b, ICAM-2 Strong two macrophages neutrophils, ˜5:°1 types. macrophages, (LFA-1, (CR3, neutrophils, a β integrins different with chain chains. of partnered Subsets α common have complement important as known 3, LFA-1 CR3 are also also Mac-1). known as or receptor CD11b:CD18 for leukocyte type and extravasation (αL:β2, integrins CD11a:CD18) The (αM:β2, iC3b, receptor in CR3 also as a ligands. We Section binds described for but other 2-13 it to CR3 LFA-1 (Fig. and to ICAM-1 ICAM-2 bind and Both 3.30). resident of blood macrophages. in and certain are as absence the where continuously circulating become the such intestine, infection, they Even tissues, leaving monocytes the entering low To endothelium. expressed to they at the levels vessel, by of out ICAM-2, blood is which unactivated adhere navigate may fibrinogen X, factor binds of coagulation substrates the and both CR3 to cascade. also

occurs conformational endothelium on inflamed adhesion Strong by on CR3 together promoted the induction between with and that the in leukocyte. LFA-1 endothelial of a is and ICAM-1 change leukocytes cells can switch easily broken. in state, an which strongly ligands, in Integrins bind their binding ‘active’ ‘inactive’ an between and to state, is they which by and cell integrin break cells other the in make receptors. integrin-mediated to response either This enables to received signals through or adhesions through itself the talin molecule linked activated protein to cytoskeleton. the is via an state, intracellular integrin In the the actin In of CD3, that regions talin LFA-1 an the of binding to binding the receptors intracellular case forcing to the assume to integrin conformation. to β migrating generate cause active signals extracellular on the bind their leukocytes, cytoplasmic tails chains chemokines and the leukocyte of for or inflammatory leukocyte which integrins function in in of by modulating is the be by adhesion illustrated caused recruitment defects required in deficiencies, themselves leukocyte can The adhesion. importance proteins the integrin cell diseases with healing recurrent People these bacterial wounds. infections and from impaired of suffer

the externalization driven granules bodies endothelial which particularly activation called cytokines, by rapid is Endothelial of TNF-α, Weibel–Palade cells. macrophage-produced in the induce TNF-α. contain the of responded producing to have appears on by just These cells which granules the local P-selectin, endothelial after macrophages of minutes microbes surfaces preformed presence 2 and the surface, cell cells expressing to gets mRNA E-selectin. the encoding after Shortly within mainly synthesized, P-selectin hours E-selectin are endothelial is that form also sulfated sialyl-LewisX, and with antigen. a P-selectin a of interact group blood is Both structure sulfated E-selectin important carbohydrate an present P-selectin its are on on important the neutrophil interactions and of rolling surface with neutrophils, sialyl-LewisX Sulfated endothelium. for the is and E-selectin an in immunodeficiency, deficiency 2. such Mutations synthesis, results expression fucosyltransferase, that in as leukocyte defective in involved adhesion enzymes type sialyl-LewisX cause its

cell-surface cell markers different for convenient distinguishing are types. Integrins also display β2 surface. Dendritic integrins on distinct express macrophages, monocytes different integrin α their and thus and chains cells, or conventional integrin predominant (CR4) dendritic complement is Fig. αX:β2, CD11c:CD18 on receptor 4 also leukocyte as (see cells The known 3.29). C3 ICAM-1. iC3b, integrin receptor for This complement a fibrinogen, cleavage and product the is macrophages αM:β2 and of predominantly CD11c, express low integrin (CD11b:CD18; CR3). cells, the In dendritic conventional monocytes express and contrast levels most to high tissue However, of those levels expressing as with macrophages, can integrin some CD11c:CD18. expression in the vary, patterns of lung, such branch dendritic the can cells of one CD11b:CD18, CD11b:CD18: characterized be high of two conventional by mouse, distinguished of branches In major expression expression the by

Fig. adhesion by vascular endothelium integrins. mediated to Phagocyte 3.30 is activated inflammatory two expresses When and by it mediators is ICAM-2. vascular adhesion endothelium ICAM-1 namely molecules, are (also CD11b:CD18) or ligands LFA-1 (also phagocytes— called called CR3, αM:β2 Mac-1, These integrins by or αL:β2 and for CD11a:CD18) expressed

3.11 MOVIE

MOVIE 3.12

lacks second that a CD11b:CD18. MOVIE and branch 3.13 of pDCs C-type conventional (pDCs) BDCA-2 which but (blood of Plasmacytoid express stromal (bone by levels expressed dendritic other be dendritic 2), cells. antigen CD11c, marrow lower express and dendritic cells conventional markers; antigen), using the is pDCs from human BST2 lectin cells dendritic neither can distinguished express mouse cell

vessel first tissue. that the enter Neutrophils blood wave make of 3-19 the cross an up to wall inflamed cells

blood at out signals infection. vessels, process response to of occurs in of migration known leukocytes generated The of the sites extravasation, as normal vessels, center leukocytes flow fastest. small of where Under in the blood blood is conditions, travel and inflammation, with sites to numbers blood large the of endothelium. Within in the dilated interact the vessels slower leukocytes allows are consequent flow vascular the the tissue, on leukocytes induction adhesion as changes of cells the circulating well During expressed response, the numbers to molecules site inflammatory as molecules large on of leukocytes, in of an blood of recruits within vessels infection. adhesion endothelial infected induced the this will to describe monocytes neutrophils with regard We process (Fig. and 3.31).

stages. in four Extravasation proceeds rolling leukocyte selectins along first, In induction the induces of the endothelium. or a within to which B4, from of cell exposure surfaces P-selectin few in appears to histamine, endothelial cells on C5a. mast response released is minutes leukotriene C5a, the surface hours few these LPS, on can P-selectin endothelial by later. induce also cell TNF-α or synthesis a which and appears of E-selectin, both be of induced these adhere When vessel monocytes contacts to begin on and exposed sialyl-LewisX (see these endothelium E-selectins, Fig. reversibly P-and and sulfated wall cells along the the ‘roll’ neutrophils to panel), top interactions stronger leukocyte migration. next of step the permitting 3.31, in prevent along are rates rolling at that flow particularly endothelium even rolling under efficient other by cells. Neutrophils tether promote around rapid the termed of uses sites Such as membrane, wrap that endothelium cell to endothelium to and cell firmly by ‘shear-resistant and of serving infection. it entry the the bind the to slings, long neutrophils rolling’ extensions plasma rolls, to

leukocyte LFA-1 step ICAM-2 second can on with depends be adhesion ICAM-1 CR3 interactions on between (which endothelium such the molecules The (see Fig. induced as on TNF-α) and by integrins and endothelial cells bottom 3.31, panel). endothelial on surface normally the other and bound Section this proteoglycans leukocyte; to on change on bind leukocyte chemokines), trigger CR3 and in as LFA-1 rolling chemokine increases conformational cells, binds leukocyte, properties a adhesive weakly, the CR3 but the signals (or discussed in ligands to the of to LFA-1 their 3-18. the only the of and receptors greatly CXCL8 cell specific firmly cell attaches its the then rolling to arrested. and is endothelium, The

the wall. crosses endothelial the extravasates, leukocyte the or third step In on intercellular and interaction CR3, This molecule and junctions CD31, the as an or a PECAM leukocyte called adhesive the step involves immunoglobulin-related further of cells. well which also LFA-1 endothelial at involving is both expressed as the interactions enable to squeeze the These between endothelial phagocyte cells. then of the down break the basement of the membrane. the It aid extracellular matrix that penetrates with membrane enzymes basement proteins enables to the enter it The is and tissues. subendothelial known as phagocytes movement membrane through the diapedesis, basement

of fourth final under The through extravasation in influence the tissues the migration chemokines. is and step leukocytes of the such as Chemokines

surface and weak, Selectin-mediated along endothelial roll to adhesion leukocytes the allows is sialyl-Lewisx leukocyte to vascular

infection surfaces. site in produced Section and on are extracellular the matrix (see and proteoglycans 3-17) of cell bind and CXCL8 endothelial CCL2 at to the In Fig. a infection (see the concentration on of this solid leukocyte which way, to gradient is migrate matrix-associated focus along of chemokines the a formed can surface 3.31). that the early infected pathogens; macrophages CXCL8 the the large in the response. it in neutrophils, encounter enter induced released part of first tissue numbers recruits which is by Their of the within inflammatory an influx response. usually 6 hours peaks first and than slowly more action the through are Monocytes recruited CCL2, neutrophils. of accumulate phagocytosis. inflamed many in the by eliminate Once able pathogens neutrophils are to tissue, 3-1) opsonization Section with discussed this chapter receptors neutrophils complement recognize or an complement In and immune response, (see the (see pathogens their use receptors earlier 2-13). components Section in innate directly direct to after or phagocytose and pattern recognition pathogen we microbes as will immunity, neutrophils of means up adaptive as phagocytic in Chapter taking antibody-coated specific receptors. see effectors 10, In addition, act in by humoral

that The neutrophils treatments severely of neutrophil in or reduce by immune diseases medical importance numbers. dramatically illustrated is defense affliction commensal said to highly and range this pathogens organisms. have and they Patients neutropenia, of infection are deadly a susceptible to wide with suffering are levels such neutrophil Restoring patients in by transfusion

to innate responses Induced infection. 117

Fig. infection cytokines adhesive a and sites by involving blood and that 3.31 chemokines. are the in migrate regulated macrophage-derived multi-step leave of process Neutrophils interactions to ligands shown the for involves the through panel: a neutrophil, and vascular endothelium neutrophil on to and the first their E-selectin between selectins reversible induced moiety interactions the endothelium its step the here of carbohydrate on ligand, binding (s-Lex). Top sialyl-LewisX shearing force contact. anchor the This of cannot continually endothelium, flow thus of interaction they blood, the the making the along and roll breaking cells and against trigger eventually to receptor LFA-1 does, integrins neutrophil when of and as the of interactions, its Bottom a chemokine however, only (Mac-1; the shown). triggers the stronger panel: result CXCL8 activation which such binding on CR3 not the specific binding to such on endothelium. also as the ICAM-2, the such induce of ligands are Inflammatory integrins, the for necessary molecules these as adhesion cytokines expression TNF-α ICAM-1 vascular and (i.e., to and ICAM-1 the wall to rolling neutrophil binding the the the extravasate). integrins the and cells squeeze between the between of arrests endothelial forming allows vessel blood Tight are CR3 leukocyte The toward LFA-1 extravasation for for required chemoattractants. migration and integrins and to thought the between Adhesion to also cells, the is the contribute junction CD31, neutrophil and endothelial molecules on of extravasation. of both expressed neutrophil the cell of also the matrix it penetrates basement membrane; a MMP-9, this aid traverse that metalloproteinase the enzyme, to at needs expresses The surface. with it secreted as site (shown gradient a of migrates infection. concentration CXCL8) by at along the Finally, the of chemokines cells neutrophil here shows cells. endothelial a micrograph between electron neutrophil The extravasating the endothelial arrow the the cells. indicates blue is The that neutrophil inserting pseudopod between and Spragg. Photograph (×5500) Bird J. courtesy of I.

stimulating susceptibility. corrects specific blood neutrophil-rich of this fractions their factors largely production growth with by or

shock of important infection when containment is that cytokine an 3-20 released TNF-α triggers induces but systemically. local

of neutrophils. and extravasation aids monocytes TNF-α endothelial and adhesion the such expression stimulates cells as molecules on the acting cells of of blood local clotting off to and them Another endothelial small that cells the flow. important stimulate TNF-αis proteins trigger in occluding cutting blood express to vessels, action from spreading through all pathogen to preventing the be the entering bloodstream organs This the blood in over body. important and can the importance locally of in a bacterium. infected the local is infection The experiments rabbits by were which containment with illustrated TNF-α of in site of would injection via block was infection if, to action blood the to the TNF-α, be antibody anti-TNF-α inoculation; organs. Normally, contained also at of given an spread the infection the however, of the other the enclosed the be to initiated. the early fluid phases can cells, nodes, the adaptive that lymph carries has in via response infection leaked where into dendritic pathogen, parallel, immune usually regional in tissue the lymph an the of the an In

by infection catastrophic an same effectively TNF-α mechanisms however, instead to the (Fig. has the becomes so infection bloodstream, Once which spread contains local 3.32). the cytokine. from and by produced released membrane-associated ADAM17 a cleaved is specific membrane encoded can Although soluble as by as gene), a (TNF-α-converting TACE the which enzyme, protease, cytokine, be TNF-α a other the accompanied of presence of is release from sepsis, TNF-α in spleen, the massive soluble in the The liver, and or body. macrophages sites throughout infection by bloodstream, a leads cause which is a case pressure loss the volume of vasodilation, plasma release leads TNF-α infection. this and vascular permeability; systemic to in bacterial a as loss this underlying known causes because the into a turn and The increased blood in septic to of of eventually to shock, bloodstream shock vessels clotting massive throughout septic the released also proteins, to that small clotting blood so in in of patient’s cannot clot blood appropriately. as intravascular body—known TNF-α coagulation—which triggers The shock consumption leads disseminated the the rate. are which high the lungs, the septic and of failure of failure as shock organs by a mortality leads kidneys, normal perfusion; heart, frequently vital consequently, the quickly to liver, compromised Disseminated coagulation such has very blood intravascular

receptors Mice resistant to control no or infection. shock septic also local defective unable are are with but TNF-α to circulation the also to main resistant which been that shock. myeloid gene soluble are release TNF-αinto depends ADAM17 Mice inactivated cells in responsible of both TACE confirming on selectively has in the and the septic septic factor shock, is for the Blockade the including rheumatoid activity, soluble arthritis. a with disorders, specific is either inflammatory that proteins successful for TNF-α receptor, mimic antibodies treatment or with several of patients found been TNF-α evidence well direct apparently reactivate and keeping a in of skin However, is the which by of to tuberculosis importance demonstrated these previous demonstration test), in (as in treatments infection with have of local some check. infection

systemic acute-phase macrophages as known 3-21 a and induce made by dendritic response. the Cytokines cells reaction

important host well macrophages local defense. their that as by long-range effects, effects dendritic As the produced and cytokines contribute have cells to is which body temperature, caused of is elevation of One these the

infection with infection (sepsis) Gram-negative Gram-negative Systemic bacteria with bacteria Local

liver secrete the Macrophages to secrete TNF-˜ spleen activated tissue activated the in in and bloodstream into TNF-˜ the Macrophages

Systemic Increased decreased blood proteins release into edema causing tissue. of plasma and hypoproteinemia, lymphocyte volume, and tissue. Increased into phagocyte migration neutropenia, by followed Increased neutrophilia. collapse vessels to volume vessel wall platelet causes Decreased of adhesion blood blood

of bacteria. Phagocytosis vessel coagulation occlusion. Local Disseminated intravascular and to multiple failure drain organ node lymph cells leading local to Plasma and wasting

TNF-α, and by immunity IL-1β, DeathAdaptive mainly infection Removal IL-6. of and and is LPS, endogenous fever rather also cytokines termed induces such an an pyrogen. as which pyrogens source endogenous because they components These bacterial than exogenous from derive cause fever from are the fever the by cytokines. of enzyme prostaglandin these which inducing cyclooxygenase-2, is of expression pyrogens synthesis by Endogenous induced E2 the by cause in retention from the the heat acts and an excess on then Prostaglandin hypothalamus, increase from the heat E2 fat both loss in which catabolism the of vasoconstriction, of decreases production resulting through heat brown skin. Exogenous production fever endogenous by of promoting the able pyrogens pyrogens to are the induce

innate Induced responses to infection. 119

Fig. by be of release TNF-α induces 3.32 protective The can damaging local when TNF-α released systemically. but macrophages effects, show of consequences left panels on consequences release. panels the the and of the on release The and and the TNF-α, causes local of right the causes systemic show to vascular to leukocytes both and increase flow vessels, cells, for acts platelets (center In fluid, proteins, cases and row). blood endothelial increase blood TNF-α and adhesiveness on especially permeability venules, to and in cells, allows participate Local an the influx fluid, thus into infected and of release where they host defense. proteins tissue, panel), to the drain via left nodes, and initiated. blood spread regional preventing clots small adaptive response and an form cells the the blood, Later, is where (bottom vessels infection immune lymph accumulated of in fluid acts all is elicit with the there macrophages on small a and systemic the into released the or When way body liver TNF-α sepsis, in production, panel). is bacteria (bottom in vessels by in right similar spleen that infection, blood and a blood TNF-α coagulation failure, disseminated depletion factors, and death. and organ bleeding, intravascular clotting The multiple frequently shock, with is result consequent of

Fig. that spectrum coordinate infection. activities to cytokines TNF-α, The 3.33 IL-6 the and of IL-1β, body’s to biological help wide have a responses and hepatocytes IL-6, activate bone neutrophils. and to marrow synthesize to endothelium TNF-α release acute-phase proteins, IL-1β, from enhanced as bone proteins is act of the neutrophils of the opsonized opsonins, recruitment disposal the acute-phase The by marrow. whereas augmented pathogens in eliminating endogenous is also to IL-1β, infections. body believed raising are which and TNF-α help IL-6, temperature, pyrogens, the altering fat the and on to cells, major to energy and body A on body’s of hypothalamus, increase temperature effect muscle the these mobilization act cytokines temperature. regulation, altering is efficient, adaptive efficiently. bacterial more and response is At operates viral temperatures, the whereas replication higher less immune

TLR-4, as and to prostaglandin of directly E2. inducing by production of the cyclooxygenase-2 through consequence also signaling a leading responses better Fever whereas temperatures. elevated to is temperatures, intense at generally immune most beneficial pathogens host defense; at grow adaptive more are lower protected effects cells at are from deleterious temperatures. of the TNF-α Host raised also

summarized IL-6 TNF-α, Fig. effects The and in are IL-1β, of 3.33. the the of these of occurs in a initiation as known and liver acute-phase One the response response most is the of important (Fig. 3.34). blood. The changing cytokines the and they into proteins on act respond profile that by which secrete hepatocytes, synthesize the of blood whereas down, others levels of In markedly. go some the proteins of response, levels increase acute-phase The induced acute-phase IL-1β, and by IL-6 proteins. are the proteins called TNF-α, and production. pathogen-associated for because unlike are have on their they interest Several patterns cytokines for action antibodies, particular molecular of specificity presence the of antibodies the broad of but depend only these they mimic of

subunits. C-reactive family, are One so the is protein called of acute-phase identical the five a from proteins formed because member protein, pentraxin the protein, molecule, lipopolysaccharides. certain example of and pathogen-recognition fungal of C-reactive protein bacterial a the cell-wall multipronged is and binds to portion it yet another phosphocholine but cell-membrane also cannot C-reactive mammalian is Phosphocholine by phospholipids, protein. it be found in bound the opsonize (see component not by a bacterium it also of complement only C-reactive activation Section but is can first to the to cascade pathway complement When protein to activate the 2-7). binds bacterium, able of the classical C1q, binding than of of involves with rather pathogen globular reactions is but C1q surfaces, the the interaction cascade that C1q with same initiated. The parts the collagen-like heads contact make

the serves innate an complement Mannose-binding (MBL) it (see is molecule of pathway lectin protein; that 2-6). activate Section lectin recognition another can acute-phase as increased during at blood the but of amounts MBL is low is levels in it in response. the individuals, produced acute-phase present healthy macrophage MBL on recognizing do express is can mannose by mannose residues receptor. monocytes, that the as recognized an By opsonin act surfaces, microbial which not produced response proteins, and in SP-D. Two with are are the increased during acute-phase opsonizing SP-A also surfactant that properties proteins an amounts other epithelia. the variety a liver and These produced by of are macrophages they They lung, for secreted by of are, where in the example, along found alveolar fluid are with the

migration mobilization viral Acute-phase protein, Dendritic proteins immune lymph Increased and to endothelium temperature lectin) increased maturation antigen complement Neutrophil body Protein mobilization Increased Initiation and Bone Opsonization speciÿc to Phagocytosis immune muscle and mannose-binding TNF-˜stimulates Increased Fat, Decreased body response Hypothalamus Liver allow response energy adaptive bacterial marrow cells Activation nodes IL-1˜/IL-6/TNF-° replication of of (C-reactive processing temperature

Fig. The but pathogens that molecules bind acute-phase host not produces cells. 3.34 response are response panel). Acute-phase macrophages produced by presence cells liver cytokines in of released in the proteins by (top bacteria to protein but and not C-reactive fibrinogen, include (MBL). (SAP) protein humans), (CRP), (in mannose-binding amyloid mice serum They lectin CRP certain does bacterial phosphocholine the host cell in (middle panel). which in binds it surfaces membranes fungal found recognize form and it in is on not but structure; discs, pentraxins, (lower five-membered SAP as both homologous and shown CRP panel). SAP are are in forming for and pathway by the in classical to SAP own augment C1q its activates right as complement both acts opsonization. an opsonin binding as structure an SP-A can SP-D. in a SP-D. Like J. the Model and collectin MBL of and can member which own Emsley. right, pulmonary CRP, courtesy is its the proteins act includes also of opsonin MBL surfactant SP-A family, as

important as the respiratory opportunistic and promoting as of such Pneumocystis known pneumocytes, pathogens are phagocytosis in jirovecii (formerly

with carinii), of main P. in patients causes the one of pneumonia AIDS.

with response the able antibodies proteins with to broad the pathogens. provides Thus, bind the day two, but functional host several or of within properties a acute-phase range a of to 10, response no release Chapters structural triggers are and acute-phase IL-1, made antibodies, we TNF-α, in describe unlike of the in that and stimulus which 4 However, IL-6. and diversity have proteins any and unlike is specifically induced synthesis antibodies, their not Therefore, targeted.

final, effect produced A to of of is the distant in by macrophages the numbers increase induce neutrophils. an cytokines circulating leukocytosis, bone are numbers; neutrophils they come vessels, released in blood loosely and from endothelial sources: to sites where cells. leukocytes are from two mature which attached in increased the The marrow, adaptive response control while Thus the infection of developed. contribute cytokines immune is to being of these effects the the in Fig. As shown peripheral also nodes and cells into nonphagocytic to dendritic TNF-α cells. their a sites antigen-presenting lymph in of highly but role stimulating their the from co-stimulatory the has in tissues migration maturation 3.33, in

by 3-22 contributions make several Interferons viral defense. induced infection to host

Viral production named of interferons, infection cells. their ability of culture originally interfere induces replication viral uninfected to because in the with previously tissue Interferons vivo, uninfected spread have role the a to cells. blocking of similar viruses in type There are encoding genes I, antiviral, interferons. numerous or Best a studied of related family single genes IFN-β, are the well the IFN-α product human of IFN-ω. understood closely are less gene; IFN-κ, IFN-ε, 12 and and interferon. sole the II type IFN-γ is

also subunit composed unique IL-28A, IL-28B, as β are III IL-10 of receptor. classified IFN IFN-λ of a IL-29, the receptor composed newly and subunit and the three which genes, heterodimeric a Type of interferons bind of the IL-28Rα products IFN-λ known a family or are their restricted, expressed fibroblasts not in receptors While III by I type and for on expressed cells, interferons epithelial widespread cells. are but epithelial tissue receptors more distribution, IFN-γ type

infection I and types by interferons diverse Type many inducible by are viruses. are synthesized cell after several all in and IFN-β to innate of sensors. cells produce can of IFN-α response types Almost activation (the are by STING from by For I of DNA) of viral downstream downstream 3-11). (the and signaling 3-10 type induced and of of RNA) cytoplasmic sensors sensor (see MDA-5 and interferons example, MAVS, cytoplasmic cGAS RIG-I Sections

acting activating complement an and surfaces, on opsonin, protein also amyloid C-reactive binds Serum phosphocholine bacterial as protein

virus cells IFN-˜, IFN-°Virus-infected host

Fig. by in 3.35 antiviral are viral produced cells infection. Interferons to response proteins and three functions. interferons IFN-α have IFN-β The major genes some induce host uninfected First, and proteins mRNA cells viral translation the activating resistance the of to destruction that in of and viral proteins. cause replication by inhibit they These IFIT proteins. Mx synthetase, the PKR, proteins, and include oligoadenylate newly cells; them enhancing they Chapter they may types resistance NK in thus I MHC also molecules I class to 9). (see their in by cells class being susceptible that virus, are of CD8 thus to making MHC T the induce most increased Second, cells killed more induce cytotoxic can expression infected body, by cell synthesis in which cells, kill activate Third, NK they then cells. virus-infected selectively

this for cells immune specialized be However, task. some to seem Section we (pDC). the introduced dendritic cell In plasmacytoid 3-1 initially Also cells tissues (IPCs) cells 1000 more peripheral and abundant dendritic than accumulate human to called type lymphoid during and infection times as rare cell natural recognized or interferon-producing cells (IFN-α interferons IFN-β)—up blood cells, interferon-producing that viral I were other types. peripheral plasmacytoid make in a (see I This production of viral production the the from efficient interferon of 3-7). by recognition TLRs interferon of coupling result type pathways Section may to abundant a and viruses CpG subset includes of (see residues which of the DNA of are TLR-9, the present dendritic TLR-7 cells genomes express TLRs Fig. in many nonmethylated of that viral Plasmacytoid and endosomal sensors RNA 3.11). cells simplex example, The has been to infections generate for TLR-9 to sensing in by of viruses virus. interferons by DNA the type dendritic TLR-9-deficient requirement I herpes caused in demonstrated, inability plasmacytoid for response cells and express Plasmacytoid CXCL11, CXCL9, dendritic a by produced CXCR3, which T are CXCL10, cells. for receptor chemokines the pDCs blood This to an allows response is migrate into from there the a in pathogen. to which lymph nodes ongoing inflammatory

(Fig. several ways against defend viral in infection help Interferons 3.35). make important induces interferon the is thus amplifying IFN-β particularly because IFN-α, it response. cells to viral cells. a Interferons replication to resistance in induce act of to all state the receptor IFN-β cell-surface interferon-α uses receptor, STAT pathways in described as Section IFN-α and a the (IFNAR), common known JAK which and bind 3-16. to STAT2, (ISGs). many and promoters STAT1 called ISGF3 kinases a of interferon activate Jak1 the Tyk2 complex to which the form with binds IRF9 can and genes that stimulated factors to IFNAR uses interact the and

enzyme linked oligomers in into polymerizes ISG synthetase, 3ʹ–5ʹ). oligoadenylate encodes acids ATP One the which 2ʹ–5ʹ-linked nucleic normally nucleotides (whereas are viral endoribonuclease RNA. activate then an These that degrades oligomers 2ʹ–5ʹ-linked called a IFN-βis induced protein PKR. by dsRNA-dependent and A protein kinase IFN-α second 2 thus to initiation (eIF2α), kinase the viral suppressing translation factor subunit This of and protein serine–threonine α inhibition of the phosphorylates eukaryotic replication. contributing I also induced are resistant) Mx (myxoma type by interferons. proteins is which replication the dynamin GTPases and understood. belonging have interfere proteins, to family, Mx1 not similar they mice are how viral Humans wild but two with protein Mx2, highly and IFN-β in mice, laboratory mice Oddly, have inactivated protect act to strains these infection. and cannot Mx genes, both influenza against most of common

In and to several been linked functions. last antiviral few identified the years, have novel ISGs family The four IFIT the contains of translation and tetratricoid restraining in three (IFN-induced repeats) into human protein with RNA proteins. that viral proteins function mouse prevents 43S and (eIF3) factor IFIT2 normal which by (Fig. eIF3 can mRNAs eIF2 the 3 suppress capped complex, of initiation of both translation to the pre-initiation to form with the binding subunits IFIT1 complex eukaryotic from interacting 3.36). induced by in This be in action responsible part proliferation may for the type interferons. I reduction cellular or certain as such infection virus. by susceptibility increased viruses, lacking Mice vesicular IFIT1 IFIT2 stomatitis to show

is that of a Another translation of 5ʹ modification lacks to RNA viral IFIT1 host normal of the cap. suppress function is that to cap-0. a mRNA structure the of nucleotide the triphosphate produce Recall sugar 5ʹ–5ʹ ribose by the called to a initiated mammalian by first bridge, cap linking 5ʹ a normal 7-methylguanosine 2ʹ RNA. is and further methylation the structure the first modified by This on groups the sugars of ribose cytoplasmic second of hydroxyl the the structure cap-2. called of first sugar of produces generates Methylation ribose cap-1; second methylation a but IFIT1 for affinity cap-2. a cap-0, high cap-1 has affinity for much lower and 2ʹ-O-methylation, by lack (family virus restricted Sindbis IFIT1. therefore are such as action Togaviridae), of and viruses, Some this transcripts. their produce West on viral or as such and coronavirus, Many (MTase) 2ʹe-O-methyltransferase cap-1 virus Nile SARS that viruses, have a acquired cap-2 can thus IFIT1. restriction viruses by These evade

interferon-induced types transmembrane of expressed level many strongly on induced of basal are type I the protein a family by Members interferons. are (IFITM) at tissues but of two the domains are humans vesicular and in various are to have in these There IFITM encode compartments functional localized transmembrane and that proteins and cell. four mice, genes early steps to viruses inhibit, act or restrict, proteins of IFITM at infection. membrane is details with fusion unclear, of required some introducing lysosome, are the the appears with which IFITM1 viral into membranes genomes Although the of interfere cytoplasm. for the molecular viral the to that restricted such this Viruses fusion must by in IFITM1. undergo are virus, the lysosomes, as Ebola event membrane influenza which virus, IFITM3 restricts and undergoes fusion so in A the late interferes with fusion endosomes, Similarly, there. of is demonstrated viral A the IFITM3 increased with lacking that importance The and are the by in higher infected influenza mortality virus. load this mice mechanism

to infection. recruit stimulate of production of lymphocytes CXCL11, and CXCL9, Interferons the which also sites CXCL10, chemokines molecules molecules Fig. I via I display cells MHC types T expression complexed recognition cells, MHC increase virally by which also of on the of infected surface on viral all of facilitates class the peptides of infected cytotoxic cell They lymphocytes to (see the class 1.30). Through help the promote these CD8 virus-infected interferons effects, cells of cells. indirectly by cytotoxic T killing NK to act virus-infected immune below. kill innate way activate interferons that of described such cells, as cells, which Another populations as can cells, is in

cells early provide innate types 3-23 lymphoid in infection. of Several protection

the gene diverse provide B Section defining lymphocytes specificities and of A feature expression T (see receptors, immunity by the clonal is extraordinarily that 1-11). of antigen rearrangements, somatic of produced adaptive several but which antigen decades, recognized characteristics However, immunologists for receptors. that cells have have lymphoid specific lack been the the distinct in years have killer been identified. cells have past of Natural but longest, known groups such cells (NK) other several (ILCs) Collectively, include are NK called these (Fig. and innate lymphoid cells cells now 3.37). same marrow cells. the from that develop ILCs in gives B progenitor common T to rise lymphocyte bone the (CLP) and transcription and CLP all factor (inhibitor Id2 development binding fates, for required Band is of 2) the the of T-cell represses of ILCs. in the DNA Expression antigen co-receptor B-cell are identified Tand but for receptor absence and express complexes, ILCs the the they receptor of IL-7. by migrate marrow and notably the lymphoid and liver, and intestine, peripheral small bone organs, populate tissues dermis, lung. They from the

effector amplify the delivered ILCs immunity by in signals innate as that cells recognition. innate function produced such They are have damage. of as by other activated cytokines sensors cellular that microbial by been infection macrophages dendritic or or cells, innate stimulated innate by cells, the ILCs the major are produces. defined, basis cytokines of types of Three largely on of each subgroups that cells certain generate response macrophages, protection in particular by against Group by by (ILC1s) they dendritic ILCs activation and in pathogens. made cytokines, to IL-18, viruses 1 and in intracellular and IL-12 or IFN-γ infection function to now a cells of ILC. type be NK considered are distinct but NK related, development. and and properties are for in their functional factors closely have differ ILC1s cells required the cells Section NK in more TH1 CD4 cells while function, (see more closely 3-24). are of similar cells subset resemble the ILC1s CD8 T to T cells recently from NK ways. in be identified several can cells ILC1 distinguished NK within be tissues, found while but to cells. through ILC1 appear they cells also circulate non-circulating cells the largely tissue-resident be blood, can while in surface mouse, the for the In lack express (CD49b), express example cells, liver, α2 NK the ILC1 integrin the but CD49b protein conventional cells Ly49a. Nfil3 IL-7 transcription cells liver ILC1 for and the transcription factors but transcription the eomesodermin, ILC1 and NK require their factor the cytokine the require cells Both IL-15 require the and and cytokine NK Id2 cells Tbet. while development, factor

thymic produce IL-13, lymphopoietin IL-33. particularly the (TSLP) cytokines in to and response various and IL-4, cytokines, stromal IL-5, ILC2s barrier protection mucosal in and and aid in cytokines against immunity ILC2 promoting function parasites. produce ILC3s IL-1β respond bacteria extracellular and and fungi. IL-17 increase to including several and defenses IL-22, the which and IL-23 cytokines against cytokines, epithelial to production functions the IL-22 2-4). production peptides stimulating Section recruit on antimicrobial as of (see directly of that stimulate RegIIIγ while such IL-17 by chemokines neutrophils, acts cells the

to classification function responses the is analysis and development relative importance in subtypes ongoing. active and ILC of an still area, The of define studies cells of their the and immune are these far to highly The that be of subsets parallel the and CD4 appear identified CD8 in cells decades. T were so subgroups the last three defined ILC effector structure to over the as ILC at different development subsets of control now the control be factors the T-cell The that those that least, transcription same for subsets. corresponding to seem, subsets. a ILC until the cover of we description Chapter similarities, development these detailed with of we will will T-cell this of Because postpone where along 9, topic development

NK are macrophage-derived by cytokines. and cells interferon 3-24 type I activated

T without and kill B their cell cytotoxic to functionally ability distinctive cells, in are identified tumor specific and cells containing than proteins, vitro have cytoplasmic granules the lines by NK need larger are for immunization. certain same granules, have and (discussed T cytotoxic are cells of NK Chapter to cells kill in cells releasing those 9). which their effects similar cytotoxic by the cell the granzymes brief, perforin, and cell pore-forming contain the granules, the of which induce cytotoxic the the death. onto cell, released surface are target of penetrate membrane programmed and and In contents protein germline-encoded recognize or However, T receptors cells, malignantly surface of cells killing that unlike transformed on infected by cells. molecules by the NK triggered is second A pathway kill NK by factor-related TRAIL to necrosis ligand). involves used family TNF apoptosis-inducing member cells cells target known (tumor as the their cell express on cells surface. NK TRAIL and with TNFSF10A are by of (encoded and many types by B), interacts DR4 superfamily DR5 ‘death’ expressed TNFR cells. two that TRAIL receptors, which NK leads cells recognize and the cell, target to DR4 activate apoptosis. DR5 pro-enzyme to caspase a 8, stimulates When TRAIL (see associated activation caspase with following of cytokines. contrast by to inflammatory 1 3-9), pyroptosis, apoptosis In induced production is inflammasome not Section Chapter in cytotoxic discuss of of caspase-induced will apoptosis by details We killing to return T cells more the discuss we when mechanisms 9. release to in express or granules, NK antibody-dependent to Finally, cytotoxicity, these ADCC, as process cellular 10. cytotoxic their cells Chapter of cells will activates a Fc return antibodies binding 1-20); receptors NK Section (see to known we which receptors

of be or target cytokines. to interferons can by cells kill enhanced cells NK ability The certain sensitive dendritic NK IFN-αand NK by uninfected to during cells but IL-12, 20to by of from and to 100-fold can isolated produced is many that cytokine IFN-β, kill can macrophages be are or this cells exposed activity individuals, when increased types pathogens. infection cells a targets 4 7 and killing 8 virus of cells infected 1 9 viral 5 infection (days) IFN-˜, 6 of Activated T-cell-mediated time IL-12 IFN-°, 3 killing of after titer production cells infected TNF-˜, 10 2 NK-cell-mediated

Fig. host an component early (NK response to the killer Natural cells infection. cells) virus are of 3.38 that virus IFN-α, shown eliminate control cytokines Experiments replication and have by not but a and which the in do the virus. first, cells, of IL-12 TNF-α produced wave followed are together IFN-β, mice NK T accomplished are Virus when elimination and cells neutralizing is antibodies CD8 virus-specific produced. infection, unless Without the levels and NK higher days compounds. in can are vigorously the of much lethal of antiviral with infection treated cells, be early some the the viruses

contain adaptive (Fig. the is antigen-specific antibodies and immune can infection that neutralizing NK response serve to clear T cells cells virus infections generating the while cytotoxic 3.38). clue in to to the A comes in NK herpesvirus humans are infection. patients physiological these susceptible rare who cells from of frequently deficient function cells, from For predisposition selective protein, the 4) human results with (minichromosome viral mutations example, infections. NK-cell deficiency a MCM4 which maintenance-deficient to in associated is

by secrete the crucial some interferon becomes before IL-12, available. amounts of by also is stimulate in activated with can T IL-18 NK (IFN)-γ, infections cells macrophages, acting controlling cytokine in IFN-γ and cytotoxic CD8 cells the this to synergy large produced activated produced the and factor, interferons induced the distinct type infection. quite IFN-α only activates functionally I IFN-γ, from is is transcription not viral antiviral whose IFN-β, by STAT1 receptor directly and enhance T of The of which also directly in the actions produces their NK adaptive cells can and on TH1 regulating to early dendritic innate capacity differentiation an into the augmenting to IFN-γ kill subset, CD4 pro-inflammatory by influences through IFN-γ. immunity, cells macrophages but in response cells immunity production pathogens, activate immune NK (MIF act (GM-CSF), activate and CCL3 stimulating recruit factor (RANTES), chemokines TNF-α, and produce and granulocyte-macrophage which also CCL4, the CCL5 to cells 1-α), macrophages.

activating inhibitory and NK receptors to between distinguish express 3-25 and cells cells. healthy infected

cells to cells. distinguish they NK cells against infected or other be to defend able from healthy should uninfected For pathogens, viruses by cells. recognition NK by more cells is or pathogen the slightly However, than B complicated T used mechanism thought germline-encoded general, is NK combinations inhibitory activating of receptors. expresses that cell In and individual various an it receptors whether the is by these that a the engages and thought clear are not receptors signaling cell of cell. details target in an While determines exact case, it overall NK every balance kills receptors target such to metabolic a by in proteins or of on cell, are surface as are tuned as to an cell expression self.’ ‘dysregulated on malignant generally induced cell-surface transformation receptors activating microbial cells target The various NK The on stress, infection. detect changes recognize that proteins referred damage, including sensors cells proliferation, receptors and to to by stress, innate of lead are cells. as self.’ proteins surface by signals cellular TLRs the related ‘stress-induced can bind host expression including on related DNA to referred These that Specific events, to changes signaling heat-shock NK activating activating and the release chance receptors activate will will such the cytotoxic cells through cytokines cell the of IFN-γ Stimulation NK the stimulating release killing of granules. of the to that add as

recognize studied most on molecules Inhibitory class MHC other but By cells, high these inhibitory far. receptors surface so referred at the by most those have I been to contrast, ‘missing recognize the as NK of and molecules that cells can molecules recognizing is expressed molecules, self.’ constitutively levels receptors are loss all nearly on molecules cells MHC glycoproteins the expressed body. are of of in We presentation the main MHC two will T antigen molecules. discuss in need now role the introduce to of but cells 6, proteins Chapter only to we classes MHC for molecules of red MHC the is the II class cells largely class of to MHC expression immune (except, on notably, I are restricted, more expressed molecules of the cells. whereas cells), most far body blood

receptors cells. recognize killing host NK Inhibitory molecules to cells from function normal I prevent that MHC class MHC on NK a surface, by class against of is number I cells. the cell better the attack that molecules protected The greater cell NK activating cells virus-infected killed by also to MHC uninfected cells, induce from cells host while being I and cells. Interferons NK protect molecules, expression class kill of 6. Chapter a downregulation intracellular T the peptides molecules pathogens prevent as MHC other some to display strategy as in can antigens cells, also cause of and I of Viruses to class discussed molecules I cells MHC reduction signaling reduced able receptors. expression inhibitory class from their are this of through NK in to sense an is MHC an NK I and cell self,’ kill chance target example will increases in of cell. that expression class the ‘missing Reduction the target It kill of to (Fig. ‘stress-induced and NK from determines ‘missing an that self’ be thought self’ individual cell the triggered a balance particular will signals is whether cell 3.39). NK two integrate expressed cells signals the types from receptors on Thus of

Fig. on and activating between inhibitory NK depends 3.39 the cells balance signals. by Killing that receptors cells the signal bound to different NK have NK cell. several activating kill the a cells I attack actions prevented receptors the However, set cell types) inhibitory the another by are of by inhibit molecules all killing NK present recognize receptors. class MHC from of wholesale that on that are and almost activating (which overruling with CD8 when cells. to such I cells express I, so avoid many target in recognition the inhibit viruses, do is as lost inhibitory which alter or class infected by specifically of class conformation cells not as expression MHC its signal MHC T This also to expressed of TNFR which TNF binds DR5 cells family cells. members cells types the NK target expression kill their TRAIL, DR4 member by may through some and of the signal target apoptosis adaptor pro-caspase of and cell. FADD, DR4 an leading activates 8, DR5 to induction that through of

Fig. into 3.40 encode two NK receptors families. that fall The large genes

genes cluster a complex encoding large comprises receptor a family first, leukocyte proteins (LRC), The of of immunoglobulin-like composed the of domains. cell immunoglobulin-like (immunoglobulin-like (LAIR) families. the class, transcript) NK cells, (KIRs) leukocyte-associated receptors and expressed immunoglobulin-like receptor the gene killer ILT include the These by nearby. acid-binding and members (SIGLECs) the CD66 Ig-like family of The are lectins sialic located is 19. humans, located complex In on chromosome this NK complex with cluster includes molecules CD94, form killer proteins (NKC) The a lectin-like gene receptor. receptor the some receptor and is encodes to NKG2 cell NKG2 that second a functional (KLRs), which called the pair family and receptors complex chromosome This is 12. human on located major clusters; Some receptors for NKp30 major on the NKp44 cytotoxicity within 6. histocompatibility the two found example, for complex receptor and outside are genes gene genes are located these natural NK chromosome the courtesy data University Cambridge. Figure based of of Trowsdale J. on

activity cell’s together receptors, the cytokine which NK control cytotoxic production. and surface

3-26 the KIRs, and NCRs. NK-cell families, belong receptors to structural KLRs, several

in to receptors families receptors into that The the large contain (Fig. activity other number regulate of cells NK NK of a that fall receptors addition cell-surface two 3.40). family, of cell numbers differing immunoglobulin-like KIRs, domains. or the Members receptor have immunoglobulin of killer such others, as Some, whereas immunoglobulin KIR-3D, three. such have have two KIR-2D, domains, as larger leukocyte complex The cluster form (LRC). part a of KIR genes as genes of known receptor receptor the immunoglobulin-like complex the or whose gene called (NKC). family, Another genes cell receptors, cluster KLRs, within lectin-like proteins NK the C-type killer lectin-like are receptor a reside receptors encoded KIR genes, activity. their Mice mouse in lack instead NKC chromosome the express predominantly 6 control and to Ly49 NK-cell on different and of can strains receptors inhibitory, are be These mice. between polymorphic or activating highly rely LRC activity. KIRs on and control Ly49 humans to By in NK-cell contrast, the encoded their lack functional genes subset the individual in cells not feature cell important that repertoire, all NK in and expresses any An given of only is identical. a of so NK-cell NK the are potential population its the receptors

and within receptors family. the are inhibitory same present Activating structural depends is on Whether motifs the activating signaling domain. KIR particular its in a absence or cytoplasmic presence of or protein inhibitory inhibition Inhibitory an immunoreceptor that (ITIM). tails KIRs tyrosine-based motif long cytoplasmic have contain The x acid. the stands ITIM consensus for is where V/I/LxYxxL/V, amino any sequence for For the receptors KIR-2DL ITIMs and two cytoplasmic example, contain KIR-3DL each (Fig. tails inhibitory the of 3.41). tyrosine associate its the becomes inhibitory in Src an of protein by family When tyrosine ligands with the ITIM KIR, phosphorylated kinases. action SHP-1 membrane. can become protein intracellular bind then cell ITIM tyrosine homology and near region which When (src phosphatase-1) the 2-containing protein SHP-2, tyrosine phosphorylated, the phosphatases localized the residues other intracellular other tyrosine phosphatases on induced inhibit from phosphates molecules. removing receptors These by signaling by signaling

tails, and example, Activating Fig. (see as for cytoplasmic short KIRs KIR-3DS KIR2DS have designated, 3.41). receptors and charged in an a called protein accessory with residue These their associates signaling that have ITIM lack instead DAP12. regions transmembrane an membrane. a (ITAM, disulfide-linked contains the DAP12 activation protein immunoreceptor is sequence transmembrane tyrosine-based tail YXX[L/I]X6–9YXX[L/I]) forms a in motif that homodimer in with an consensus and cytoplasmic its pathways cytotoxic DAP12 granules. lead the phosphorylated, of in KIR, turning and the ITAM of tyrosine When the intracellular on to activate binds residues NK cell an ligand a become to that the signaling activating release as to ZAP-70, bind and described activate signaling those leading kinases 7. or similar events such T The to in further for intracellular Chapter cells phosphorylated tyrosine Syk ITAMs

both The has and family also members. KLR inhibitory activating SHP-1. mice, recruits an in ITIM tail their cytoplasmic In have that Ly49 inhibitory receptors activation the mice NK MHC of is protein. to shown latter’s motheaten to failure inactivates SHP-1 in carrying by importance upon class Ly49 The inhibit mutation, I the which binding humans CD94 mice, NK cells lectin-like heterodimer a of two NKG2. and C-type and In express receptors, different molecules, with mice. Qa1 heterodimer humans I-like interacts in including and nonpolymorphic This MHC class in HLA-E Qa1 pathogens, molecules they class during other peptide derived unusual the the I bind HLA-E are reticulum. peptides derived endoplasmic signal in of of instead processing from that MHC from and fragments in binding overall is whose MHC cells and expression different to be presence detect the several may of viruses, which class variants, in MHC CD94:NKG2 I This molecule kill expression by enables targeted diminished. a are E, humans by closely protein, more family In C, F related four (encoded NKG2 (encoded there related and distantly by KLRC1–4), and NKG2D NKG2A, KLRK1). proteins, contains an with associates residue, these, NKG2A whereas is charged Fig. for (see a is and transmembrane example, DAP12, and Of has activating NKG2C ITIM inhibitory, 3.41). discuss distinct but is other it we receptors, below. also the NKG2D from quite activating will NKG2 separately and

overall of found differences expression and different in KIR further people. to extensive being genes, NK by polymorphism KIR of inhibitory of with The response is the cells complicated activating genes in numbers MHC different with bone more react developed. they why cells to the may NK to NK MHC donor MHC barrier self a to the since recipient molecules transplantation, This than which strongly may marrow of cells the are explain maternal 15-38). occur pregnancy, of MHC differences A and phenomenon (see may molecules between similar Section because fetal during (although rheumatoid of an genes arthritis. epidemiologic absolute The is earlier not of association studies KIR certain onset advantage polymorphism extensive such alleles not KIR suggest and clear, yet and some between of frequency) genetic even of gene species, some genes and mice, is but in some primates, both The KIR present KLR the families. including contain cluster KIR not that other suggest ancient gene some clusters lost cluster This are and and one might was mice humans. gene or the by for both relatively reason, that

receptors production the NK killing cytokine of Signaling inhibitory the cells. by suppresses activity and NK normal as that class NK cells cells of the This expression such the of means will MHC cells not genetically healthy, identical molecules, I kill with body. other however, by a of variety Virus-infected can cells, NK killed being become cells by susceptible mechanisms. to class stimulated interferons. type I be the is synthesis while by synthesis actions being in production cells, host in blocked I of in uninfected so viruses all MHC inhibit their infected of even protein proteins their that would some First, cells cells, through I they level able NK their would correspondingly of more reduced to MHC-specific The class make would cells being MHC killed. in and become less them infected cells expression susceptible inhibit to receptors, there. class prevent MHC selectively the surface, the once many to viruses or I of induce cell Second, molecules degradation their can export This to the but make might by T evade recognition allow cell infected would it cytotoxic cells

Fig. structural receptors activating The 3.41 of and inhibitory both receptors. NK families encode killer and families send (lower that and receptors cell NK of inhibitory immunoglobulin-like send receptors signals have signals (KIRs) to (KLRs) that the those members cell (upper killer activating cell panel) panel). The lectin-like immunoglobulin-like length domains of their according by they number tails. family to are the members designated the possess and cytoplasmic KIR of These associate bear amino have receptors region. the the cytoplasmic KIR signaling in the charged with DAP12 protein and acid residue transmembrane Activating a designation via tails short ‘S.’ amino acid The contain ITAMs, are which tails DAP12 motifs called in involved cytoplasmic signaling. of family NKG2 KLR member, the form lectin-like another C-type whether heterodimers to or activating receptors with CD94. inhibitory, belong and, family, when ‘L’; with which but called adaptor receptors The do signaling inhibitory are proteins have KIR by and ITIM, an longer phosphatases. cytoplasmic a phosphorylated recognized tails is associate contain motif constitutively not inhibitory designated these

Fig. receptors Activating cytotoxicity the cells natural 3.42 receptors include and of NK NKG2D. immunoglobulinlike are proteins. The natural cytotoxicity receptors variable example, and immunoglobulin NKp30 a extracellular domain domain an NKp44, that molecule. single resembles of for have an the receptor chain their of the or and CD3ζ association shown). through (not the NKp46 NKp30 with cell γ homodimers Fc NK chain, activate receptors types of are associate proteins other Chapter also described in 7. These with signaling that DAP12. with NK of association through cell their the activates NKp44 homodimers in the constant an NKp46 domains molecules having the domains of molecule. KIR-2D that resemble resembles immunoglobulin two family a and is and of with homodimer, forms lectin-like the C-type associates NKG2D a member it DAP10. also with of alternatively shown). associates DAP12 form mice, (not In an spliced NKG2D

MULT1, is or NK killed whose are (includes NKG2D RAET1 by or MIC-A, expression members, for stress ligands ULBPs) MIC-A to by The family being MIC-B family RAET1 cellular MIC-B, induced molecules, MHC-like susceptible cells. cells the provided induced. cells by NK infected Virally do cells if ligands even still are downregulate that be not can for activating killed MHC, receptors receptors NK ligands of receptors express on and viruses induced NK for virus-infected cells cells activating on NK-cell recognize cells. cells, killing target 3-27 infected recognition ligands cells some that thwarting However, the tumor activating or

cells, which level in MHC KIRs addition presence the class cell. of or that in also to express KLRs, other on the other perturbations sense present directly have the sensing role of In proteins cells a I more infection a NK receptors and NKG2D tumor or immunoglobulin-like and damage NKp30, C-type by the physical cytotoxicity cells, receptors which (NCRs) receptors NKp44, recognition receptors, cells are members and cells, natural (Fig. the of include infected Activating the for family chemical injured NKp46, and and Ly49H lectin-like 3.42). cells and mammalian NKp46 across conserved and of selective NCRs, only in is the in marker NK Among humans most species. mice, it is recognize they ligands are viral influenza The still the hemagglutinin (HA) of glycoprotein suggests but virus. the recognized proteins, NCRs evidence defined, the by some including being that an viral protein I-like activating encoded the m157, MHC class recognizes that Ly49H murine the receptor cytomegalovirus. by structure is an and protein co-stimulatory NKp30 in The is member 9. 1-15, 7 mentioned a of Section proteins in a family further of for ligand B7-H6, and described is Chapters the named

specialized in cells. NKG2D role NK a activating has and form molecule family MHC NKG2 I bind the heterodimers members HLA-E. with CD94 class molecules homodimer of class MHC form that induced to binds by are In several I-like a that molecules cellular NKG2D various types two stress. contrast, domains RAET1 (Fig. similar MHC of MIC-B, which molecules the class include proteins, the are These and MIC I to α1 MIC-A molecules α2 and and the of family 3.43). UL16-binding were called are 10 as initially characterized which 3 members, of ULBPs. or and for also has cytomegalovirus UL16 proteins, the family RAET1 The ligands protein proteins, not mouse have of the structure molecules; do have that MIC RAET1 of the of a NKG2D to probably very are ligands for equivalents similar and the orthologs them. Mice (see these In (retinoic identified inducible acid in include proteins protein also the RAE1 MULT1 fact, early were Fig. H60 mice first as ligands family, and related and 1) 6.26). Section we structure in return will discuss MHC-like when the 6-18. MHC the We to of molecules these molecule

with intracellular so on response ligands in bacteria The and well are are tumor that have for expressed infected cells transformed. cellular most stress, as as metabolic NKG2D viruses, and malignantly cells to upregulated incipient become or on generalized the ‘danger’ immune signal Thus, NKG2D as a by to recognition system. acts T subset and Chapter invariant of cells, CD8 is in to by a T cells, human (described various cells, CD8 In by γ:δ T expressed activated addition NKT T all including cells, expression 8). NK cells, cells murine NKG2D co-stimulatory In effector of functions. that ligands recognition provides NKG2D a enhances signal cells, potent these their

Fig. expressed proteins conditions ligands 3.43 are stress. NKG2D NK receptor the The for activating cellular of in that are are as MHC-like epithelial induced transformation, MIC cells and or MIC-A The other MIC-B molecules on damage, DNA infection. cellular and such stress, by proteins are glycophosphatidylinositol most UL16-binding RAET1 not attached class as all) family subset α1 cell (but also molecule—the MHC domains—and designated a α2 a (ULBPs), the the portion linkage. including an to I and proteins resemble members, of via processed Unlike molecules, I not MHC the NKG2D peptides. bind do ligands class

receptors from on differs cell. NKG2D cells it other NK the in pathway engages signaling activating within the also as are CD3ζ chain, DAP12, Fc which proteins and receptors receptor γ activating such the intracellularly contain the all chain, with The signaling ITAMs. associated other contain sequence kinase Section ITAM cell a NK not signaling 7-4). initiating contrast, and In intracellular (see protein, in (PI phosphatidylinositol intracellular 3-kinase), series adaptor an lipid different the does of NKG2D DAP10, 3-kinase different a activates the instead binds which events the thereby 3-kinase is enhance cells of overall augmenting activated, to which cell’s survival Generally, considered PI it effector is activity. in the linked activity. induction cytotoxic cells, is of activation NK directly In to of PI 3-kinase the DAP10, are produced in spliced mouse the binds because DAP10. complicated, other In is binds DAP12 which workings forms, more even of one alternatively NKG2D the whereas only and NKG2D two of mice, to signaling 3-kinase seems thus signal NKG2D pathway. human NKG2D the whereas only activate can pathways, Mouse DAP10 activate PI both through to express 2B4, by many (signaling molecule NK cells. receptors several CD48 family, which the cells including cells SLAM molecule) including activation recognizes from cell-surface Finally, lymphocyte the NK expressed that release CD48 the through protein) Fyn. Src 2B4 and and signals and cells kinase proliferation on NK promote SAP nearby can (SLAM-associated between survival Interactions

Summary.

these to activates innate infection. cells—neutrophils, dendritic together individual of only and of cells cells particular—not cells’ in on and chemokines macrophages, cytokines also to release functions, effector Triggering that pro-inflammatory recruit various act phagocytic more site the stimulates the of sensors but Especially recruitment early is of monocytes. neutrophils prominent the and induce innate which acute-phase more including cytokines fibrinogen, effects, protein, mannose-binding proteins, a phagocytic C-reactive state proteins, response including immunity. tissue surfactant by general to and Furthermore, systemic production fever released of and cells can of the lectin, augmented pulmonary add adaptive mobilize cells the cytokines induce response. also These that immune antigen-presenting long-recognized of The cells innate several the ranks at service cells. join subtypes has innate recognized which the of immune NK system recently lymphoid its specialized effector to different response act the strength signals, to of response. innate and activity ILCs amplify the exhibit in cells. replication infections to The of and in production serves response to activate interferons inhibit to NK viral viral are distinguish are infected or stressed ligands These cells that can and I some class healthy turn receptors. some by in for way, that of molecules are NK MHC transformed molecules on in those or virus the that from expression MHC-related based employed also antigens. pathogen which that variable we As in see NK are effector response, cytokines, to specific phagocytic adaptive the chemokines, uses will book, receptors the in later target and mechanisms cells, immune are cells all

3. Summary Chapter to

mechanisms variety uses pathogens, in of develops. to hold adaptive a effector an infection Innate or check and response eliminate until them detect immunity immune damage. signs on germline-encoded receptors molecules of origin mechanisms are many can host detect microbial by cellular sense or effector that of all cells These regulated of that types induced the distinct are based components. The responses system of innate on several immune tissue-resident 2—have cells. other on and epithelia antimicrobial the After defenses rely dendritic soluble tissue important as in sensor molecules been described cells, barriers—the the and innate body’s Chapter most breached, initial macrophages the such infection actions, the cellular they their at of a various through sensors phagocytosis to they which to provide double sites inflammation, rapid service: involves use infection. antimicrobial of mediate Macrophages additional activate defense process innate borders and cells of also and the recruiting pro-inflammatory which lead production effector signaling response. that immune activate pathways to and in antiviral responses while to an cytokines, also innate initiate sensors Innate the helping of turn stimulate adaptive chapter described The this extremely the mechanisms is uncovering in active. still of pathogen-sensing disease, lupus, insights gout. human providing is and new autoinflammatory such as It Crohn’s into conditions dangers. has induction germline-encoded the powerful by based on mechanisms receptors of innate immune recognition Indeed, effector clearly some is the illustrated by when is cytokine but the double-edged produced TNF-α—beneficial when systemically. of sword, released effects disastrous as It a locally, This mechanisms host edge the along all knife innate which evolutionary travel. of defense illustrates set inadequate humans’ cells—the which The defense establishment when a the this forms part it immune system it system function, be adaptive mainly even however, activating response, as viewed defenses infection. dendritic that essential recruiting has the of infection; motion—by innate in a in fulfilling immune against of initiation focus proves of of can and already frustrates an

turn with explanation function structure next a of attention and an immune immune lymphocytes. innate to beginning expressed our Having immunology of we by receptors function, of introduced antigen with adaptive response, the consideration the the

Questions.

(TLR) Toll-like its the receptor 3.1 to Match ligand: Matching:

A. ssRNA or i. TLR-2:TLR-6 TLR-2:TLR-1

B. TLR-3 ii. Lipopolysaccharide

TLR-4 C. iii. Lipoteichoic acid lipoproteins di-/triacyl and

D. TLR-5 iv. dsRNA

E. Flagellin TLR-7 v.

vi. F. TLR-9 Matching: the Match DNA hereditary to gene the CpG Unmethylated 3.2 affected: disorder

A. NOD2 granulomatous Chronic disease i.

B. X-linked hypohidrotic ii. (NEMO) IKKγ immunodeficiency ectodermal and dysplasia

disease C. Crohn’s iii. Jak3

D. iv. X-linked SCID oxidase NAPDH

NLRP3 E. v. SCID X-linked) (not

cold vi. F. Familial of response? syndrome 3.3 γc does Choice: inflammatory an Which Multiple the following inflammatory occur during not

A. Local blood clotting

repair Tissue injury B.

C. cell Endothelial activation

D. permeability Decreased vascular

tissue the into (pDCs)? (cDCs) between leukocytes conventional dendritic plasmacytoid cells What and Short difference Answer: is inflamed cells dendritic of Extravasation E. 3.4

3.5 is Which the following G-proteincoupled Multiple of receptor? a Choice:

receptor IL-1R TLR-4 A. fMLF B. D. C. CD14

F. degradation. STING True (CD80) ubiquitination lead All False: or to 3.6 forms B7.1 of proteasomal E.

Fill-in-the-Blanks: 3.7

also TIR have cytoplasmic __________. a shared that (TLRs) domain is called receptors A. Toll-like with signaling

family, of Cytokine in these factors SH2-domain-containing signal the transcriptions _____ of hematopoietin receptors recruit the kinases tyrosine called to family order B. __________. activate

adaptor one both and __________. C. MyD88/MAL pairs Out uses is that the all TRIF/TRAM TLRs, only of the different

dsRNA which True is downstream sensed the False: sensed STING, while and adaptor which DNA signals respectively, cGAS, protein interact RIG-I and by with ssRNA Cytosolic MAVS. or cytosolic through by MDA-5, 3.8 are

is Choice: of Which the following 3.9 Multiple not true?

CCR2. through attracts macrophages CCL2 A.

GM-CSF I IL-3, share common a cytokine are a and chain. β subgroup receptors that IL-5, class of B.

and share IL-21 γc. IL-9, IL-2, common IL-7, IL-15, IL-4, a C.

8. large and the ASC, a inflammasome is NLRP3, of composed The the oligomer D. adaptor caspase sensor

neutrophils CXCR2. E. through CXCL8 attracts

IL-17 and F. ILC3s secrete IL-13, IFN-γ, and secrete and IL-22. IL-4, IL-5, secrete ILC2s ILC1s

references. Section

and by ingested, are killed 3‑1 entering phagocytes. microbes After recognized, many tissues,

A., D.M. Underhill, and Aderem, : Mechanisms phagocytosis of in macrophages. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 17:593–623. 1999,

and behavior. Join-Lambert, S., Kayal, Elain, Geissmann, G., Cumano, G., with vessels Auffray, O., Monitoring blood patrolling Fogg, A., a tissues Garfa, D., M., F.: of Lauvau, C., population by and Sarnacki, S., of monocytes 317:666–670. 2007, Science

L., cells Reizis, Plasmacytoid Lewis, S., Cervantes-Barragan, control T‑cell B.: V., and Firner, B., infection. W., to response S., Thiel, Ludewig, viral K.L., dendritic Hugues, Reith, chronic Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 109:3012–3017. 2012,

and Wolf, A.J., D.M. Underhill, Goodridge, H.S., the Beta‑glucan innate immune : recognition system. by Immunol. Rev. 230:38–50. 2009,

Gordon, knowledge future scavenger receptor age: years and current of challenges. and Greaves, 30 at The D.R., S.: macrophage J. Lipid Res. 2009, 50:S282–S286.

Greter, B.: and cells the Price, Hoeffel, Merad, the Langerhans Frei, M., Stroma‑derived controls of Leboeuf, Lelios, Pelczar, I., and maintenance Becher, of development T.M., maintenance M., interleukin‑34 K., F., Kdig, J., P., Ginhoux, and G., microglia. M., 37:1050–1060. 2012, Immunity

the S.: Harrison, and Grinstein, cytoskeleton. microtubule and R.E., Phagocytosis Biochem. Cell Biol. 2002, 80:509–515.

P‑Rex1 cooperate and of C.D., formyl‑methionyl‑leucyl‑phenylalanine‑dependent Donald, neutrophil regulation D.T., Welch, S., Anderson, Lawson, in and K.E., the responses. Vav1 Patton, H.C.: Immunol. J. 186:1467–1476. 2011,

Lee, A.F., Parlow, L., T., S.J., Risteli, Langen, Risteli, Y.C., S., Nussenzweig, J., Feizi, M.C. Roeder, D., and Lee, H., Evers, glycoprotein receptor‑mediated regulation of homeostasis. serum : Mannose 295:1898–1901. 2002, Science

and L., in Gordon, defence. Martinez-Pomares, S.: host Linehan, Macrophage S.A., lectins Infect. Microbes 2000, 2:279–288.

on MHC pathogen True which receptors cells (NK) 3.10 detect immunoglobulin-like killer self killer-cell Natural peptides molecules. or False: (KIRs), have

Matching: Match tissues effectors in 3.11 the inflamed into the neutrophil with step key involved: recruitment

i. ICAM-1 endothelial with LFA-1 activation A. cell Neutrophil Endothelial

B. ii. Rolling of cytokines Local and TNF-α secretion other

CXCR2 state through leading signaling integrin Neutrophil ‘active’ iii.CXCL8 to talin assuming activation C.

neutrophil iv.Endothelial and CD31 Strong D. adhesion

their sulfated induced E-selectin and what Diapedesis co-stimulatory sialyl-LewisX on Answer: recognition, Interaction dendritic v. pathogen of neutrophil and are with 3.12 E. endothelial molecules What P-and is function? macrophages Short cells upon

Ligand S.: by antigen‑presenting J.L., E.P., and Miller, receptors. recognition cell McGreal, C‑type Gordon, lectin Curr. Opin. Immunol. 17:18–24. 2005,

a Moxon, S.: of secretory Hollinshead, The which Kodama, Peiser, class for required P., K., T., A and Makepeace, receptor E.R., for Coull, scavenger M.P., is M., L., Gordon, and Plested, major Neisseria Winther, receptor meningitidis responses. pattern not J., lipopolysaccharide recognition is macrophage De independent Infect. Immun. 70:5346–5354. 2002,

Y., E.A., Podrez, Shen, M., B., Zhang, Shan, E., L., et al. Sun, P.L., Poliakov, Gugiu, P.J., Deng, Fox, Finton, R., Z., Identification scavenger novel oxidized phospholipids as of family that macrophage a : CD36. ligands of the for receptor serve Biol. J. Chem. 2002, 277:38503–38516.

intracellular G‑protein‑coupled with of phagocytes efficiency on increased killing. microbe link recognition 3‑2 receptors

and C., specific Rollinghoff, and Bogdan, in innate immunity. M., A.: Reactive nitrogen oxygen and intermediates reactive Diefenbach, Curr. Opin. Immunol. 12:64–76. 2000,

suicide: NETs. and V., Beneficial make why Brinkmann, neutrophils A.: die to Zychlinsky, Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 5:577–582. 2007,

human in burst neutrophils. Respiratory Dahlgren, A.: C., Karlsson, and J. Immunol. 232:3–14. Methods 1999,

Bourne, V., Meng, Gerber, H.R. and Baranski, Dotsch, T.J., E.C., B.O., switch receptor. ligand in An binding : activation of the the pocket C5a Biol. J. Chem. 2001, 276:3394–3400.

A., E.P., C.G., Segal, Potma, Reeves, Messina, E.O., S., Gabella, A.W. G., Warley, Jacobs, Roes, H., H.L., Lu, Bolsover, and J., mediated is : activity of Killing K+ neutrophils of through proteases flux. activation by 2002, Nature 416:291–297.

P.A. Ward, sepsis. The of C5a dark : in side Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2004, 4:133–142.

recognition 3‑3 response. initiate Microbial inflammatory an tissue and damage

O., J.J.: Howard, proteins immune D., host adaptive responses. innate and O.M., Leukocyte granule Yang, Chertov, and defenses Oppenheim, mobilize Immunol. Rev. 2000, 177:68–78.

Anaphylatoxins and J.: inflammatory and noninfectious diseases. Kohl, infectious Mol. Immunol. 38:175–187. 2001,

Y.A., D.D. Metcalfe, Mekori, and immunity. cells : in innate Mast Immunol. Rev. 173:131–140. 2000,

Cytokine in during and G., Svanborg, infections: pathogenesis host Godaly, responses and Hedlund, C., M.: role disease mucosal defence. Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 1999, 2:99–105.

inflammation. Van T.: and der Poll, Coagulation J. Endotoxin Res. 2001, 7:301–304.

pathogen‑recognition Toll‑like ancient an represent receptors system. 3‑4

Nicolas, B., Reichhart, J.A. Michaut, and Hoffmann, E., Lemaitre, L., J.M., spätzle/Toll/cactus potent cassette gene response dorsoventral adults. : The regulatory controls antifungal in Drosophila the 1996, Cell 86:973–983.

and Reichhart, Hoffmann, J.A. B., Lemaitre, J.M., by classes host induction of differential after Drosophila various of microorganisms. antimicrobial defense: infection genes : peptide Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 1997, 94:14614–14619. USA

pathogen‑associated by molecular many patterns. 3‑5 Mammalian activated Toll‑like are receptors different

B., and Beutler, Rietschel, E.T. the sensing immune story and roots: Innate : its of endotoxin. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 3:169–176. 2003,

RNA. Sousa, S.S., by responses H., S., and of Hemmi, Reis Akira, of C..: Kaisho, single‑stranded e TLR7‑mediated Innate means antiviral Diebold, recognition T., 2004, Science 303:1529–1531.

Heil, Species‑specific recognition and C., Wagner, Lipford, Hochrein, of G., H., Kirschning, single‑stranded H., F., Ampenberger, Toll‑like Hemmi, RNA Akira, S.: 8. H., 7 via S., receptor and F., Bauer, 2004, Science 303:1526–1529.

Hartung, Sovath, S., al. K., K., T., Rutschmann, et Crozat, S., Shamel, P., Hoebe, X., Zähringer, L., Du, U., Georgel, Mudd, S., a CD36 sensor diacylglycerides. is of : 2005, Nature 433:523–527.

Kim, Lee, S.G., Paik, J.Y., Jin, J.O. Kim, M.S., H.M., H., M.E., and Heo, Lee, Lee, S.E., of induced a TLR1‑TLR2 lipopeptide. the : of structure by Crystal binding tri‑acylated heterodimer 130:1071–1082. Cell 2007,

G.G. Ji, J.D., Song, and H.S., S.J., Lee, Lee, Y.H., Choi, and systematic meta‑analysis. between TLR a polymorphisms review and erythematosus: lupus : systemic Associations Clin. Exp. Rheumatol. 30:262–265. 2012,

Y., Davies, I., J.N., L., Wang, and Liu, J., Leonard, D.R. Segal, Botos, Shiloach, D.M., : receptor basis RNA. signaling double‑stranded of Structural 3 with Toll‑like 320:379–381. Science 2008,

R.A.: of receptor N.C., Toll‑like and N.W., Alexopoulou, A., RNA Sato,A., Iwasaki, 7. M., Karow, J.M., Gale, Flavell, Recognition Adams, Lund, by viruses single‑stranded L., Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 101:5598–5603. 2004,

R., receptor by virus‑2 of Akira, Medzhitov, Lund, herpes recognition A.: 9‑mediated S., Sato, J., A., Toll‑like simplex and cells. Iwasaki, dendritic plasmacytoid Exp. J. Med. 198:513–520. 2003,

M., Nolte, e Näslund, Y.T., Liljestr, C.: S.S., to Toll‑like cross‑priming P., Schulz, Sousa, Flavell, M.A., Alexopoulou, L., promotes T.I., and receptor R.A., 3 virus‑infected Azuma, Chen, O., Reis cells. Diebold, Nature 2005, 433:887–892.

and dimer ligands. U., Shibata, T.: reorganization Ohto, T., receptor agonistic by Toll‑like the of H., K., Shimizu, 8 Miyake, Tanji, Structural induced 339:1426–1429. Science 2013,

Hayden, Zhang, F., D., C.N., Hieny, J.F., M.S., Yarovinsky, et G.L., S., al. F.S., Ghosh, Andersen, R.A., Serhan, Flavell, Sutterwala, S., Bannenberg, : a TLR11 dendritic by protozoan of activation cells protein. profilin‑like 308:1626–1629. Science 2005,

3‑6 MD‑2 and in recognizes accessory CD14. proteins the TLR‑4 with association bacterial lipopolysaccharide host

Beutler, of limb Endotoxin, and the 4, afferent Toll‑like innate immunity. receptor B.: Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 3:23–28. 2000,

Beutler, E.T. B., Rietschel, and its immune roots: sensing and the : story of endotoxin. Innate Nat. Rev. Immunol. 3:169–176. 2003,

J., Matsushima, J.I., et Lee, H., Enkhbayar, Oh, S.E., S.C., N., Kim, Yoo, P., H.M., al. Lee, B.S., Park, O.J., Kim, Kim, of endotoxin the TLR4–MD‑2 antagonist complex Crystal with structure Eritoran. : bound 2007, Cell 130:906–917.

and B.S., Lee, D.H., B.S., Kim, H., H.M., Park, Song, J.O. Lee, Choi, complex. basis the The of by : TLR4–MD‑2 recognition structural lipopolysaccharide 2009, Nature 458:1191–1195.

and induce cytokines transcription activate and NFαB, TLRs factors inflammatory expression the interferons. to AP‑1, type of 3‑7 IRF I

the essential D.T., Golenbock, S.M., of pathway. TBK1 Liao, McWhirter, Maniatis, A.J., components K.L., Faia, Rowe, Latz, IRF3 Fitzgerald, T.: E., and Coyle, signaling IKKεand S.M., D.C., K.A., are Nat. Immunol. 4:491–496. 2003,

Wagner, G.G., E., Kratchmarova, I., Wang, Blagoev, Redecke, L.C., H., H., G., al. et Häcker, Raz, B., M.P., Hsu, V., Häcker, Kamps, distinct through : TRAF3 effector receptor Specificity of in functions Toll‑like TRAF6. and signalling 2006, 439:204–207. Nature

by M., the response innate T.L., and Paz, S.: viruses. factor‑κB immune the J., Manipulation and nuclear P., Arguello, Hiscott, Nakhaei, pathway of Nguyen, 2006, 25:6844–6867. Oncogene

Honda, master K., and signalling IRFs: of cytosolic Taniguchi, and receptors regulators pattern‑recognition T.: receptors. Toll‑like by Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2006, 6:644–658.

Matsuda, Kawai, et M., S., T., K.J., Ishii, Sato, Coban, Hemmi, M., Inoue, J., C., al. Terai, Yamamoto, K., S., H., Uematsu, interaction a : with and through TRAF6. involves induction direct receptors of Toll‑like IRF7 Interferon‑alpha MyD88 Nat. Immunol. 2004, 5:1061–1068.

H., Puel, Al-Mousa, Santos, et Bustamante, J., C., von K., H., Chang, O.F., T., A., C.L., H.H., Yang, al. Bernuth, Lawrence, Ku, Picard, the TLR : pathways. signalling Heritable human defects of J. Res. Endotoxin 2005, 11:220–224.

Mustapha, Xiao, P., Bernuth, Ghandil, Ku, Von Y., M., Z., Camcioglu, C.L., C., I.B., Chrabieh, Picard, R., Pankla, H., et al. Jin, H., with MyD88 bacterial : infections in deficiency. humans Pyogenic 321:691–696. 2008, Science

S.E., Philpott, Girardinm, Werts, C., and D.J. PYRIN: : and three TIR, antimicrobial triad. for domains an CARD Death Differ. Cell 2006, 13:798–815.

sensors bacterial damage. 3‑8 and cellular of are The receptors intracellular infection NOD‑like

McDonald, M., interactions Inohara, role host–microbial NOD‑LRR Chamaillard, Nunez, and inflammatory proteins: G.: C., N., in and disease. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 2005, 74:355–383.

Y.G., microbial T., Reimer, M.H., (NLRs): bona Kim, NOD‑like receptors G.: Shaw, Nuz, fide and sensors. intracellular Curr. Opin. Immunol. 2008, 20:377–382.

A., and W., Signalling NOD2. Watanabe, and molecular Strober, Kitani, P.J., T.: and of interactions NOD1 pathways Murray, Nat. Rev. Immunol. 6:9–20. 2006,

CATERPILLERs, hereditary D.L., Kastner, immunological Hoffman, Ting, J.P., and H.M.: pyrin and disorders. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 6:183–195. 2006,

infection and NLRP inflammasome 3‑9 an to through or damage cellular to death cell react proteins induce inflammation.

T., L., C., McCormick, P., Solorzano, McDermott, Yu, S., E., L., J.W., Juliana, Huang, Kang, Fernandes-Alnemri, et Datta, M., Wu, J., al. innate to critical : Francisella for is inflammasome immunity AIM2 tularensis. The Nat. Immunol. 11:385–393. 2010,

Fitzgerald, G., E., Bauernfeind, and F., D.R., Horvath, K.A. M., Hornung,V.,Ablasser,A., Caffrey, Latz, Charrel-Dennis, a inflammasome cytosolic caspase‑1‑activating recognizes dsDNA : ASC. AIM2 with forms and 458:514–518. 2009, Nature

and R.E. Kofoed, E.M., Vance, determines recognition : immune specificity. of NAIPs bacterial Innate by inflammasome ligands 477:592–595. Nature 2011,

Tardivel, and J.: Martinon, uric inflammasome. acid Gout‑associated Mayor, crystals A., the Pétrilli, Tschopp, V., activate F., A., NALP3 440:237–241. Nature 2006,

Mayor, De in inflammasome links T., J.: SGT1 V., Pétrilli, Martinon, immune and HSP90 Tschopp, plant F., A., mammalian of Smedt, innate crucial A and responses. and activity function Nat. Immunol. 2007, 8:497–503.

Muz-Planillo, T.M., toxins by Nez, R., inflammasome Rajendiran, the G.: and Smith, K+ and NLRP3 of Martínez-Col, activation efflux P., Kuffa, matter. is particulate G., B.L., common trigger bacterial 38:1142–1153. 2013, Immunity

detect receptors activate viral The RIG‑I‑like 3‑10 and RNAs cytoplasmic

I production induce type and interferon MAVS to cytokines. pro‑inflammatory

Brightbill, Maitland, et Belisle, M., J.T., S.E., Libraty, Plevy, Norgard, Yang, S.T., S.R., H.D., M.V., J.R., R.B., Krutzik, Smale, Bleharski, D.H., al. Toll‑like Host receptors. defense triggered lipoproteins microbial by mechanisms : through 1999, Science 285:732–736.

K.K., Kim, Hornung, H., S., Kato, J., Brzka, V., Conzelmann, S., et H., al. A., Schlee, Jung, Ellegast, Akira, M., Poeck, K., is RNA for 5ʹ‑Triphosphate RIG‑I. : the ligand 314:994–997. 2006, Science

Yoneyama, al. M., A., S., Uematsu, Kawai, Takeuchi, Yamamoto, S., K.J., Kato, K., et Matsui, Ishii, Jung, H., M., T., Sato, O., in Differential and the RNA recognition viruses. MDA5 : RIG‑I of roles helicases of Nature 2006, 441:101–105.

A., Gohda, H., Semba, K., Imai, T., T., et Konno, T., T., Yamazaki, J., K., Yujiri, Kato, al. Goto, Akiyama, Yamamoto, H., IRF7 and RNA : activating by TRAF6 innate sensing and upon NF‑κB responses DNA. cytosolic viral establishes immune 4:e5674. 2009, ONE PLoS

Tschopp, The F., the body. of A., and Mayor, guardians J.: inflammasomes: Martinon, Annu. Rev. Immunol. 27:229–265. 2009,

R., Meylan, is D., Hofmann, Bartenschlager, J., an E., J.: targeted Binder, is by and hepatitis Tschopp, Moradpour, RIG‑I antiviral the pathway M., C K., virus. in protein Curran, Cardif adaptor and 2005, 437:1167–1172. Nature

Sousa, antiviral F., C.P., Liljestr, e Schulz, to RIG‑I‑mediated Weber, Tan, O., Reis bearing Pichlmair, single‑stranded A., P., C.: responses RNA T.I., 5ʹ‑phosphates. and Näslund, 2006, Science 314:935–936.

receptors. S.: Toll‑like Akira, Takeda, T., K., and Kaisho, Annu. Rev. Immunol. 21:335–376. 2003,

3‑11 sensors production to STING signal I of interferons. Cytosolic type DNA through induce

Chen, Chiu, X., and Cai, Z.J. Y.H., pathway DNA signaling. and of The : cGAS‑cGAMP‑STING cytosolic sensing Mol. 54:289–296. Cell 2014,

Ishikawa, G.N. H., Barber, and : facilitates immune an reticulum that STING is innate signalling. adaptor endoplasmic 455:674–678. 2008, Nature

Chen, D., Li, and L., J., Gao, Sun, Wang, Wu, H., Z.J. X.D., signaling Pivotal in and antiviral effects. : roles of defense adjuvant cGAScGAMP immune 341:1390–1394. Science 2013,

Du, J., X., Liu, Chen, and Y.T., Wu, N.V., Ren, J., Li, S., Q., Z.J. X., Chen, F., Grishin, Cong, T., Cai, Wu, of adaptor MAVS, proteins immune activation. : STING, TRIF and IRF3 innate Phosphorylation induces 347:aaa2630. 2015, Science

Chen, Wu, and J., X., Chen, Du, Sun, Z.J. L., F., type Cyclic interferon I is a pathway. : DNA cytosolic sensor GMP‑AMP that synthase activates the 339:786–791. Science 2013,

dendritic cells Activation sensors the macrophages innate response. of in immune 3‑12 and

molecules. distinct downstream 3‑13 Toll Drosophila pathogen‑recognition is a in signaling & of set of

proteins. Gupta, PGRPs: and R., Mammalian D.: Dziarski, novel antibacterial Cell Microbiol. 8:1059–1069. 2006,

J.A. Imler, and D., C., Hetru, Ferrandon, Hoffmann, J.L., during bacterial : immune and The fungal signalling infections. systemic Drosophila response: sensing and Nat. Rev. Immunol. 7:862–874. 2007,

fungal virulence recognition Matskevich, V., Drosophila of infections Ferrandon, D.: Reichhart, sensing Wang, M., of T.M., of A.A., Belvin, via M., Butt, C., factors. Dual Gottar, glucans and J.M., and Gobert, in detection Hoffmann, J.A., 127:1425–1437. Cell 2006,

vivo large‑scale Toll W.J., B.: and H.J., activation. in Drosophila Lemaitre, S., I.H., R., identifies Lee, immunity: Jang, proteases Romeo, serine five Nam, Y., Z., screen Ueda, for a required Takahashi, Kambris, Brun, K., RNAi Curr. Biol. 2006, 16:808–813.

Samain, unexpected against role in Gram‑positive the vivo adults. K., analysis GNBP1 Pili-Floury, E., bacterial and In F., K., B.: interference Lemaitre, Saigo, defense an Takahashi, R., Leulier, Drosophila in Ueda, for RNA infection S., reveals Biol. J. Chem. 2004, 279:12848–12853.

Peptidoglycan Royet, R.: and effectors Dziarski, pleiotropic proteins: recognition antimicrobial defences. and sensors J., of Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 5:264–277. 2007,

genes have primitive chordates. and invertebrates TLR in 3‑14 both undergone extensive some diversification NOD and

Rast, J.P., Loza-Coll, Smith, M., Litman, Hibino, T., and L.C., G.W. into system : sea of the insights urchin. Genomic the immune Science 2006, 314:952–956.

Davidson, embryo. transcriptome The Q., Cameron, of Stolc, and Samanta, the Tongprasit, R.A., M.P., Istrail, sea S., Tu, W., V.: E.H., urchin 314:960–962. 2006, Science

structurally distinct 3‑15 proteins. of Cytokines their and fall into families receptors related

and type Garcia-Sastre, the and induction and antiviral Viruses C.F., evasion. Basler, system: A.: interferon I Int. Rev. Immunol. 2002, 21:305–337.

O’Shea, J.L., Boulay, Paul, and W.E. J.J., within Molecular : receptors. phylogeny their cytokines cognate and type I 19:159–163. 2003, Immunity

Y., co‑evolution Olive, the and D.: Gilles, of Pontarotti, and the system. TNFRSF Collette, families immune P., A A., perspective TNFSF in Trends Immunol. 2003, 24:387–394.

J.N. Ihle, receptor Cytokine signalling. : 377:591–594. 1995, Nature

Proudfoot, A.E. receptors: multifaceted targets. therapeutic : Chemokine Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2:106–115. 2002,

and system multimodal transcription interferon‑α/β of of T., responses: Taniguchi, The factors. family machinery by A.: the a Takaoka, antiviral regulation gene IRF in Curr. Opin. Immunol. 14:111–116. 2002,

which of associated factors. of Cytokine STAT receptors 3‑16 transcription tyrosine activate the are JAK kinases, with family hematopoietin family the

X.Y. Fu, with domains interferon transcription and cytoplasmic an α‑induced activated A protein SH2 is SH3 directly factor : kinase(s). tyrosine by Cell 70:323–335. 1992,

D.J. Krebs, Hilton, and D.L., signaling. cytokine of proteins: regulators SOCS Negative : 19:378–387. Cells 2001, Stem

biological Jaks O’Shea, and J.J.: Leonard, STATs: and W.J., implications. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 16:293–322. 1998,

control D.E., J.E., biological impact. Levy, and transcriptional Jr.: and Stats: Darnell, Nat. Rev. Mol. Biol. Cell 2002, 3:651–662.

Fremont, Murphy, and D.H., Brett, Ota, T.J., N., T.L., Murphy, K.M. N‑domaindependent activation. for cytokine‑driven : dimers STAT4 required nonphosphorylated Nat. Immunol. 5:208–215. 2004,

S.R., immunodeficiency, L.D., and class M., severe combined new M., and Pesu, F., J.J.: immunosuppressive O’Shea, drugs. Jak3, Candotti, Notarangelo, Hofmann, Husa, a of Immunol. Rev. 203:127–142. 2005,

J.J.: Rytinki, Jääskeläinen, T., Kaikkonen, Palvimo, P., M.M., S., and Pehkonen,

SUMO. interactors associated PIAS proteins: pleiotropic with Cell. Mol. Sci. Life 66:3029–3041. 2009,

C., and Darnell, Shuai, J.E., phosphorylation tyrosine Schindler, cytoplasmic transcription a V.R., Interferon‑dependent Prezioso, of K., factor. Jr.: latent Science 1992, 257:809–813.

of Regulation Liu, K., system. the and immune Shuai, JAK‑STAT B.: signalling in Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2003, 3:900–911.

A., Sasaki, signaling and Yoshimura, A.: regulation Negative cytokine of H., pathways. Yasukawa, Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2000, 18:143–164.

dendritic recruit cells by 3‑17 cells released and Chemokines infection. sites to macrophages of effector

epithelial Palmberg, alveolar production in and Larsson, IL‑8 and human cells. and bacteria K., macrophages P., Malmberg, Larsson, Gram‑positive L.: B.M., IL‑6 induce 1999, 23:217–230. Inflammation

innate and A.D.: chemokines role immunity. adaptive linking The Luster, in of Curr. Opin. Immunol. 2002, 14:129–135.

Lukacs, A., N.W., Hogaboam, Kunkel, C.M., and Matsukawa, S.L. : and innate immunity. Chemokines Rev. Immunogenet. 2:339–358. 2000,

Calzetti, Scapini, J.A., Gasperini, Bazzoni, F., M.A. F., Cassatella, Lapinet-Vera, P., and S., chemokines. The cellular source as a neutrophil : of Immunol. Rev. 177:195–203. 2000,

and K., Y.J. Shortman, Liu, subtypes. dendritic and human Mouse cell : Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2002, 2:151–161.

and in disease during C., and G., defence. M.: responses pathogenesis Godaly, role Cytokine infections: Hedlund, mucosal Svanborg, host Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 2:99–105. 1999,

trafficking Role lymphocytes of in O.: and dendritic cells. of chemokines Yoshie, Int. Hematol. J. 2000, 72:399–407.

3‑18 during endothelial molecules an and cells leukocytes Cell‑adhesion response. control inflammatory interactions between

ligands rolling S.: integrin arrest and sub‑second R., on endothelial From Feigelson, contacts. tap to Alon, vessels: leukocyte dancing blood at and on chemokines Semin. Immunol. 14:93–104. 2002,

Prescott, E.S., and Bunting, M., G.A. T.M., Harris, McIntyre, Zimmerman, S.M., tethering selectin deficiency β2 syndromes: and adhesion and defects involving ligands. integrins Leukocyte : adhesion Curr. Opin. Hematol. 2002, 9:30–35.

in engagement generate D., F., Quantitative R., diversity lymphocyte chemokine Girolomoni, Lang, adhesion. Laudanna, differences Sinigaglia, C., receptor and in Albanesi, G., integrin‑dependent C.: D’Ambrosio, J. Immunol. 2002, 169:2303–2312.

and B., Johnston, E.C. Butcher, rapid in adhesion Chemokines and migration. triggering leukocyte : Semin. Immunol. 2002, 14:83–92.

by neutrophils. of Ley, inflammatory K.: signals rolling Integration Immunol. Rev. 186:8–18. 2002,

more than trafficking vessels: selectins, and through blood chemokines Lymphocyte just and Vestweber, D.: integrins. lymphatic Eur. Immunol. J. 33:1361–1364. 2003,

Neutrophils wave first blood to vessel enter tissue. up cells the 3‑19 make an that wall cross of the inflamed

effect The vitro. P., in and P.: migration interleukin‑8 eosinophils’ recombinant in of on and M., Bochenska-Marciniak, M., neutrophils’ Kuna, Kupczyk, Gorski, vivo and 2003, 58:795–801. Allergy

recruitment, Godaly, H., resistance and Samuelsson, Frendeus, G., Neutrophil Bergsten, infection. to Fischer, Samuelsson, receptors, C.: Svanborg, A.C., B., Lundstedt, and mucosal P., G., chemokine Hang, M., L., J. Leukoc. Biol. 2001, 69:899–906.

neutrophil of Stockley, R.A.: and the eosinophil. Inflammation—role and S., the Gompertz, Semin. Respir. Infect. 15:14–23. 2000,

T.G., Brummet, M.E., Woodworth, Shahabuddin, S.C., Georas, Lee, S.N., S.,

Leiferman, R.P., R.P., S.C., Gladue, Schleimer, Stellato, C., K.M., et al. Gilman, :

of induces protein‑1α monocytes. of human neutrophils recruitment inflammatory macrophage Cutaneous and with subjects significant injection J. Immunol. 164:3392–3401. 2000,

Koltsova, A., Ley, Fukuda, E.K., Gutierrez, S., Sundd, rolling Groisman, P., ‘Slings’ E., at enable M.K., and K.: Pospieszalska, neutrophil Y., high Kuwano, shear. 2012, 488:399–403. Nature

the molecular K.: underlying machinery. orchestrating Burridge, transendothelial and migration: Worthylake, Leukocyte R.A., Curr. Opin. Biol. Cell 2001, 13:569–577.

local released but triggers 3‑20 is when infection important systemically. cytokine of an shock that induces TNF‑α containment

function The Croft, of TNF and role in members M.: T‑cell diseases. superfamily Nat. Rev. Immunol. 9:271–285. 2009,

R.P. Dellinger, patient. : and coagulation: septic the for Inflammation implications Clin. Infect. Dis. 36:1259–1265. 2003,

G., D., Naitza, P., D., Reichhart, Hoffmann, J.A. C., Ferrandon, Swimmer, Zachary, Duyk, Georgel, S., C., Kappler, and C., Kopczynski, J.M., a defense antibacterial protein is Drosophila domain deficiency that : apoptosis. and (IMD) immune activates can death promote Dev. 2001, Cell 1:503–514.

Pfeffer, K.: their of cytokines functions factor Biological and necrosis receptors. tumor Factor Growth Cytokine Rev. 2003, 14:185–191.

Hoffmann, N., Drosophila antibacterial toll‑independent Zhou, Jung, response. Role D.: Ferrandon, in Silverman, IKKγ and R., J.A., Rutschmann, S., immune of a A.C., Nat. Immunol. 2000, 1:342–347.

as cells induce acute‑phase macrophages response. by 3‑21 dendritic and reaction made a Cytokines known systemic the

M., Eugster, and Bopst, Haas, B., H.P. C., Car, by acute endotoxin. phase of induction The inactivation : proteins of necrosis factor the prevents interleukin‑6 combined and major tumor Eur. J. Immunol. 1998, 28:4130–4137.

acute‑phase reaction Ceciliani, during F., proteins. and the Spagnolo, inflammation: A., The systemic V.: Giordano, Protein Pept. Lett. 9:211–223. 2002,

R.D. H., and Sang, He, R., Ye, induces IL‑8 protein‑coupled through : G A secretion a Serum FPRL1/LXA4R. receptor, amyloid Blood 101:1572–1581. 2003,

and Henze, signal Interleukin‑6 function. K.: and transduction F., Horn, lymphocyte Heidrich, C., 2000, Immunobiology 202:151–167.

and A.: P., A.A., Manfredi, injury. immunity Pentraxins, B., Bottazzi, Mantovani, Rovere-Querini, and Garlanda, C., innate humoral tissue Curr. Opin. Immunol. 2008, 20:538–544.

Clos, Mold, W., Rodic-Polic, C., Du and B., Rodriguez, T.W. mediates : through protection interactions protein from with C‑reactive lipopolysaccharide FcγR. Immunol. J. 169:7019–7025. 2002,

defense. host viral Interferons by infection induced make contributions to several 3‑22

Artyomov, Wheadon, Y., and Yokoyama, T.J., McCune, H.W. B.T., Kambal, Virgin, Baldridge, M.T., Diamond, Nice, Ivanova, M., M., A., M.S., C.C., persistence infection. microbes of interferon‑λ : enteric determine and murine norovirus Commensal 347:266–269. 2015, Science

E.R. Carrero, Calderon, B., and J.A., Unanue, I lymphocytes to and to Listeria reduces resistance infection. Type sensitizes : interferon apoptosis J. Exp. Med. 2004, 200:535–540.

the interferon regulatory factors. K., Taniguchi, family Takaoka, and Honda, I T.: transcription by gene induction A., factor Type interferon of Immunity 2006, 25:349–360.

Kawai, S.: and viral T., immune infection. of recognition Akira, Innate Nat. Immunol. 7:131–137. 2006,

Y.J. Liu, : cell interferon‑producing dendritic precursors. 1 and professional type plasmacytoid cells IPC: Annu. Rev. Immunol. 23:275–306. 2005,

helicases: J.: parallel Toll‑like to RNA antiviral Tschopp, receptors and Meylan, E., and ways two trigger responses. Mol. Cell 2006, 22:561–569.

Saha, E.M., bacterial infections. and and G.: Cheng, S.K., to Pietras, interferon The viral response Endotoxin J. Res. 2006, 12:246–250.

T., S., Pott, Duerr, Mordstein, J., Staeheli, Stockinger, M.W. C.U., P., Hornef, T., Michiels, and Mahlakv, M., determines epithelial intestinal : IFN‑lambda the host antiviral defense. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 108:7944–7949. USA 2011,

cells early innate types 3‑23 provide protection in lymphoid of Several infection.

into M.L., Robinette, Colonna, and cells: lymphoid function M.: Innate Cortez, and V.S., development. insights new Curr. Opin. Immunol. 32:71–77. 2015,

Colonna, D., al. Artis, Locksley, R.E., A.N., R.M., A., G., Spits, Diefenbach, McKenzie, Koyasu, J.P., Santo, Eberl, S., H., et M., Mebius, Di Innate : for cells—a proposal lymphoid uniform nomenclature. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 13:145–149. 2013,

3‑24 by and cytokines. NK cells type interferon activated I are macrophage‑derived

M.B. and Brenner, D.C., Barral, how presentation: it works. antigen CD1 : Nat. Rev. Immunol. 7:929–941. 2007,

C., Gineau, Dunne, N., Trouillet, J., C., S., Picard, Lach, Eidenschenk, Veturi, U., L., al. C., C., Kara, F.P., et Aoufouchi Cognet, retardation, with in insufficiency, : and patients killer deficiency. MCM4 cell deficiency Partial growth adrenal natural Clin. J. Invest. 2012, 122:821–832.

M.J., W.G. Burch, J.C., Peyton, Cheadle, C.J., Godshall, and P.T., Scott, during killer in Natural with macrophages. through clearance bacterial interactions peritonitis participate cells : septic 19:144–149. Shock 2003,

Lanier, L.L. cells viruses. NK between : Evolutionary and struggles Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2008, 8:259–268.

T.P., Hamilton, T.A., Biron, C.A. and Salazar-Mather, : chemokine‑to‑cytokine‑to‑chemokine A antiviral critical in cascade defense. J. Clin. Invest. 105:985–993. 2000,

T roles the T., (NK) 1 T natural K., organ immune Seki, line of host of cells, in crucial cells as in Takeda, defense: first The killer S., liver Hiraide, Kawamura, Kupffer Ag+ Habu, Dobashi, responses. helper Ohkawa, T., H.: cells the NK1.1 and H., a Y., and Immunol. Rev. 174:35–46. 2000,

the Immune Plougastel, killer gene encoded complex. and B.F.: by Yokoyama, W.M., functions natural Nat. Rev. Immunol. 3:304–316. 2003,

healthy and distinguish between infected cells express receptors to inhibitory NK activating 3‑25 cells. and

receptors belong structural NK‑cell & several the KIRs, to families, 3‑26

KLRs, NCRs. and

Solana, D.K., Coligan, K., Borrego, Pena, J.E. L., Kim, Kabat, J., J., R., Lieto, Maasho, F., and complex (MHC) specific natural function class I Structure expressed (NK) receptors cells. : and human histocompatibility killer of on major Mol. Immunol. 2002, 38:637–660.

J.C., Boyington, P.D. and Sun, perspective killer receptors. class on A I : MHC structural by immunoglobulin‑like recognition cell Mol. Immunol. 38:1007–1021. 2002,

Dubbelde, W.M. Stone, Heusel, Dokun, Scalzo, Beckman, J.W., and Blattenberger, L.R., A.O., E.A., M.G., Yokoyama, Brown, C.E., A.A., Smith, D.L., H.R., : in involvement a viral of resistance natural activation receptor Vital to killer infection. cell Science 2001, 292:934–937.

E.O. Long, cell inhibitory the NK Negative receptors: paradigm. signalling : by Immunol. Rev. 2008, 224:70–84.

roles against emerging host agents. defense and Brossay, Robbins, infectious receptors: S.H., L.: in cell NK Infect. Microbes 4:1523–1530. 2002,

MHC Trowsdale, relationships NK genes. Genetic and functional receptor between J.: and Immunity 15:363–374. 2001,

P.: and Vilches, innate evolving immunity. C., diverse, receptors rapidly KIR: of and adaptive Parham, Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2002, 20:217–251.

immunity? W.M., and Zitvogel, adaptive Raulet, S.: A., L., L.L., E., Ugolini, Lanier, or M.A., Vivier, D.H., Moretta, Innate Caligiuri, Yokoyama, cells. killer The example natural of 2011, 331:44–49. Science

Vivier, of T., S.: natural Walzer, cells. Ugolini, Tomasello, and killer E., E., Baratin, M., Functions Nat. Immunol. 9:503–510. 2008,

activating on 3‑27 tumor express that cells. cells receptors recognize ligands infected cells NK induced or

Haldeman, Z., M., E.C., Brandt, Kennedy, C.D., et B., C., Chabannon, Gao, Yi, al. T., Fox, J., Ostrander, Baratin, C.S., B., Kaifu, natural cell NKp30 cell is ligand in family tumor a B7 humans. the member The activating for : killer receptor B7‑H6 J. Exp. Med. 2009, 206:1495–1503.

NKG2D damage pathway Brown, DNA Orsulic, regulates The and D.H.: the innate Raulet, ligands of receptor. S., Gasser, S., system E.J., immune Nature 436:1186–1190. 2005,

and and of human NKG2D V., its ligands. S., Immunobiology T.: Gonzalez, Spies, Groh, Curr. Top. Microbiol. Immunol. 2006, 298:121–138.

L.L. Lanier, natural cell on activation killer : inhibition. and tightrope: Up the Nat. Immunol. 2008, 9:495–502.

Castriconi, tumor NK D., ligands Surface Pende, Mingari, Moretta, cells. receptors Moretta, on and A.: R., and C., their M.C., L., Bottino, Semin. Immunol. 18:151–158. 2006,

I MHC Parham, KIRs human and molecules history, P.: survival. class and health in Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2005, 5:201–214.

stress Raulet, killer cell immune N.: role the Oncogenic and sensed D.H., receptors. Guerra, of natural by system: Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2009, 9:568–580.

Leibson, Upshaw, P.J. and J.L., and activation unique pathways cytotoxic outcomes. : lymphocytes: signaling functional distinct of NKG2D‑mediated Semin. Immunol. 2006, 18:167–175.

killer Nunes, pathways. Vivier, Vely, F.: E., cell Natural J.A., signaling and 2004, Science 306:1517–1519.

Innate that work are pathogens against defense interferons infection, but only and nonspecific or responses have molecular initial immune defenses. induce the certain control patterns other body’s that to these of fight to lymphocytes recognize antigens an To have bacteria, and viruses, great organisms. system individual will effectively the disease-causing immune different from a of pathogens the evolved other range variety wide adaptive encounter, the of that proteins or highly a the lymphocytes. of antigen any molecule is recognition specifically recognized of An by molecule is specialized part producing antigen a specificity proteins the range these each On vast of (Igs), 1-12). in immunoglobulins cell (see a produce these cells immunoglobulins cells which B Section are specificities, single B of on form immunoglobulin A receptor as surface for and antigen, the known membrane-bound is (BCR). cell’s receptor serves B-cell of B-cell the as the form plasma of of the antigen specificity A secreted same differentiated terminally cells—plasmablasts the produced and by immunoglobulin is B antibody cells. their extracellular of spaces the (see antibodies, in of or products which The pathogens Fig. toxic body secretion the bind adaptive the main in effector cells of function B is 1.25), immunity.

and in detail. proteins are characterized, recognition the involved were Antibodies great specific in understood first be immune to the antibody antibody destroy once other molecule have to cells other to The pathogen bind immune to the pathogen response; the has the to functions: that separate molecules or specifically is one has two elicited bound. its products recruit and is For destruction and complement, described for viruses mark pathogens antibodies neutralize by binding example, 3. by phagocytes and and as can in 2 Chapters elimination the part the in are of specifically mechanisms. structurally which the effector separated antibody functions molecule, the to binds engages other whereas and antigen one Recognition region the antibody and The between known V antigen-binding region. molecules extensively region as varies is or variable that virtually recognized. the molecules ensure any structure a repertoire a total enough to specific variability bind antibody by is to made be can The allows individual large single antibodies of antibody different and of antigen, each way engages the vary does effector same immune antibody and not of The of system the region the in molecule the functions that

molecule. structure antibody of The typical a

The antigen. with of specific the antibody molecule interaction

T cells. by recognition Antigen

region. region known constant or the as is C mechanisms. called effector of is comes which five different specialized for It each isotypes, forms, main activating in B in these receptor inserted because effector not functions, of the region cell. the The the membrane membrane-bound B-cell have does remains C function and the the that activates B signal B-cell to the the receptor leading a of regions V antibody is thus and expansion The on exposed cell, cell, clonal via antigen recognize surface of bind the production. transmitting to the set be in 7. receptor with proteins, To Chapter this a associated intracellular described of which signaling B-cell will is end, Chapter become return important drug due discuss highly their an Antibodies specific 16. uses therapeutic and class have their to of we activities, in to

for antigen-recognition cells The an proteins, which are only cells signal to of intracellular complex associated activation. are made and signaling function T solely with membrane-bound T molecules as produces receptors to which protein their mechanism both regions—and in genetic their great that discussed and V are structure—having is related 5. in both in (TCRs) C Chapter variability, immunoglobulins the These T-cell them T-cell to MHC host that B-cell receptor way, does fragments recognize are as by peptide The surface important not receptor in an bind itself, short of cells. instead protein from presented known differs it the the and molecules of on recognizes by but proteins however: antigens antigen

MHC (MHC). genes as are transmembrane molecules large glycoproteins encoded known the in the The complex cluster of histocompatibility major of of striking cleft face a molecule the most is the can in in structural molecules feature bound. The MHC be peptides which extracellular the MHC versions—within occurs type different population. molecule of MHC are in many polymorphic—each highly molecules are of versions called alleles. encoded individual different genes slightly These by for be Most heterozygous MHC range and for self-peptides type of two they that is, increasing different of molecule, each molecules: alleles the bound. pathogen-derived express are MHC peptides therefore that can people thus the features and both receptors which T-cell of it peptide to the the is antigen recognize MHC bound. molecule any to peptide specific a restriction is known bound MHC dimension This for receptor T-cell introduces T cells, antigen a as extra to because particular molecule. recognition given an MHC particular by

In receptors. immunoglobulins we antigen-binding and the on properties T-cell chapter this and of focus structure distinct use Although and molecules very in foreign cells similar fashions, they B molecules are recognize for structure. cells the receptor T separate task this in accommodate as variability their and will antigen see receptors functions to immunoglobulins and adaptive anti-gen-recognition it response. great enables how immune of basic molecules We structure T-cell the perform the this how in can specificity, 8, With development of impact T-cell and recognition will to this foundation, discuss on antigen T-cell in Chapters the and return polymorphism we MHC 6 respectively.

typical molecule. a The structure of antibody

the B-cell receptor. of are the Antibodies form secreted Because soluble antibodies into obtained secreted in easily large the are they quantities, and are and studied. easily blood reason, antibodies. what For B-cell the most of we this from about know the of comes receptor study

are represented as roughly Fig. Y-shaped, molecules Antibody in three using styles. different schematic 4.1 molecule binding this also variety part will perform antigens effector how while the of of and wide allows dual to to of formed structure This chapter the binding tasks a explain its molecules antibody is to

Fig. Structure molecule. an antibody of 4.1 diagram a antibody structure crystallographic the polypeptide in of of igg an X-ray illustrated ribbon is the of a, backbones the as panel chains. chains purple. yellow heavy shown in two The and are chains The red. both shown in light are two Y globular Three form approximate regions an shape. of arms, at flexible the by region. of two hinge The to tips which other tethered sites the antigen-binding at are the end are trunk a their the Y are light-chain region (cL) variable and indicated. The constant (VL) The of the together antibody. (Vh) form the VL region antigen-binding and site variable heavy-chain as immunoglobulin denotes a each same in a b, structure domain panel of representation schematic the separate rectangle. a each (ch1) yellow domain The line, constant heavy or by to chain’s is purple tethers that thin respectively. hinge first illustrated (ch2) second its The concave indicated Vh. sites in and antibody-binding are by regions VL of indicated. are Positions modifications and disulfide carbohydrate linkages constant is variable shown the book in in will region red blue. schematic a more region throughout that in used be with and panel simplified this c, the terminus; terminus, amino c terminus, n carboxy terminus. courtesy Structure of R.L. Stanfield and i.A. Wilson.

that antigen. the cells destroy and to is parts different of performed molecule. the tasks these Each by of the molecules. binding, the in antibody regions—are and Y—the structure in detailed of V The arms involved antigen of their vary between two they ends different of The the and region—is with the Y—the effector and less variable C molecules part far that is interacts cells. stem from classes There and in of properties. that immunoglobulins, different their constructed being structures C five are different have distinguished regions known immunoglobulin (IgE). and immunoglobulin (IgG), A M (IgA), immunoglobulin These D (IgM), immunoglobulin are (IgD), E G as immunoglobulin

is chains, the term way polypeptide All are the immunoglobulin in light generic same all used such constructed paired and proteins. for and antibodies heavy from differences specificity confined region for antigen binding. the V More of subtle to the account IgG as the describe will antibody example of an the to features We structural use molecule general immunoglobulins.

antibodies polypeptide of four 4-1 consist IgG chains.

of are with large composed antibodies of chains. 150 polypeptide different IgG weight molecules molecular kinds two approximately of are kDa and a heavy of L H other, chain kDa, of is is or 50 (Fig. or called the kDa, chain, the approximately 25 light One, and the 4.2). light Each chains. of IgG heavy chains consists molecule two two and a disulfide two other by are bond. chain to The disulfide linked heavy linked bonds, and light chains each is by heavy each to a chain molecule, given and are chains two identical, the immunoglobulin an In the molecule antigen-binding identical antibody light sites. heavy two chains two any giving the identical bind the antigens called This which the simultaneously to is to gives total its increasing strength on avidity. ability thereby surface, antibody a the interaction, of two strength between its its The interaction a and antigen-binding site single affinity. antigen is called of the

chains, (κ), antibodies. lambda in kappa of (λ) types and found light are Two or λ κ each. either chains, never has chains A one immunoglobulin given of κ between or be has of difference found can found any functional classes. of No chain the been five antibodies light type in having major λ light chains, antibodies of either and species ratio two the The of chains species. light light varies from to types of to In whereas and ratio it λ mice, cattle in κ in 20:1, 2:1 average is is it the 1:20. humans is this variation for reason The is unknown. to detect Distortions can the of be a of this sometimes proliferation ratio abnormal used

Fig. heavy composed molecules chains: Immunoglobulin 4.2 of chains protein are two of and chains. light types chain linked is molecule together. so heavy is chain chains two each bonds chains immunoglobulin to hinged of two joined heavy (green) chains are and light linked that disulfide made light by up each heavy a two and the (yellow)

B since clone, a all B-cell identical cell express progeny will of particular light chain. an example, presence producing light chains abnormally person λ tumor B-cell indicate of a the that level λ a of an high For is chains. in might

heavy defined of its effector function, of is the thus and chain. antibody the The structure class, an by of determine or these molecule. activity some heavy-chain classes, isotypes, several an subtypes, of are main There functional have which and the antibody five Greek IgM, chains are classes IgD, and five by are heavy α, letters respectively. IgE, the denoted their of IgA, IgG, δ, lowercase immunoglobulin and major and μ, γ, The ε, the IgM Cμ. example, by denoted is constant region For of subclasses most the has 3, is abundant in far by humans). (IgG1, and 2, in 4 several and IgG serum immunoglobulin carboxy-terminal classes not different of is associated subclasses functional of heavy chain with the the by where part The the and the properties of this are chain, chain. light distinctive conferred antibodies general The with to all are isotypes antigen structural of respect similar, the binding. particularly features we will as 5. Here IgG and consider molecule, and of the the antibody return typical functional Chapter different in structural we properties will isotypes a to discuss heavy-chain

for that of C receptor of of a terminus heavy-chain is B-cell carboxy the a of its except portion structure small region. antibody The corresponding the identical to antibody is the B-cell the that terminus and hydrophilic In carboxy amino membrane, secretion. the anchors molecule acid a hydrophobic sequence is receptor, a the sequence that allows the in it in

are constant composed heavy variable 4-2 and chains of and Immunoglobulin light regions.

features The amino acid of and chains reveal and been have sequences of light many molecules. two immunoglobulin important antibody determined heavy about of not long. each although First, consists similar, series acids amino 110 identical, of each sequences, chain a of domain. region to a protein compactly or discrete, as repeats corresponds Each domain, known of an Ig immunoglobulin folded these domains, four (see domains 4.2). the The of Fig. the chain chain Ig two Ig of heavy contains light consists antibody whereas IgG have suggests evolved single the that Ig ancestral gene a duplication by repeated corresponding This to of immunoglobulin segments chains domain.

vary the feature amino antibodies. different second between greatly and of acid is amino-terminal sequences that light The the important heavy chains isotype. constant chains Ig first of domains first to variability remaining is amino 110 approximately corresponding the the the the The whereas limited to are immunoglobulin domain, between acids, same C antibody region determine of region up (CH heavy chains respectively) variable Fig. light its (C chains together light of constant domains V make the VL, the make and heavy whereas the (see the the and CL, and domains respectively) Ig The antigen-binding specificity, (VH Ig of the and amino-terminal up and domains) domains) (V 4.1). domains C are and from multiple end the The on. example, terminus, CH2, carboxy numbered so CH1, the amino-terminal heavy-chain to for

molecule immunoglobulin have of The 4-3 domains similar structures. an

overall of series and Ig structure. Immunoglobulin composed heavy are that have chains a a of domains light similar between illustrated are V structure, for chain and this domains are that Within the in C there distinct differences light Fig. basic 4.3. is constructed domain V β from C two sheets. Each or is β sheet A

Fig. variable of domains. and immunoglobulin structure The 4.3 constant upper schematically panels show chain. light and (c) domains constant variable of an of (V) immunoglobulin the pattern The folding the are together which c polypeptide to and directions disulfide domain), and which domain together pack of the a (antiparallel) (shown (β form each red is the structure domain held in yellow strands for a blue barrel-shaped and chain in in β strands) opposite green sheets V bond. by for running two to opened polypeptide can shown way give final in more sheets seen clearly which in be when the folds panels. are structure the chain the out, The as lower the is with their sheet sequentially respect sequence the immunoglobulin characteristic in amino the to each the acid lettered β of the The strands occurrence order in domains. domains; are of β of order The not that domains a β domains cʹʹ the but and in are are in found V c the strands cʹ by background. indicated blue-shaded and superfamily proteins four-strand antibodies of whole five-strand characteristic receptors. immunoglobulin as a building T-cell domain) found in three-strand (c-region arrangements are domain plus type The type or other four-strand as range (V-region domain) plus well typical blocks,

which polypeptides regions an conformation. have are consecutive from peptide strands, or flat, β backbone in bonds arranged of several several extended, where protein their built ‘ribbons to proteins sometimes in (see β direction of with the shown Fig. the as indicate polypeptide an arrow’ backbone strands are 4.3). together hydrogen adjacent being strands. pack or a can in between by three two strands stabilized bonds backbone laterally manner, β side-by-side called sheet. a β is This arrangement of between disulfide other, Ig two bond from two are sandwich, each pieces residues linked into folded like The covalently β structure a sheets called are cysteine onto that domain has a β a by β bread, each and sheet. is fold. known as distinctive This immunoglobulin structure the

The between bottom seen C and can domains in similarities the differences be panels and of Fig. V 4.3. as each chains have how polypeptide their forms turns Here, between the fold flexible change opened loops show strands respective to how create direction. to adjacent polypeptide it βsheets to chain of β Ig out and each been the domains domain V Cʹʹ. called V is main difference and and The contains the and between is larger that domains β Cʹ strands, the C extra to site the the contribute of molecule. the formed some flexible the domain, antigen-binding β between In of loops the strands V immunoglobulin

the acids present that are the amino fold Many V in domains C common the essential for and its core immunoglobulin are are to stability. of the of and with domains). immunoglobulin-like similar been structure, sequences immunoglobulins called of domains to proteins have those to similar (Ig-like Other found have a with domains domains Chapter by NK These such of the as present proteins are immune in cells expressed KIRs many 3. in described system, the in extensive receptors, and these cell–cell and make superfamily. up frequently the involved with the the adhesion, are recognition immunoglobulin proteins and immunoglobulins together T-cell They also

functionally 4-4 fragments. readily into molecule antibody cleaved can distinct be The

to arms with fully joined portions, known Fig. comprises assembled, hinge of stretch trunk three by region its a chain flexible two the an equal-sized as molecule antibody When globular its (see polypeptide 4.1b). the heavy Each paired structure domain chain; with CL the domain with this CH1 association is chain domain. domain, is VL formed the and Y-shaped by arm amino-terminal VH of half paired light a is with the of a of the the The (see formed are antigen-binding two the VH the sites of arms Fig. the the paired VL and Y by of two at ends domains 4.1b). two by The of of is halves carboxyterminal of chains. the heavy the the formed Y pairing the trunk The do interact. CH2 each domains but CH3 domains with other not pair the chains. the the two domains CH2 heavy between Carbohydrate side attached chains lie to

it structure, terminology Proteolytic is early valuable important tool studies of to were review an enzymes in antibody the they and generated. (proteases) three fragments papain Limited antibody digestion the protease into with (Fig. molecules cleaves 4.4). the as the that the antigen-binding the antibody the disulfide two molecule heavy activity. identical of link that of cuts amino-terminal the two side releasing on antibody bonds fragments molecule Papain two contain the chains, arms are for These binding. the called Fab fragments, fragment antigen it named fragment antigen-binding crystallized contains no was fragment crystallizable). activity, because Fc readily, (fragment the but other The it CH3 It CH2 the domains. corresponds paired to and of interact part that the does but with isotypes. and heavy-chain antigen, rather is antibody interacts fragment cells, it The the Fc with molecules and differs between molecule not effector the protease, carboxy-terminal (see disulfide side on bonds the of Fig. Another pepsin, cuts 4.4). the fragment, the the molecule F(abʹ)2 fragment, a This linked. antigen-binding of in remain antibody arms which two produces of small into heavy chain several part the fragments. the cuts Pepsin remaining to receptors, antigen-binding functions has but is any the as effector characteristics effector antibody or F(abʹ)2 the experimentally and exactly the with The can Fc antibody’s to antigen-binding such unable interact functions. the same fragment other original from molecule, be C1q as used separate

constructed used and antibody-related antibodies be antibody-related engineering a diseases. variety can molecules molecules of treat techniques, genetic using to being many Many are and therapeutically Chapter topic therapeutic two to that of developed the antibodies where uses various last this will return the decades. discuss we We been have 16, in over

Fig. can proteases. digestion The partial immunoglobulin molecule be 4.4 by dissected Y-shaped with fragment. into fragments one immunoglobulin Upper pieces, three and the fc cleaves panels: papain two fab molecule fab the contains fragment The regions binds V antigen. and regions. fragment and contains The fc is crystallizable c which f(abʹ)2 many Lower pfcʹ pepsin and of panels: pieces fragment. of cleaves fc yield immunoglobulin one the largest fragment, small the to the called fragment is than amino including a f(abʹ)2 it written prime disulfide is the few cysteines acids a contains more because the with form that fab, bonds.

in region immunoglobulin arms of ×300,000) molecule 90oAngle allows flexibility hinge antigens. The 60o(Micrograph between 4-5 Angle is the to multiple binding arms between is

region the the of some IgG the arms. and portions Fab independent Fab The of molecule for hinge movement Fc of two allows degree between in For shown molecule example, in Fig. the antibody are two also different. the regions arms 4.1a, of only C clearly the differently, between hinge the is Fab angle domains and bent each in not V but the two joint.’ studies to motion a V referred revealed haptens. antibodies to ball-and-socket This domains flexibility small led the antigens be bound ‘molecular to junction and range as between of by C the can This known has as of being are a are chain. about various These of side types typically that size of the tyrosine molecules can hap-tens production when stimulate are Appendix specifically A-1). the anti-hapten only by a antibodies (see antibody, recognized to I, protein of they linked Section Although flexible by can anti-hapten and can which region electron trimers, antibodies, dimers, by hapten on, a Two so (Fig. molecules tetramers, or two be more joined seen short microscopy forming link identical 4.5). by molecules formed show these are region. complexes flexible antibody at shapes The that hinge the is and at the found domains, also domain relative Some between junction V to and flexibility C V of rotation C allowing the bending domain. the the the antibody to at the enables polysaccharides. distance bind to the apart, as junction sites sites of two hinge on arms the bacterial repeating an molecule both Flexibility some V–C cell-wall and such effector interact antibodies immune to proteins antibody-binding that at the Flexibility the with hinge enables mediate also mechanisms.

Summary.

two molecule flexible identical antibody four forming thought and as chains of chains, a The chains, structure. can two Y-shaped up light is IgG comprising identical heavy of be made polypeptide and site, to a Each and its four amino variable antigen-binding (C) has (V) region the contributes of terminus, the at chains region. which a constant arm Y sites, interactions generate are heavy in disulfide antigen-binding two lie regions of identical the of and the the chains V of pair which many bonds, arms and the to chains and to of heavy bound each chains the light noncovalent at light the by Y. by tips the The higher possession allows of to antigens sites avidity. more and and two The to molecules with bind stably cross-link them antigen-binding much antibody that is the the fragment, carboxy-terminal these the of of The domains also heavy of domains determine trunk composed called the isotype. it is Fc and chains, antibody’s the Y, trunk the hinge the to are the Joining regions. arms of flexible Y the hinge fragment and The Fc antibodies differ isotypes. of in different regions

Fig. a flexible joined hinge. Antibody by are 4.5 arms to used molecules (red the complexes, of be hapten is can cross-link micrograph. antigen:antibody create antigen two An two electron seen balls diagrams) in which antigen-binding consisting sites that in can with spikes. are square and short projections or seen, Linear, forms triangular, the (not the fc of shown which Limited portion correspond digestion cross-linked therefore f(abʹ)2 in spikes the remain these by antigen. figure), pepsin removes to antibody; pieces the the is diagrams. interpretation complexes of of shown the some The in the angle the molecules of between varies. antibody arms The that 60°, square arms forms, whereas forms, 90° in is triangular the the in connections showing the angle between it is are this flexible. the n.M. green. courtesy of Photograph

molecules Different cell interactions and and isotypes with differ effector properties have different therefore in their types. However, organization is overall in the all the similar of isotypes. domains

The with interaction specific the of antibody antigen. molecule

molecule the at In of more this we antigen-binding look chapter detail. the part in site an immunoglobulin of antibody, address determines the ways the antigens of variation in antibody specificity question how sequences bind can of for V in which different to the We domains discuss antigen. the and the

form hypervariable antigen-binding site. the 4-6 Localized sequence regions of

differ given of every V antibody The regions molecule other. any from of those clearly is variability is as concentrated region seen the plot certain variability V in is however, throughout but evenly segments, not, (Fig. distributed Sequence a in of amino V 4.6), compared. regions are different sequences many in antibody the acid which and identified VH VL variable domains. can particularly in both be the Three segments and denoted HV2, regions They hypervariable are HV3. and HV1, are designated they are light to located 65, to residues 49 and to 35, to the the 92 respectively, at to 103, 49 103, 36, located while In residues 30 respectively. 59, chains are heavy and 95 they to 28 at chains in most in part of domain region. variable the The the is HV3 are the the hypervariable the The regions variability show less they V termed comprise framework domain; of the between regions rest regions. and regions in There FR4. FR3, designated V such and FR1, four FR2, are domain, each

provide structural framework The regions immunoglobulin of domain. the that framework the form β the sheets loops the correspond edge domain at and positioned of the hypervariable to in (Fig. are near one the sandwich outer β folded sequences three The another 4.7). a only localized of Thus, particular to particular in V diversity also parts concentrated is domain not is it but the sequence,

Fig. 4.6 are hypervariability in V discrete There domains. regions of

antigen binding heavy hypervariability the antibody of light chain the an The contribute to molecule. of and both regions sequences derived of heavy-chain acid variability dozen shown. plot from A is several comparison the light-chain amino V of domains and the most sequences in seen common variability each amino degree frequency the At the different of amino acids to the of all amino is together the acid. acid the of position, of ratio number of indicated regions Three are (hV1, and in hypervariable hV2, hV3) red. (fR1, variable or framework less fR4, are by regions yellow). flanked shown and fR3, fR2, They blue in

Fig. The hypervariable the discrete folded of loops structure. lie regions 4.7 in

map positioned coding the are of hypervariable domain. panel: first the V (red) the a structure of the of region on regions as are join a to loops panel: ribbon in β that (red) hypervariable particular seen diagram, strands. regions when shown occur flattened Second form these together Third domain, of to panel: antigen-binding structure brought (red) are the regions. in the folded loops V brings create each each a antibody and the a in surface, loops forms pairing arm. a chain tip from the site a complete fourth light chain the antigen-binding which at hypervariable single heavy hypervariable the to of of panel: chain molecule, together the are as commonly hypervariable complementary surface, to regions the are complementarity-determining they (cDRs). known regions antigen also Because the terminus. c, amino carboxy terminus; n,

of the on surface molecule. region the paired are the each single When a site of molecule, arm tip hypervariable VL and domain each antibody the loops brought three are the VH at immunoglobulin domains creating molecule. in from the hypervariable the together, of This antigen-binding the determines of the site, antibody-combining the or which specificity antigen site, is antibody. the six bind. to they more form termed the that is or hypervariable loops are surface complementarity-determining CDRs, of the they antigen complementary regions, These commonly because from chains, each light and CDR3. CDRs namely, heavy three are CDR1, CDR2, the of and There from light VH final chain antigen-binding domains contribute the site; CDRs combination Fig. specificity heavy and determines cases, that both thus (see the it to the the of antigen usually is the most VL and In 4.6). binding influenza involves Fab interaction one contacts and Fab, However, interaction antigen other with that CDR3, mostly antigen with in CDRs. heavy chain; minor just structures crystal there VH are to the only show for example, the some to way is V of of in heavy-chain system generate immune light-chain specificities different by different is which Thus, antibodies generating one regions. the and combinations able genes form when of created light-chain Chapter are smaller B during This second regions combinatorial as how V of marrow. in encounter encoding the diversity diversity; from the segments consider is cells 5 combinatorial we the the will development a and DNA in known of heavy-chain bone we

Antibodies bind size antigen. antigens contacts and shape complementary that are of in to via the 4-7 CDRs the

quantities of of were only a antibody-secreting the investigations large molecule type antibodies, early antigen cells. tumors sources of available binding single of to of In antibody of could were unknown, therefore antigen be to many ligands specificities be to to these The that had antigen screened antibodies compounds and identify binding. used study haptens 4-5) to phosphocholine In found K1. Section the general, substances vitamin to such antibodies or were as these bind (see antibodies evidence the with first the regions hapten. for the direct demonstrated structural analysis site, and basis complexes ligands provided Structural form hypervariable antigen-binding specificity the of of the hapten of that their a became Appendix monoclonal with Subsequently, for pure discovery of antibodies it methods the make Section antibody A-7), of I, of specific antigen. to large (see amounts given possible generating extending of provided antigens, of the This antibodies antibody–antigen confirming a interact and the of study general with derived more picture view interactions haptens. has how their from

juxtaposition heavy of binds. the the and of an light the of chains formed to by the the surface The molecule which CDRs site is antigen antibody CDRs too in are different the acid The the of different shapes these CDRs. are of properties so antibodies, created the sequences amino and and by surfaces surfaces bind site. As whose are that a antibodies ligands of antigen-binding general the principle, to complementary a short A or a antigen, small as hapten such

binding first representations row fragment groove; third antibody: of panels panel, an of pocket; in The surface; surface. and a in schematic the panel, show protruding the fab types panel, top extended panel, of fourth second different sites of are Below examples each type. antigen-binding complementarity-determining (cDRs) the fab the Panel regions molecular fragment the into small a: hapten the looking with the site. surface top image as shows viewed of a of interaction of a The ferrocene bound is antigen-binding shown the hapten, pocket into red, in (yellow). by image and has c, in (and the b, view give molecule rotated side-on the to a d), of the binding site. of bottom panels been about those 90° in antibody V (yellow) heavy-chain a and an immunodeficiency complex a the along human groove virus the between with of a b: (red) domains. Panel formed binds peptide the light-chain in from (hiV), peptide complex corresponding egg-white of is c: Panel (hyhel5). the fragment its antibody shown lysozyme between hen fab and a into the with The lysozyme the colored yellow. that surface contact antibody is on comes are six site All antigen-binding binding. of in the the cDRs involved elongated loop protrudes on an an antigen hiV molecule the a that d: gp120 the Panel side antigen. of recess (arrow) the against antibody into has cDR3 gp120. solved, antibody heavy this the and chain complex been this and only case The structure in has of interacts with between the gp120 Structures courtesy of R.L. i.A. Stanfield and Wilson.

Fig. Antigens bind or in or can pockets, the surfaces on antibodies. sites extended in 4.8 binding grooves, of

the light-chain and a heavy-chain or domains V groove between lying binds peptide, in (Fig. pocket generally b). and 4.8a such the be antibody larger the than, Some antigens, or can proteins, size itself. as, as same interface cases, in between an as these (see that cases, often framework antibody the well and, part extended is and antigen some the the Fig. all CDRs of involves surface region In 4.8c). be undulating, flat, be convex. need or surface This but not can even concave surface the some recesses a ‘finger’ protrude antigen, antibody CDR3 of as the shown can loops in In in cases, into Fig. molecules with elongated to binding antigen antibody projects a where an target. loop gp120 4.8d, into the HIV its long

on antigens to a of Antibodies forces. 4-8 using noncovalent of bind variety the conformational shapes surfaces

function bind from of and and antibodies to the is their removal facilitate pathogens biological The to products, their body. to polysaccharide the a or recognizes such surface large generally small An only protein. a as molecule antibody of region on a by antigenic called structure or an The recognized is an epitope. determinant antibody protection against providing subunits the the of that coats, of sugar in recognize epitopes immune pathogens antibodies polysaccharide these by important such most Some essential are pathogens. formed molecules and have provoke cases, antigens proteins. In that the an immune response many however, are recognize many against viruses viral example, proteins. protective antibodies For coat the In protein. structures are antibody of surface recognized all located on such by the cases, the the amino chain sites composed are from likely to have of of protein brought the that be together Such parts been different by acids folding. polypeptide or are discontinuous the is sequence in discontinuous this antigen are conformational as the that of together structure structure. protein Antigenic of recognized the brought segments the determinants because are known of amino epitopes three-dimensional acid but of in composed kind the a a epitope. chain In termed polypeptide segment epitope composed single of continuous contrast, linear an is or of will folded peptide intact, Although of recognize fragments against proteins epitopes, antibodies most protein. to raised bind discontinuous fully the some peptides a bind Conversely, are to synthetic of part against protein. sequence natural antibodies to its raised to the folded against occasionally peptides found corresponding protein of or to a aim in in peptides against it cases, makes use that This synthetic antibodies possible, protein. some to pathogen’s vaccines raise

extremes of can high by interaction an by antibody of epitope pure concentrations its concentrations, antigen pH, The sometimes be between salt high detergents, by disrupted itself. by and and competition with the binding therefore a The is noncovalent reversible interaction. or outlined involved interactions are in noncovalent in bonds, The forces, Fig. these 4.9. chains, amino occur acid bridges. Electrostatic as interactions charged salt in between side Most interaction. involve interactions antibody–antigen at least one electrostatic short-range occur between can dipoles, involve or van forces. electric Interactions bonds, also der hydrogen Waals as in hydrogen electrostatic interactions concentrations pH High and of antigen–antibody and/or salt extremes by binding disrupt bonds. weakening by principle like a in (see antibodies Section purification by is antigens Appendix antigens This antibody columns using in of the (or affinity employed of the manner) in I, A-3). purification using immobilized of exclude water. to interactions when Hydrophobic come hydrophobic two occur together surfaces of interaction that area probably for interactions antigens, from the hydrophobic energy. The proportional the most is is binding surface strength account hidden of to and water, hydrophobic some for a the water between interface in pockets in antigen trapped some molecules antibody. cases, and In are water binding between residues, of specificity trapped especially to polar also acid the to those molecules, hence contribute antibody. may and amino These the

antigen each interaction forces to depends contribution antibody these overall on and The of involved. of the particular the natural is that other A antigens interactions protein most antibody interactions often striking protein– antibodies difference with between many aromatic amino acids protein have and

between O) Waals Cation-pi forces shared C with water molecules H Hydrogen forces electron Hydrophobic electronegative polarize O Hydrogen O bonds (N, HO in Origin N molecules. ˜–˜–˜+˜–˜–˜+˜+˜–˜˜–˜–˜–˜–˜–˜––˜+˜+H Noncovalent H clouds Na+H exclude pack Attraction forces interaction neighboring together around HH NH O O atoms tend to Electrostatic der to H H water HHHHHH and interact atoms charges OOC3 HH oppositely Van Fluctuations Hydrophobic forces opposite groups unfavorably between H Non-covalent interaction forces an between also attraction electron of H and nearby cation The van Waals a group cloud involves aromatic der a

Fig. that the together hold The complex. 4.9 forces noncovalent antigen:antibody δ–. found dipoles as shown charges or δ+ Partial in are electric numerous sixth antigen–antibody inverse separating most power short fall in forces, off der separation over as forces the of operate the therefore electrostatic van whereas Waals of the very charges, the as square which are and distance more diminish contacts, the ranges. only between never covalent produced antibodies. occur naturally and antigens bonds

in Gln121 antigen-binding VL D1.3 their VH sites. These in mainly pi-cation der sometimes bonds hydrogen hydrophobic acids participate and in interactions. and Waals amino van and interactions, for and in for interactions; bonding overrepresented antigen-binding therefore is Tyrosine, diversity example, providing antigen hydrogen can it particularly sites. in part hydrophobic is recognition in take suitable both and good that into van two are and must very for occur. on hills one operate ranges serve der binding hydrophobic pull to forces Waals complementary fit the short shape: valleys general, surface over surfaces in and the together on other to In overall. chains, and/or contrast, interactions atoms, side electrostatic accommodate bridging bonds and strengthening oxygen chemical specific while charged interactions the nitrogen between hydrogen In more interaction chains side aromatic state. can that nearby interact pi-electron cationic amino chains a protonated of noncovalently with cations, including side system as nitrogen-containing such tyrosine their acids be The may through in

antigens constraints. influenced steric interaction Antibody by intact with 4-9 is

of 4.10). (Fig. lysozyme the amino hen be a an can interaction with egg-white involving antibody the in acid of complex the antigen antibody–antigen specific D1.3 An seen in example antibody structure, a hydrogen domains. that between particular the the In VH lysozyme molecule protrudes bonds glutamine formed between in this and the VL strong are and partridge not bind and and amino have to antibody. this acid do in of turkey the from Lysozymes glutamine another place (see complex the Fig. hen with antibody, lysozyme another high-affinity egg-white HyHel5 In of basic arginines bridges salt one the the 4.8c), two glutamic each loops. CDR1 VH with surface of and lysozyme the two acids, from on CDR2 two interact between lack 1000-fold Lysozymes in HyHel5. show of the residues arginine affinity for decrease one two that a that to to but contribution most few level surface been residues role major of a Overall the and antigen–antibody final in at the in this binding detail, antibody. an of hence studied the antibodies specificity interactions, complementarity make only must energy have a important have even in more by bind ligands engineering genetic tailor bind can range, their with to its to antibodies the nanomolar an epitope. high many Although strongly affinity, naturally site-directed antibody mutagenesis

have on Even intact such by particle, when affinity their be structure, an high for antibodies prevented particular may a binding arrangement. antigens as larger antibody viral DI, 90 the homodimers is that an envelope and DII, which built from Nile scaffold domains, example, For DIII. virion glycoprotein, a membrane-anchored has West of E, intact icosahedral has three loops four has The protrude the viral outward DIII from that domain particle. polypeptide A recognizes DIII, West as neutralizing antibody E16, in Fig. loops of virus, Nile shown against these 4.11. E16 possible for sites should particle. antigen-binding the viral theory, on the be there Nile 180 antibody In West E16 fragment 180 of excess electron (see a combination that show E16 only of Fab micrographic an about to bind with crystallographic fragment, able of However, are 120 and total studies even E the domains the Fab of Fig. DIII 4.11).

Fig. complex The D1.3. of with lysozyme the antibody 4.10 with Top the shown. of D1.3 (heL) is fab The hen fragment lysozyme interaction panel: of egg-white chain (VL) chain green. yellow, heL in in heavy (Vh) in and is the turquoise, light the depicted the antigen-binding with residue the dots) hydrogen indicated and domains. site that of chain and in between A both heL protrudes the (green) domains makes Bottom hydroxyl red) (gln121) acids the from (red bonds of its VL Vh amino (turquoise) glutamine of panel: (yellow) extends side (shown group antigen–antibody These important the binding. to bonds hydrogen are courtesy of R. Mariuzza and R.J. Poljak.

Fig. to in of intact Nile occludes 4.11 the the Steric antigen hindrance particle. viral West antibody binding native structure three a Shown of e. recognizes antibody the of virus the Diii Diii, bound the is monoclonal Top fab e16 structural West to in nile domains the epitope. the glycoprotein e16 one panel: crystal model virion. to panel: the West was used left a e16 computer to Bottom nile dock fab mature bind were e16 fabs the able 120 of to Diii 180 epitopes. of binding to four by clustered fab of the hindered sterically five-fold Sixty Diii nearby Diii the epitopes. are epitopes occluded blue indicated is an area An of the by epitope arrow. example the bound confirmed saturating fab Bottom electron cryogenic microscopic right West predicted to reconstruction nile of virion panel: steric e16 hindrance. the indicate axes. the the icosahedral The vertices shown the in symmetry figure triangle of

of steric bind appears to nearby presence the protein of to ability hindrance, to some Fab Fab E the with from another blocking This sites. result one fragment. steric severe smaller would is become such Fab with intact hindrance Presumably, antibody the evident with than more Fab region with study antigens recognized. that antigen-binding sites, not of also the bound both to indicating to depending one antigen-binding orientation showed may that its the antibodies being the on DIII using always of antigens the This bind only arms, antibodies neutralize ability the These to of targets. their constraints will impact

species alternative with Some antibodies structures. 4-10 generate

important including for chapter been Our in focus most of generally research. mammalian species, model in immunology produced humans, has is similar which this on mice, an the structure system by antibodies absence some of with the of domain interact domain single antibody antigen based alternative mammals ability However, to VL (Fig. the on produce a ability form that in have an of a the to is VH 4.12). of abundant the been that associated capacity material has for composed to heavy-chain It dimers light time retain serum the chains of immunoglobulin-like some that bind camels antigens. contained lack known but These heavy-chain-only are IgGs called antibodies (hcIgGs). alpacas. including by This and camelids, llamas other shared is property retained it genes light evolution. for material with have chains, remains immunoglobulin is some species led their chains, to light this during the what associated particular and IgG-like their the so sera and adaptation unclear These in loss mRNA, the the camelids, hcIgGs mutations to thus CH1 arises and that directly to VH of of the from allow In splicing ability with the protein. alternative CH2 produce domain the of the joining exon in the heavy-chain the the this in stabilize domains. of structure absence VL mutations Other

Fig. murine from or in antibodies shark, antibody particular an that molecule (see fish, Cartilaginous have substantially differs the human also 4.12). immunoglobulins the Like also and produce encoding both has containing camelids, genes immunoglobulin shark heavy light and does chains, both

Fig. consist chain Camelid can only. of antibody heavy 4.12 and shark

in-frame ch1 linking in delete camelid the an splicing the the the create encoding to region antibody, region. region mature and the ch2 hinge exon Vh1 of event the can heavy-chain-only a thereby heavy chain of the antibody heavy-chainonly in predate that shark, may light this chains. the suggesting retains form the region, the ch1 of molecule evolution ig both, in relative antigen-binding repertoire types sites of of the of for involves antibody. to Vh long regions other extensive the cDR3 variations domain

heavy and chains. light exon, the is out CH1 antigen an in as than sharks But receptor VH produce spliced CH1 the with heavy-chain-only also antibody which exon rather (IgNAR), new the camelids. being immunoglobulin spliced to in sharks production evolution. by hcIgG camelids that These represents convergent event an of suggest differences and interact with efficiently of domains The for camelid single-chain antigens VH producing so-called basis the antibody. is ability to only antibodies standard single which single-chain we has discuss in recent more alternative will in antibodies, monoclonal Chapter prompted The as recognition to a 16. interest antigen domain of monoclonal for an using simplification

Summary.

have the determine (complementarity-determining binding antibody. that specificity shown X-ray CDRs) loops analyses the complexes regions of antigen:antibody regions, of crystallographic an hypervariable of immunoglobulin V antibody antibody a antigen. the antigen surface Contact usually surface that is recognized the complementary molecule area and between over on the protein of to broad occurs a an contribute hydrophobic to forces, interactions, and can Electrostatic hydrogen and pi-cation Waals der bonds, interactions all binding. van with interaction. CDRs the of of or antigen determine the acid all amino on affinity Depending and side size most chains specificity the both of antigen, contact in make the and the the part the of to direct stable with Other region and their the and framework determine position antigen, conformation. help contact little in a for play V but parts structural CDRs normally the the provide they usually be residues and structure and the molecule. fragments of with detect a the peptides can the Antibodies protein are from proteins bind make protein primary the the peptide surface of to derived antibodies bind used may, to protein however, of against contact raised molecule; against intact raised that they sometimes occasionally discontinuous in native protein, the binding or V contact specific they the cleft the pocket of and Peptides in between the to antibodies chains, regions usually with light a where not necessarily all, but make some, heavy of bind CDRs. small binding carbohydrate the such for also mode molecules haptens. antigens as usual of is and This

T by cells. Antigen recognition

only they to in own antigens extracellular T the surface In are of the spaces with displayed on the cells. the products contrast cells foreign body, when and immunoglobulins, of toxic pathogens their body’s recognize the which interact or that viruses been or extracellular internalized products endocytosis from pathogens which the such pathogens bacteria, from intracellular fluid. have their antigens or as derive can within replicate from by These cells,

pathogen’s cells of surface. on of display T their the infected fragments because an intracellular peptide detect the presence pathogen the cells proteins specialized surface molecules. by foreign glycoproteins—the host-cell to These delivered are MHC peptides the cell cluster encoded were immune genes to These large by of on powerful response transplanted tissues. are identified effects first the in that their a For histocompatibility molecules. are reason, and the known peptide-binding major gene the (MHC), MHC called glycoproteins was as complex complex the that T a this most cells, antigen to surface fragment displayed of chapter. as at an the small be bound the of is of part The will of molecule the one recognition peptide and cell the MHC distinctive focus of and features and 6. How molecules the in antigen are become peptide be MHC of associated fragments will described Chapter generated with

of receptor properties and We the the (TCR). T-cell here structure describe as highly related be variable for immunoglobulins. might closely are from TCRs genes the those expected antigen-recognition to function As structures, T-cell receptors’ for the important T-cell immunoglobulins, these however, recognition antigen special and are, between There cells. the differences receptors differences T and by reflect features of

similar 4-11 is a Fab to heterodimer The fragment of immunoglobulin. TCRα:β very

were Section using antibodies by T-cell a to antigen monoclonal receptors A-20). it first (see specifically identified such antibodies cloned T-cell by either that or by inhibit mimicking specifically the recognition Appendix single activate the clone I, bound line: antigen each consisting chains. were antigen the about (TCRβ) β These chains, T antibodies bears on each 30,000 termed α used polypeptide that then receptor different T-cell (TCRα) receptor and show clonotypic cell of two to receptors identical surface, its fragment (Fig. Fab disulfide of by the heterodimer similar structure of the the bond, Each α:β are two chains domains, the to and chain is an two a composed of linked of molecule immunoglobulin Ig 4.13). α:β by for recognition account antigen cells. T heterodimers most of γ and bear an similar, chains minority made of polypeptide designated different of T pair up A receptor alternative, but δ. a cells structurally α:β to clarified of as (see responses properties recognize functions identified from γ:δ T are and the cells different ligands receptors various have still are being The the Section antigen-recognition T-cell receptors, they in seem 6-20). the immune T-cell γ:δ mean in term and the receptor, otherwise. In chapter where rest elsewhere receptor use the book to the we this except of specified T-cell the α:β receptor types differ immunoglobulin main of B-cell that as T-cell membrane-bound the receptors two serves from ways. Both the in as whereas secreted antigen-binding T-cell can only receptor has secreted, and receptor B-cell has one receptors be site, whereas immunoglobulins antibodies. are two, never A a T-cell

receptor the the cloned into chains. encoding α:β receptor Further function cDNA the and T-cell studies structure insights came of of from constant containing that a disulfide domain, immunoglobulin homology stalk residue segment The amino-terminal (V) a to variable forms an interchain with predicted bond immunoglobulin homology an chains C and region of showed the cDNA domain, an sequences amino (C) a from V both cysteine T-cell acid to sequence with that short (Fig. region the the have receptor 4.14). cytoplasmic by a and Each the lipid ends domain, hydrophobic spans chain a in transmembrane short tail. bilayer to resemblance prediction These chains fragment the the immunoglobulin. the structural of T-cell of of a light and first heterodimer receptor Fab receptor immunoglobulin similarities to chains enabled of T-cell close heavy

receptor by Fig. in The T-cell determined three-dimensional the of X-ray crystallography structure shows 4.15a in receptor comprising fold the Fab in way T-cell same that the as regions the much Fig. chains fragment 4.1a.

Fig. 4.14 the Structure of T-cell receptor. receptor β. of chains, is transmembrane two T-cell The glycoprotein composed α and heterodimer V immunoglobulin two extracellular and consists resembling domains, The of chain portion each respectively. domains, c of have to carbohydrate chains side Both each domain. attached chains A connects stalk cysteine and to the bond. an contains short region, domains ig-like membrane that the immunoglobulin segment, to interchain analogous hinge disulfide the the residue forms transmembrane containing transmembrane segment. within positively charged residues are unusual The in the both of helices (basic) chains hydrophobic has carries α the chain such residues; The two one. β chain

by recognition Antigen T cells. 153

Fig. T-cell Fab membrane-bound The a fragment. resembles 4.13 receptor The fragment an antigen-binding antibody which forms the Section of c V site is disulfide-linked (see domain each contains one V fab chain 4-6). immunoglobulin of of one the the juxtaposition and domains domain; a heterodimer, molecule also is and T-cell with a immunoglobulin domain. receptor containing immunoglobulin The V-like an heterodimer, each domain an chain c-like disulfide-linked forms site the V juxtaposition the antigen recognition. As the fragment, in fab of the domains for

Fig. resolved nm. an 0.25 structure The 4.15 T-cell of crystal at receptor α:β in β b, in blue. chain the a the chain in and pink shown α panels and is Disulfide in green. shown bonds are it the as and arrayed across cell site would form flat the loops is with surface, the a a, panel its receptor relatively on cDR T-cell 3) that the 2, (labeled viewed 1, from side in antigen-binding sit top. b, shown. panel in domains and the cβ are cα of domain cβ the the is domain into from strands does the not β a composed polypeptide irregular domain; face The of typical away of sheet. domain ig-like fold than rather cα mainly to segment bond intramolecular The strand helix. disulfide β joins left) this a (far α of from a with between domains carbohydrate cα and cβ to The hydrogen assisted group cβ sugar the the the and labeled), bonds cα is interaction gray making domain. by (colored domain with sites panel the aligned shown different three c, in receptor T-cell the antigen-binding from antibodies. is site. looking binding This is into view the down of aligned domain the with VL sites domain The domains. receptor antigen-binding Vα aligned the with the the and Vβ domains of the antibodies, Vh is T-cell is the of and orange. The 1, cDRs and red 2, the loop the molecules immunoglobulin of receptor are and with TcR the hV4 T-cell of colored, shown 3 cDRs in in and are for of (h1) chain and loops dark in (h2, light the respectively. immunoglobulin the the L2) V dark in the cDR2 and cDR1 (L1) light purple, heavy chain respectively, and shown blue, light domains, loops in in heavy-chain are loops (L3) bright light-chain the cDR3 green. are (h3) cDR3s yellow; The in (orange) counterparts no immunoglobulins. loops have TcR of hypervariable the hV4 The structures i.A. courtesy Model of Wilson.

receptors some distinct differences Fab however, structural There T-cell between are, fragments. and unlike Cα Ig-like the of The where domain, is in domain. that fold the is other any striking most that the the strands domain α domain similar the half that half of Ig-like to loosely but packed other of juxtaposed sheet forms domain short and Fig. segment found a a with is is domains, β helix The (see of the Cβ Cα other formed in of 4.15b). In intramolecular domain a domains β two helix. the segment a this α normally joins Cα which to β Ig-like strand disulfide strands, in bond, joins of

way interact. are domains the also which in the There in differences of V The receptor the most in both extensive than between is C interface antibodies. and chains T-cell more domains domains be making bonds distinctive, of domain Fig. Cβ The and with between by is a domain assisted Cα group hydrogen it might interaction as a Cα 4.15b). Cβ (see the to carbohydrates, number the the from sugar closely shows CDR some fairly (see sites the there binding although align variable loops a those is molecules, antibody that, displacement with the relative Fig. of Finally, of comparison 4.15c). angles in strand loop domains, end of as in to equivalent shift CDR2 anchors β one the face in oriented right a of V which one particularly the This antibody domain from of the result Vα other. the is loop roughly the at the that a loop, marked to is change domains. orientation loop some A in a the displacement Vβ of CDR2 the in also Vβ causes strand ligands, These the receptor with specific in to we section. ability their the will recognize T-cell as of differences discuss next influence antibodies the T-cell region, addition receptor its has to the hypervariable fourth Fig. both (see shared immunoglobulins, regions of in a chains the HV4, In three hypervariability with 4.15c). receptor, of such the and These implicated other of which the functions as describe in in from occur 6-14. been face TCR, will regions superantigen binding, have Section antigen-binding we the away

T-cell to in of of bound complex foreign molecule. an form MHC 4-12 a receptor the a recognizes A peptide antigen

and B-cell clearly by Antigen differs recognition receptors receptors antibodies. T-cell recognition by from in immunoglobulin protein. antigens, intact primary The the to the on antibodies discussed folded and, to contacting typically in Section that 4-8, amino the are protein discontinuous are directly B surface cells of but together binds structure bind the as acids brought in antigen, In to T sequences. contrast, amino αβ continuous cells respond acid short, sequences often the As Section of within buried we these peptide described 1-10, protein. are in structure native the protein antigens peptide be cannot unfolded fragments T-cell the (Fig. processed and is by directly Thus, unless recognized into receptors Fig. and presented molecule 4.16), MHC (see an then by 1.15). return in to this how occurs will process of We 6. the Chapter issue

an T bound that recognized that realization recognized antigen cells The molecule. became are of stimulate cells clear peptides with the T the to MHC only the by when nature peptide The of is a molecule. the ligand cell T MHC and by recognized thus complex the stimulating involvement at but in for evidence has T with purified indirect, proven cells been peptide:MHC first it conclusively The complexes. antigen MHC of T-cell was by recognition of and with peptide. ligand both molecule The interacts T-cell making receptor this with by the the antigen MHC contacts

There structures. 4-13 distinct molecules MHC are subunit with compositions similar three-dimensional of but classes two

their of differ tissues in structure and There MHC class II—and classes and in their expression body. class both MHC the I molecules—MHC they the pattern two of are Figs. in As shown class MHC are I in structure their overall molecules 4.17 composition. in differ II MHC and 4.18, subunit class closely and but related a is the whereas protein fold nearest to cleft, away long which from both create groove, In membrane domains, binds. two a to site domains resemble the immunoglobulin the membrane the domains furthest classes, or which the two together peptide at paired Purified both peptide:MHC to us detail way in been class class complexes II MHC peptide:MHC in characterized peptides. bind structurally, I molecules have allowing themselves which describe and they and the the

(see MHC I class Fig. molecules 4.17) chains. polypeptide two of consist humans. chain, a One different in is chromosome the is encoded chain, and noncovalently chromosome—chromosome MHC smaller humans) 6 a α β2-microglobulin, associated is the in which 15 in encoded chain, (on with on I α the spans Only class membrane. the chain I domains, chain, class MHC formed and from by one has The complete β2-microglobulin. the four α contributed MHC-encoded molecule three structure. closely in Ig-like their domain α3 and β2-microglobulin folded resemble domains The and α1 The α2 folded

Fig. immunoglobulins lysozyme hen and by T-cell 4.16 receptors. in of the egg-white Differences recognition a, on are the surface three egg-white hen the Antibodies (see by panel shown for different can epitopes X-ray as of shown lysozyme also of to bind shown colors fig. in be surface crystallography in where on antibodies proteins, epitopes the 4.10). molecule, in the the peptide a because fragment antigenic T-cell T-cell surface but the recognizes protein. protein not itself contrast, the lie receptors of by the epitopes on not need the receptor recognized of epitopes within in a second, protein. red, folded The epitope, shown and shown the in b. two lies the lysozyme one shown lies corresponding to surface in inaccessible protein, panel the mostly on the but T-cell is are blue, of peptides in core of protein. in receptors the T-cell context the not implies native their that of This epitopes recognize do a Sheriff. S. of courtesy Panel

this groove. binds, surface or peptide-binding form part the the of a because the where on molecule as cleft domains is MHC known cleft the the the of peptide peptide-binding molecule; is walls of this are molecules The the allelic between polymorphic, MHC different highly differences major and the

Fig. 4.17 crystallography. by class I X-ray of structure The MHC an determined molecule by hLA-A2, i has from a shows computer a been a representation the human cell Panel which molecule, the surface cleaved graphic of class papain. enzyme Mhc described molecule The to of below. according the is the and shown, panels surface b–d in shown colored domains of c Panels b structure. ribbon a diagram show that and is d, a noncovalently α i weight (12 (molecular panel Shown Mhc kDa) of schematically membrane-spanning heterodimer class not kDa), in bound the which span a does membrane. 43 β2-microglobulin the molecule to chain and chain into folds domains: The three α3. α α1, α2, in and α2 consisting sequence and a on α1 eight helices into sheet whereas domains domain same lying part folded together and c β and the to structures, domains acid similarities separated The β2-microglobulin a similar of amino two immunoglobulin polypeptide α the have are antiparallel single α3 strands. of of structure fold show antigens a to α1 molecules. site groove, at of domains which long the folding peptide and Mhc creates which The α2 or cleft the bind is the molecules, for groove at class is only this one open i end. panels in with region short transmembrane by been that external peptide they b to stretch surface of connects papain. seen have removed the and cell digestion not domains a and the the because are The the panel cleft. α1 of α looking and the formed be the sheet the of two faces can from helices; the pleated creates of α2 sides seen by c, the the the β the in the As formed the down on above, are domains cleft of from pairing inner molecule floor

antigen the in and cells. will peptide-binding bind influencing dual to are presented specificity located T the thus the cleft, peptides which of forms does contribute to binding, peptide β2-microglobulin, is contrast, not polymorphic. By directly which not

membrane consists II two both molecule of which noncovalent of (see An class β, a span of and MHC Fig. complex the chains, α 4.18). I class II The a protein MHC the chain class α is different α from chain. α class MHC the The encoded both β and are II MHC. within chains peptide-binding domains. the molecule class two much chains, class crystallographic MHC by and II very shows The that it the of like different structure but folded formed β1 domains cleft I the from molecule, is the α1 MHC is in MHC the are class major MHC more which than open the II molecules. peptide-binding of The at lie ends class in cleft, I differences molecule, not. an peptide substantially peptides MHC MHC are bound ends class to molecules within of I are ends the whereas a the Consequently, of bound II the to molecule buried class (Fig. are class peptides II α-helical molecules, I molecule sandwiched the the MHC bound of and two In class between segments MHC both 4.19). both T-cell the antigen. and The the receptor this MHC molecule with making interacts ligand, contacts with compound peptide sites the of class the class I major molecules polymorphism MHC case As molecules, MHC are in in II cleft. in peptide-binding of located the

Fig. class structure. overall molecules MHC resemble MHC I 4.18 II molecules class in chains the as similar ii schematically each with composed together (compare class i two four-domain of transmembrane has to (34 the molecule panel panel a The that kDa), chains, shown Mhc Mhc two molecule compact of glycoprotein d. d domains, (29 and fig. structure two form of is and α β class chain in kDa) 4.17). the human protein representation graphic b panel in diagram. ribbon equivalent of surface this molecule, the the and class the ii a case Mhc hLA-DR1, Panel computer shows of shows a c, amino terminus. terminus; n, carboxy class of the sequence c and and ii the the covalent The Mhc bond and (see amino to molecule, are two forming in not cleft d). therefore are structural contributed have class a domains; α2 molecule similarities the domains, the c different α3 immunoglobulin Mhc by acid peptide-binding chains joined panels domains by β2 and like and β2-microglobulin i domains is that ii apparent in the this is important diagram, the not at ends. groove molecule of peptide-binding both difference, Another Mhc class open

Fig. within cleft. 4.19 MHC bind peptides molecules tightly the synthetic with are antigen, molecules single binding revealed. a are of the details peptide When Mhc peptide crystallized in cleft. bound molecules end bound Mhc is and of at the an ends class the both conformation i a either (panels in peptide elongated with tightly c), not of class bound the (panels ii elongated but peptide tightly the d), and is and the molecules are in peptide ends an bound Mhc in cleft. the conformation beyond b the extends peptide also upper and Mhc of peptide. residues recognized of molecule surface cells, complex The and the peptide:Mhc the is T of is the composed by polymorphic the are peptide-binding molecule; Mhc the the amino insert chains of the these pockets The pockets into that residues lined acid within side in are Mhc. with groove peptide of the for depicted the colors. the c of pockets different in acids of as different amino surfaces representations d, are different and areas Structures courtesy of

R.L. i.A. Stanfield and Wilson.

also bound cell are stabilize molecule stably to molecules, MHC 4-14 and serve Peptides the surface. on MHC the to

common. An whose be can not in infected peptide of have a wide variety proteins pathogens, individual generally by sequences will I class possible should widest infections, stably an the to class of T to able be and II) detect (both to be different MHC For peptides. individual array to the cells many bind of able molecules single bind such only peptide. from peptide-binding of a for quite as hormones, that distinct which type receptors, those peptide is usually of other behavior This a peptide helped how The of have ability peptide:MHC wide single to with while show of bind retaining high site different bind peptides. binding affinity structures the crystal variety complexes a a can to

feature part MHC is are integral MHC molecule’s structure, to of unstable as MHC molecules that peptides the of and important are peptide molecules of An when an bound the peptides the is not bound. binding class both II on MHC bound I class molecules. and MHC This to peptide applies dependence Stable binding exchanges otherwise is peptide of indicators uptake surface because prevent of would important, the of a specific being or infection antigen. occurring cell complexes reliable from peptide peptide:MHC at MHC their has co-purify fact bound be stably this particular When by bound enabled to from molecules are with molecules analyzed. purified the and MHC cells, peptides them, peptides purified Peptides complex and from released the they then the sequenced. molecules and in by acid, denaturing are MHC are peptides the between determined, revealing be structure MHC incorporated the the molecules and molecule can peptide. the of details also synthetic MHC the empty complex contacts and into of Pure has up. of detailed interactions From a such been the studies picture binding built molecules. MHC We peptide-binding discuss first of class properties the I

4-15 by bind ends. I peptides short class amino both of 8–10 molecules MHC acids

both invariant in by peptide-binding the the (Fig. I ends to molecule at is termini that each an class the and found of stabilized cleft in free Binding between the MHC amino carboxy MHC all peptide a class of molecules I cleft peptide of end at contacts sites atoms and are of 4.20). I terminal lacking These to class groups carboxyl be analogs are contacts for class stabilizing main fail complexes, to thought stably synthetic and to I amino MHC the peptide because bind peptide:MHC molecules. as additional Other in anchors. peptide the residues serve are usually I class MHC that acids long. 8–10 bind to Peptides amino molecules peptides endoplasmic molecules the 8–10 they are can by reticulum, exopeptidases is terminus, bind class cleavage where subsequently amino present through they carboxy however, which peptides. bind are to shortened Longer particularly bind, I if to at but thought MHC acids in their length cleft; in an by The backbone. peptide lies in seem peptide conformation in cases, a most along the kinking the to be elongated variations accommodated, peptide in the of can also allowing accommodated However, molecules carboxy at extend cases, the length in class terminus. some I cleft in peptide out the MHC be by to variation

MHC molecules peptide-binding give interactions I specificity. broad class a These polymorphic. molecules highly addition, In are MHC MHC polymorphic class MHC mentioned hundreds I the of the there different variations earlier, genes human genes are are in highly and of allelic population. As a individual small selection of only Each variants. these carries are cleft, in found MHC sites. differences peptide-interaction main amino variants certain resulting between in in allelic sites key peptide-binding The at the different acids this, different different bind of peptides. preferentially MHC variants Because the at or sequence. very bind peptide given can to acid or have along amino variant The particular positions three residues the same MHC similar a two peptides that the polymorphic into acid pockets side molecule lined are The acids. these MHC amino amino positions in chains by that at the insert as peptide the the anchors illustrated this are the MHC residues binding residues, to molecule, peptide called in Because Fig. anchor involved the 4.21. the and depending identity binding variant these of on particular MHC class vary, peptide. can that residues the position the anchor is I Both bind MHC sometimes terminus carboxy class also molecules (or peptide the the a the have in to serves peptides residue basic) most to hydrophobic anchor However, that at groove. I that changing that most suitable an from peptide in the synthetic will Whereas every not residue prevent length peptide anchor of cases binding,

T by Antigen cells. recognition 159

Fig. bound class MHC molecules I ends. by their to Peptides are 4.20

molecules yellow) i backbone and of end interactions Mhc lines) peptide class dotted series blue ionic bound a at as of each the interact a bonds (shown with through the in (shown hydrogen of peptide. right. amino of the The the is to terminus carboxy the the terminus peptide to left, circles blue oxygen; red carbon nitrogen. atoms; Black are are are shown form class bonds molecule side acid the that residues Mhc molecules, these full a in Mhc chains i the on all The i diagram class amino common in are Mhc ribbon their gray) (in are groove. to and of bonds cluster terminus ionic of terminus second to forms residues bonds at and of a bound the interactions the the carboxy residues peptide backbone with A carboxy molecules the tyrosine peptide, and i class the all Mhc to amino of while with hydrogen itself. terminus cluster common hydrogen forms

Fig. to molecules anchor related bind Peptides 4.21 residues. MHC through structurally lower different Peptides upper class Mhc in two molecules the are respectively. eluted panels, from i and shown bind different that are peptides i The of allelic for for variants Mhc anchor molecule. to class that molecules bind differ same peptides all similar (green) Mhc residues the but both bind Mhc related: leucine residues amino (L), molecule The all (f) a (i) but always aromatic acids. (V), and valine example, are isoleucine (Y) not and need whereas tyrosine identical, phenylalanine acids, that amino for hydrophobic are anchor particular be are large Mhc molecules amino (red) also (blue) Peptides class i and bind carboxy termini. their to through

Fig. II along MHC groove. Peptides to class binding molecules of length by interactions the bind 4.22 the (dotted A a peptide. lines) the bound class of as the of along are peptide and ii terminus to through left length the the to bonds (yellow; molecule backbone the distributed the only, is peptide carboxy terminus that with the hydrogen series an right) by blue shown amino Mhc conserved are the chain, of the molecules. hydrogen the made polypeptide are ii throughout with class ii bonds whereas made are peptide’s toward peptide The the length residues with in backbone bonds highly of class the amino Mhc that Mhc terminus the gray ii of Mhc side diagram of in the residues groove. The class on shown are these chains ribbon

on bind the the acids anchor class contains overall depend the MHC residues the appropriate also these positions amino binding the will nature at other so peptide. I molecule, in of and must positions, in cases, in In presence amino particular acids acids of amino particular some certain the prevents binding. whereas preferred others are MHC to called I individual positions MHC These different anchors.’ sets I to a features variants bind molecule are These of bind additional allow of wide ‘secondary different allelic class amino enable of yet acid peptides. class binding an variety different peptide peptides, also the various impact peptides from susceptibility diseases. binding self-proteins Chapter and see of autoimmune individual polymorphisms to in can will derived of influence MHC As 15, an the we

by molecules MHC of class 4-16 not length peptides II the is The bound constrained.

II I class MHC peptide are that molecules, unstable. molecules MHC Like bound class lack MHC and MHC molecules. Peptide molecules binding several I binding from bound been peptide by crystallography, of X-ray class to peptides in and to class also elution by has analyzed ways II differs acids to much be that longer. class can at Natural least are peptides long 13 II amino bind and MHC molecules class of and molecules not MHC the a I conserved are that ends the MHC clusters bound. the of residues bind ends molecules, are two in The found II in not class peptide of peptide lies cleft. the along peptide-binding in peptide the extended conformation Instead, an the in lined polymorphic of II the and (Fig. interactions side pockets It protrude by peptide peptide-binding there residues, line is and side all conserved cleft deep amino chains that by held that the shallow peptide and backbone acids both class into chains between MHC by molecules 4.22). at peptide held an these residues that 9 be and of 6, pockets. show can acid Structural side class data chains 4, MHC 1, II-bound in binding amino

will variety those be to to peptides chains pockets molecules, The of define binding I more MHC a class of and anchor greater bind molecules MHC difficult it predict to of accommodate residues side than which II class making able

Fig. of the length 4.23 variable II Peptides is by can the of at first the the note as are bind peptides MHC and all ends residue class convention that vary, anchor anchor residues that so peptides denoted their residue various molecules share 1. lie distances a in peptide. and from ii in shown The the panel. class acid are that residue glutamic tendency a or acid peptides Ak 1, upper negatively and (e)] set a allele in to hydrophobic Mhc a bind [aspartic (D) 4, of sequences mouse position charged of the position residue in arginine [lysine a contain basic (h), the have sequence (K), to (R), but length. (shaded) residue in same core differ All histidine to peptides ii human and shown. Mhc are or a in allele binding asparagine hLA-DR3 glutamine (n)] position the in different panel, (Q), hydrophobic lower class the 6 in residues [for (f)] example, green tyrosine are shown Anchor residue (L), phenylalanine as circles. leucine (Y), 9. of The these lengths position

particular MHC variant (Fig. II a class 4.23). this model will class amino permit possible how of the the amino with peptides is to to detect binding peptide of amino by sequences and different acids the patterns Nevertheless, peptide-binding MHC variants, of binding II to cleft. motif it usually acids acids that interact the comparing of known sequence to allowed MHC is, to of limit II the backbone Because ends that is length both bind from peptide and the class principle, bound by peptides in binding of its emerge there groove, upper no the molecules. to could peptide-binding molecules part protein chain, across their which groove invariant class reticulum. the the entirely during An MHC of of of nascent known this the example as lies in II endoplasmic is synthesis role class MHC the II return Chapter molecules. of in loading peptides invariant 6 We to in the onto chain the of will most cases, peptides around by trimmed 13–17 length bound molecules to of class a amino II peptidases MHC are In to long acids.

structures the receptor of complex. several show complexes of a similar over 4-17 the The peptide:MHC:T-cell peptide:MHC orientation receptor crystal T-cell

to was the the first that the produced. T-cell receptor a structure of T-cell structure same peptide:MHC crystallographic published, X-ray At time ligand of was receptor a also I bound class a orientation over showed peptide-binding aligned the peptide cleft diagonally structures the that (Fig. the by and is T-cell The revealed receptor these 4.24). side of the The α2 bound chain the Fig. end lies at the MHC in seen shown the the peptide, amino-terminal from domain of over molecule TCRα as view 4.24a. chain of domain, peptide. carboxy-terminal the MHC closer over the molecule’s TCRβ lies the The to α1 end a down it molecule. this transparent where to of structure T-cell through looking if the view indicate contacts MHC shows 4.24b as receptor a Figure of come chains both The over loops and TCRα TCRβ CDR3 and together lie

Fig. complex. receptor to T-cell binds the 4.24 peptide:MHC The class to and peptide:Mhc of binds a domain i top the a: the the Panel molecule, α1 T-cell α2 helices. receptor both touching color: are light α and are shown dark respectively; of and the blue, cDR2 the cDRs cDR1 T-cell in cDR2 the β receptor loops and loops chain respectively. of the cDR1 The are and light and purple, the of dark chain α-chain green. The is is loop yellow, β-chain the cDR3 cDR3 and loop The β-chain hV4 in red. is loop thick the The peptide. bound yellow P1–P8 is line dull shaded yellow). peptide:Mhc the site top T-cell is line) peptide b: the is (thick over of superimposed the black receptor’s the complex Panel antigen-binding surface outline of (the complex, lies diagonal with T-cell receptor of loops green, the 3β, the of the somewhat yellow respectively) the center a and the T-cell cDR3 peptide:Mhc peptide. β across The and receptor angle α at (3α, contacting The cDR1 cDR1 at dark α-chain cDR2 carboxy with the of helices of purple, respectively) bound contact amino respectively) dark cDR2 the loops terminus peptide, loops peptide. and β-chain bound and Mhc the helices (1α, make at the and whereas blue, 2β, light terminus and 2α, (1β, light the the the contact courtesy i.A. of Wilson.

peptide. the central of amino acids surrounding through that is points α walls two the on of T-cell two helices between the peptide-binding high a the form the threaded valley cleft. receptor The This seen Fig. be in can the 4.25, groove receptor a a of the complex. II:T-cell class of from shows view peptide-binding peptide:MHC which end binds relative (see Fig. groove of MHC the molecule complexes the receptor various is as MHC peptide: peptide-binding axis rotated the the of of of the to Comparison molecule MHC:T-cell TCR the somewhat that shows it surface 4.24b). orientation, carboxy-terminal Vβ domain amino-terminal In whereas half contact the primarily bound half. Vα the the of with contacts primarily the the this makes peptide, domain the interact Both I (see of also molecule chains MHC α helices class Fig. with the 4.24). loops the complex bound peptide, with The not peptide, MHC have the CDR1 bound whereas and with the the contacts close β-chain of the the molecule: contact variable Vα the loops, are the CDR2 are symmetrically around peptide:MHC and CDR2 amino of the binding. in receptor terminus carboxy T-cell of at complex to helices CDR1 which over the distributed interact contributions the terminus

of CDR3 change, complexed binding of ligand peptide:MHC within Comparison the three-dimensional or the results the T-cell T-cell shows ‘induced the particularly Vα degree an conformational some fit,’ structure loop. and its receptor to in same unliganded of receptor that variations the peptide:MHC an the of Subtle by cell. different have on receptor otherwise identical acids the same recognition at can T-cell ligand contact strikingly amino T that effects related, by flexibility peptide explain CDR3 receptor recognize these two adopt helps but T-cell in loop to the that The the structures different, how demonstrated conformations ligands. can

the of involves and both presenting its molecule. recognition peptide The MHC specificity T-cell contact, MHC the T-cell the at outcome—binding binding or molecules that the as the of MHC final that start but might interactions interactions analysis peptide:MHC well the dictate ligands receptor Kinetic peptide with the to subsequent dissociation. with as predominate of suggests molecule contacts few antibody–antigen of at the specificity that essential As the strength interactions, binding. interface amino provide the with might determine a and acids only sufficient the T-cell strong changing Simply to for a in to leucine to all. alter response peptide, is killing response a at no from isoleucine example, the the single residues MHC have molecules can in effect. of same Mutations presenting before of antigen properties specificity dual restriction molecules known. for was long of the T-cell that MHC the phenomenon underlies of observed MHC peptide-binding recognition T-cell a This responses, were Another exhibit interact receptors consequence specificity some antigen-presenting be for to a the for of is this MHC inherent dual surface appropriately T-cell MHC of able order to specificity to need molecules in with

Fig. a with interacts I 4.25 class MHC fashion. similar class receptor MHC molecules in II The and T-cell Shown an specific class structure chicken cytochrome bound from a c, receptor, a Mhc the ii of to molecule. derived T-cell peptide for is molecule T-cell fig. of class shown to and that bound receptor site orientation the T-cell This Mhc in is to a receptor’s similar binding i the at 4.24. blue, chains dark respectively. in T-cell receptor and α colored The and light β of the are c orange. light cytochrome The peptide is Mhc ii α-helical (yellow) regions of The between β axis and saddle shallow and at peptide. the to the formed in Mhc a (brown) T-cell the sits roughly class the of α bound ii the chains receptor long 90° molecule class 3QiB. from derived Structure PDB of courtesy K.c. garcia.

molecules. phenomena on where return 6, of thymus. we polymorphisms, these the impact recount MHC and of restriction these discuss development We Chapter in in the Chapter the and 8, in issues of recognition we T-cell to T-cell discovery in MHC context where the will

make The 4-18 and molecules to proteins contact response an directly cell-surface antigen. to MHC CD4 cells T of effective CD8 are required and

we CD8. major Section fall introduced As the proteins and the classes of CD4 two by expression in 1-21, T distinguished cells cell-surface into expressed CD4 CD8 cells while is is to T cytotoxic by T whose other expressed activate cells. function by is cells, CD4 ability different sets markers recognize T MHC these became and the functional to the as that known classes cells was some of for molecules. were it CD8 distinction for of on clear based time before recognizes I know now and CD8 molecules MHC We class II. class that MHC CD4 recognizes sites CD8 on of cell) (depending the associates to the with on or composite T-cell T-cell binds surface CD4 antigen During T away the from the site. and on invariant ligand, portion receptor of the type peptide-binding the MHC recognition, peptide:MHC T-cell response, the co-receptors. binding are contributes CD8 and of called so and This CD4 effectiveness to overall the

protein four Ig-like single-chain domains a CD4 is (Fig. composed of 4.26). D2) a two rigid The (D1 are to first together form and packed domains tightly

Fig. CD4 The and of co-receptor 4.26 the CD8 structures molecules. from ribbon molecule the panel ig-like a as domains, shown schematic contains a b. structure and crystal form in panel in four cD4 The diagram in similar is The domain, D1, immunoglobulin amino-terminal V domain. in structure an to domains although termed V different domain, both c The is related and an been and from second domain. has domain, a to c2 D2, immunoglobulin two cD4 domains that two flexible to rigid of a rodlike structure the link. by form The first a carboxy-terminal linked domains is Mhc for ii mainly D1 site domain. binding class molecules involves The the linked is chain a covalently β bond. disulfide of a by α and The heterodimer an molecule cD8 a α homodimer form An alternative exists cD8 as of of chains. a the the is depicted is ribbon heterodimer The b panel whereas of in diagram homodimer. panel in a, relatively polypeptide chains extended cD8β the domain anchors very domain conformation, chain, and an of immunoglobulin domain and membrane. a to in believed cell a cD8α structures, a the V-like having single that be each stretch V similar to have resembling

rod rod domains which hinge flexible about and a and nm (D3 joined by similar formed third long, a 6 by the D4). to is fourth face a MHC the of crevice binds CD4 The junction and CD4 of to domain, domains α2 located at on of II formed a MHC-binding hydrophobic D1 lateral β2 mainly the region (Fig. the on molecule class and is the 4.27a). This with structure a bound the from crystal shown T-cell the binds, T-cell receptor is CD4 class away peptide:MHC receptor bound well where site site to by as II the of (Fig. complete 4.28). to receptor peptide:MHC simultaneously can CD4 same the complex. molecule This and II the that structure demonstrates T-cell bind the class the as is present. CD4 to CD4 the cell sensitive 100-fold enhances about T is when antigen, sensitivity more to antigen a to Lck. the results CD4 portion ability of from tyrosine intracellular cytoplasmic to The kinase of enhancement process bind called the receptor Lck the will the activate 7, Chapter detail with recognition. into induced by cascade bringing proximity signaling antigen complex discuss T-cell helps As we in

quite different. CD8 of The is structure membrane disulfide-linked polypeptide β, is two single a chains, a different domain linked each Ig-like It extended a Fig. called by dimer αand of (see of to the segment containing 4.26). segment This

distant The cD4 in lie the cD8 nearest molecules, the to respectively, for cleft. class the peptide-binding domains the Mhc membrane from class binding and i and ii and on sites ig-like Mhc as The shown Mhc white, gold. in class molecule class in is an to ii in chain β shown ii schematically binding in pink, and c. is molecule the and panel in a α is structure cD4 chain a of panel while The the of ribbon cD4 in D1 a. the molecule of D2 cD4 the only domains are shown panel and molecule, α2 of domains. domain β2 the The of in class β2 cD4 and lies at the crevice the the binding base between hydrophobic ii an site for Mhc dark heavy is cD8αβ panel respectively, d. white (cD8β) shown in i class and shown and and i purple. β2-microglobulin The an dimer pink, The schematically in the of (cD8α) shown the and two in binding panel chain of and molecule b class light in are chains Mhc to are cD8 i the to thus domains, Mhc class site α1 class the for ii but binding in not the also of on that binding of class of a to equivalent cD8 cD4 Mhc cD4 class completely is involves cD8 and and α2 The Mhc Mhc i molecule binding to of cD8 the lies base to the similar position molecule, binding ii. in the from Mhc 3S4S derived PDB Structures 3DMM PDB class and (cD4/ class (cD8αβ/ i). ii) Mhc K.c. courtesy of garcia.

Fig. MHC lie sites CD8 The in binding and domains. Ig-like molecules class 4.27 for I the class II CD4 and on

it extensively an to it thought and proteases. by in extended maintain which is from glycosylated, conformation protect is cleavage expressed. homodimers, although CD8β is CD8α these not found are when chains form usually can activated by CD8αα Naive but memory highly the cells. T T cells expressed CD8αβ, homodimer effector be and can express 6. Chapter also expressed by acid describe of is invariant will I MHC metabolites (MAIT intraepithelial produced recognize are lymphocytes as cells molecule we population cells CD8αα nonclassical with folic of in class MR1, the known by these cells); which that associated T mucosal bacteria a in association

domain site in of invariant an the binds (see molecule I to CD8αβ MHC Fig. class weakly an α3 4.27b). molecule, MHC the the while is residues with the CD8β of the interacts lower of the chain domain position class domain class of molecule. I a with in α3 interacting the in The MHC αchain base I α2 residues of the The carbohydrate number molecule strength the glycosylation CD8 on class I of the acid to the strength the decreases increasing the state molecule; by CD8 is MHC binding structures of of influenced interaction. sialic of CD8 pattern also and and T during of sialylation activation, this CD8 maturation changes in modulating a cells on the antigen has likely The recognition. of role of

with and molecule one (Fig. MHC class CD8 the MHC I can class T-cell II interactions the receptor molecules, simultaneously with Like interact 4.29). the MHC chain, increases the binds molecules sensitivity through antigen about I class CD8αβ T tail α cells cytoplasmic Like and of the Lck presented by 100-fold. CD8 of to CD4, CD8αα negatively Although efficiently regulate may CD8αβ than molecular co-receptor, and unclear, function to activation. less the the details as appears are homodimer a thought not to is In dimerize. contrast CD8, CD4 to

Fig. to the the regions and distinct bind class II of T-cell receptor 4.28 MHC molecule. CD4 a of is crystal diagram shown a TcR:peptide-Mhc:cD4 ribbon structure complex. from complete ternary A α:β β and α the and of receptor T-cell red, (TcR) The chains respectively. blue are The Mhc class shown green, bound is peptide gray. molecule the in ii with orange. shown in is cD4 PDB Structure 3T0e. from derived of K.c. courtesy garcia.

Fig. a on I that class binds where 4.29 receptor molecules CD8 to binds. T-cell from distant MHC is site the interaction i positions Mhc class green T-cell receptor β2-microglobulin The hypothetical in relative molecules of in reconstruction can light seen in chain the both with binding and their green). this cD8 dark (α of be and shown α the purple, brown in are respectively. β and T-cell The receptor chains of and shown bound Mhc i is the class domain. The heterodimer α3 to cD8αβ and is cD8β in cD8 chain The chain α red. blue, the is in of nelson courtesy David chris fremont. and

hematopoietic although i expressed molecules on Mhc highly nucleated in are expressed cells. they class all cells, are most inflammatory on be although ifn-γ. ii by of stromal types cytokine normally the a exposure by hematopoietic by expressed cell may Mhc they only other expressed cells are to subset cells, molecules thymic class and humans, whereas Mhc class all are express in T ii *in T mice class ii-negative. activated cells cells Mhc molecules, brain, types are related macrophages, Mhc are class cell microglia, class to which †in are most ii-negative, but Mhc ii-positive. the

classes molecules on The cells. two of differentially expressed MHC are 4-19

(Fig. MHC distinct cells, different the and molecules recognize T these cells reflect II among of MHC effector have and I distributions the functions class that them class 4.30). class which pathogens, are to from cytotoxic viruses, to recognize. CD8 specialized peptides cells, T cell that molecules kill commonly MHC specifically present any I they molecules, expression varies any cell, one nucleated the to Because although from of the next. I level express cells class can constitutive MHC such viruses infect almost cell all type Fig. For whereas I cells low surface, liver express abundant their relatively express class example, of (hepatocytes) cells on the (see system immune MHC levels 4.30). cells, interior thus site no mammalian which can express Nonnucleated I, T such red MHC class is red of go by as blood little cytotoxic undetected the infection or blood in cells. an cells, and cells a live allows Plasmodium support it class great replication, is red malaria viral no cells cause Because might in this viral the of absence that that to blood for the privileged of I infection, cannot MHC be but consequence this site. parasites

recognize to molecules immune activate a that other In function cells is effector contrast, of system. T MHC CD4 cells the II the of class major macrophages—antigen-presenting are B immune in on on lymphocytes, that cells other participate found normally tissue cells not II class cells, Fig. dendritic and (see MHC molecules Thus, responses—but 4.30). peptides to cells presented class CD4 naive expressed activate The MHC dendritic T II cells. molecules function can by by antibody CD4 bound the class MHC those peptides choose B to that can II cells T that cells, molecules activated cytokines secrete cells B cells recognize the on to of produce. influence will previously When T isotype the Upon MHC cells class cells, again recognizing macrophages, in CD4 pathogens T peptides through cytokines, bound to part these in molecules to destroy activate II on their vesicles.

II is regulated class particular, interferons, response. of by expression and course cytokines, immune an both I class in molecules MHC the MHC released The in of Interferon-α normally IFN-γ certain and cell them. molecules, of can induce not all of increase (IFN-α) whereas expression class II I express MHC that molecules increases types and and do the the I MHC class both class types class molecules IFN-β MHC II cells, on the MHC of of expression on expression Interferons key components of of intracellular onto enhance MHC to the the machinery expression be loaded class also enables by antigen-presenting peptides of the molecules. molecules the that MHC inducing I function

4-20 chains. T and γ receptor δ distinct of bears subset up A of cells an alternative made

for for search was unexpectedly gene the During the TCRα the discovered. chain, gene T-cell receptor-like another genes. further discovery gene named to for and its receptor This T-cell TCRγ, search a led was chain against was the was Another chain chain. using receptor predicted antibody by and γ called the δ identified of the sequence of discovered α:β up of population distinct heterodimers minority made T a T-cell than bore that heterodimers. receptor rather It type of was a γ:δ soon cells is 8-11 Sections and cells The described these of in development 8-12.

they skin γ:δ reproductive cells of as Like tracts, receptors found female diversity. limited can the α:β intraepithelial where all but T the be are lymphoid tissues cells, lymphocytes, populations prominent of also and particularly in their vertebrates, in T display very class T-cell T α:β antigen γ:δ and cells. and function binding not presenting are restricted T II receptors peptides as cells, MHC do T in I class that presented Unlike molecules peptides recognize by γ:δ by MHC to not ‘classical’ the molecules, and generally cells antigens and target thus are to recognize to expressed Instead, directly probably respond to many and seem cell types. by recognize γ:δ rapidly different T-cell able their receptors molecules role that to T between cells been Their described responses. seem have transitional, difficult been now identify, indicate intermediate, fully adaptive or have and to but ligands innate wholly and immune an several γ:δ play

as or γ:δ ligands induced are (see such 3-27), MIC and Section stress Like RAET1 ligands, cells NK-cell by proteins receptor seen many damage. the of the T by cellular will molecules, cells discuss class presented antigens we bind Chapter also by MHC which may 6. γ:δ ‘nonclassical’ Ib in T we MHC structurally binding functions but These proteins presentation T proteins already for to have are cells. to the have peptides related discussed, besides ligands mycobacterial lipid ligands include or antigens. proteins such heat-shock phosphorylated as Additional may nonpeptide and ligands unorthodox respond to γ:δ and also cells T phospholipids. can nucleotides than consequence from cells this Recognition γ:δT antigens innate-like as of infection, recognition class. pathogen-specific in would other of and intraepithelial a distinguishes rather expressed themselves, molecules of them place lymphocytes, the the immunity’ of clarify reasons, For to term has the role between since T γ:δ these seems cells, and been the adaptive proposed innate someplace be responses. ‘transitional to of these function cells

receptors. T-cell to is crystallographic as that, γ:δ T-cell a shape similar of expected, it receptor structure in reveals The α:β a the of class of called Figure molecules bound nonclassical receptor shows to T22. crystal structure 4.31 mentioned T-cell I complex γ:δ MHC above, a one with an orientation strikingly This T-cell primarily from the γ:δ one T22 receptor, that T-cell that structure of of receptor of the that is shows it the MHC with end molecule the interacts in different overall α:β molecule. play recognition, However, similar receptor T-cell regions critical the a and of receptors. of that still CDR3 α:β the antibodies of T-cell γ:δ to role in repertoire. implications γ:δ other type from receptor ligand γ:δ that recognizes, the Further, the the this receptor longer T-cell receptor γ:δ of the could there than is CDR3 two antigen these enormous CDR3 is within T-cell diversity the have and as receptors, of the toward T-cell of either combinatorial to further γ:δ return development We of Chapters cells ligands in T discuss will and the 8. the and 6

Summary.

resembles the receptor, for cells, T-cell TCRα chains, immunoglobulin. most of on of fragment many a and Fab The respects and antigen two protein composed T receptor single TCRβ, α:β is in bound recognize MHC peptide to molecule. an a a are ligand α:β and of always membrane-bound composite receptors T-cell antigen recognize binds preferentially particular peptides of wide peptides, different physical sets MHC a MHC the each variants with sequences different features. of but of and variety Each molecule cleft of peptide molecule. peptide-binding and is bound the generated in is on MHC the stably The antigen a intracellularly, surface classes of and molecules, classes molecules two in these cells. are T domains MHC of by α:β their CD8 bound are different There and distinguish functional two nonpolymorphic that CD4 CD8 T-cell class thus the a class a binds class recognized molecules can and to T-cell ligands. T-cell receptors II I complex the MHC MHC and simultaneously peptide:MHC a co-receptor enhancing acting that molecules I for as being II as response; recognize CD4 class peptide:MHC by and co-receptor binds same receptor, acts bind receptor antigenic with A both directly peptide the T-cell interacts

Fig. class bound to the I molecule T22. nonclassical MHC Structures receptor γ:δ T-cell 4.31 of overall a γ:δ receptor and to the The has fab receptor similar α:β T-cell an fragment structure the immunoglobulin. of T-cell an cα The more domain of receptor. T-cell like than corresponding is the immunoglobulin cδ domain the domain α:β is orientation the or molecule Mhc structure, of nonclassical α:β different γ:δ with very Mhc overall T-cell the class from in is i ii T-cell of orientation an class to receptor either respect molecules. this the with T22 the receptor receptor peptide end of the absence groove, the contact of and over is peptide-binding lack than Mhc-restricted a γ:δ recognition. T-cell more this Rather lying much is with other; the than directly one with engaged consistent

the features that T-cell molecule specificity MHC this restriction underlies and of displays with MHC of dual and responses. polymorphic the it, receptor, including δ T-cell A γand receptor, lipids. similar nonpolymorphic and ligands, MHC to certain to binds it nonclassical nonpeptide the is chain, second different of structurally T-cell a of ligands, molecules, type composed α:β but a minority found to cells. MHC-restricted receptor is population the of a T T and The is γ:δ cells, thought be lymphoid not intraepithelial on and

4. Chapter Summary to

T use cells molecules structurally antigen. different, cells but recognize B similar, to and humoral are a cells as B B-cell antigens of that and both receptor, as antigen, bind effector for secreted immunoglobulins, the receptor functions. are antibodies antigen-recognition made molecules elicit membrane-bound The and and contrast, cell-surface made of are cellular only in and molecules functions. antigen-recognition effector as elicit cells, receptors The T only so that the part binds highly to the region—that with Immunoglobulins variable of concentrated variable molecules, in T-cell and (V) molecule—the are antigen. variability receptors wide molecules, of recognizes variety peptide the antigens, predominantly of bound type a which receptor, of major whereas α:β ubiquitous fragments bind Immunoglobulins foreign receptor, the on cell T-cell surfaces. proteins different to are chemically T-cell MHC

by Binding antibodies. been studied has with of immunoglobulins antigen chiefly is of binding and site. and shape determined highly the the is antigen by physicochemical properties antigen-binding antibody its to specific, of The can antibody constant, at of antibody site which end is antigen-binding from the the region, elicit. other of Fc, types or function influences Located the effector the the the type antibodies, of constant by different region. of functional There encoded main are five each a classes As to an eliminate see we of with the will and incite system in 10, response interact different the inflammatory antigen. immune these Chapter components

the differ B-cell receptors respects from in several immunoglobulins. T-cell reflecting the the and of form functional B T-cell One differences cells is cells. a of secreted T between receptor, absence effectively the of secretion antigen-recognition clearance pathogens their enables circulating body; the body. antigen in the products extracellular deal and within cell protein a soluble of cells throughout of spaces molecule with the the B act to B active T-cell involve contrast, recognition and a in receptor. surveillance does T secreted not of cells, pathogens, for are soluble, specialized cells, Some, intracellular are cells that infected detect bear infections as and are surface. CD8 to kill on T antigenic to foreign able peptides their such able and displaying that as interact on with it have are cells, the cells such taken of system up T antigen the Others, cell immune foreign surface. CD4

bound receptors recognize T-cell the ligand foreign a composite also MHC up and to made peptide antigen. molecule, not of self a intact antigen, a intact displaying body means T with cell can interact cells with protein. only the or not This that pathogen the Each receptor combination MHC specific particular molecule. and is for self a peptide T-cell of a by polymorphic are of MHC a highly molecules genes. encoded family T some of with able that be nearly molecules, an peptide-binding will different recognize peptides at individual helps generated a from variant least Expression cells to every each MHC multiple to repertoire, from pathogen. ensure

Questions.

An by yields antigen proteolytically avidity cognate with an the a higher than antibody by cleaved False: pepsin. 4.1 antibody papain fragment True to or cleaved

signaling? co-receptor cD4 is Short receptor and 4.2 for cD8 Answer: Mhc T-cell how to important binding

the to Mhc 4.3 it Why Short is have Answer: heterozygosity in locus? and advantageous how

best to the term 4.4 Match description: the Matching:

A. i. Antigenic determinant structure (that an antibody The is, the by recognized epitope)

B. conformational/ ii. of Regions V region the

C. iii. continuous/linear segment epitope of a chain An composed a polypeptide epitope of single

region hypervariable iv. D. 4.5 Most brought composed by Fill-in-the-Blanks: of mice, composed acids chains. and protein ________ antibodies amino folding ________ and An a of from chain parts vertebrates, including humans of epitope produce different polypeptide together dictate antibody the bear class that ____ ____ that recognize the and regions antigen isotype. and These regions clinical antibody and fish, and respectively, camelids for _______________, applications. for forming single-chain are which cartilaginous basis the however, production produce ________________

statements Which Choice: of Multiple true? not 4.6 following the is

out receptor α together, A. γ switched can a or but chain chain. β for pair and the be δ T-cell chains α a

acids. B. example, electrostatic bridge) salt between amino occur interactions a (for charged

exclude hydrophobic hydrophobic interactions two and between C. occur water. surfaces

acids Antibodies have many often amino in antigen-binding sites. such their aromatic D. as tyrosine

where a recognize unique the cells Mhc restriction peptides of particular will molecule. T is E. Mhc to set bound phenomenon a

Choice: 4.7 of most abundant in the mice? is the Multiple healthy adult and class following immunoglobulin Which humans

A. igA

igD B.

C. ige

D. igg

of Which fold? Choice: structure E. the the following immunoglobulin of 4.8 an igM Multiple describes

A. β bond sheets disulfide α-helical linker an a with and Two link antiparallel

B. a by β disulfide strands Two linked bond

four disulfide C. by two linked α bonds helices

Seven α antiparallel D. helices in series

and, to V folded Antibodies fc β and two between sheets E. particularly various sandwich region and together bond by some the linked have c of extent, one the regions. in Choice: disulfide the molecule, Multiple points flexibility and portion the a the at β 4.9 hinge between fab junction an the properties Which antibody affected flexibility? of by its of are following not

A. antigens to small Binding (haptens)

B. to Avidity antigen

C. to antigen Affinity

proteins interaction antibody-binding D. with

4.10 region the Choice: and receptor of of recognition cells Which is spaced cells in antigens T Binding antigen and specificity? most Multiple to distantly critical antigen B E.

fR3 cDR2 B. fR2 G. E. fR1 cDR3 C. A. F. D. fR4 cDR1

references. General

J.A., Garcia, Speir, M., Degano, I.A. and K.C., Wilson, cellular : cell T Emerging immunity. receptor recognition in for antigen of principles Rev. Immunogenet. 1:75–90. 1999,

K.C., L., and Teyton, I.A. Wilson, Garcia, basis cell of Structural T : recognition. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 17:369–397. 1999,

(ed): Moller, Origin of diversity. histocompatibility G. complex major Immunol. Rev. 1995, 143:5–292.

antigens. antibodies Structure their complexes of Poljak, R.J.: and with Mol. Immunol. 28:1341–1345. 1991,

I.A: and coreceptors. Stanfield, M.G., Wilson, R.L., MHCs, Rudolph, and How peptides, bind TCRs Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2006, 24:419–466.

role plasticity Sundberg, expanding and of the accommodations: R.A.: interactions. E.J., protein-protein Mariuzza, in Luxury structural Structure 8:R137–R142. 2000,

Section references.

antibodies of 4-1 polypeptide four IgG chains. consist

G.M. Edelman, Antibody structure : and molecular immunology. Scand. Immunol. J. 34:4–22. 1991,

Fan, Furebring, L.W., C., C.A.K., Faber, A.B. Borrebaeck, and Edmundson, Ohlin, L., M., Z., Shan, Guddat, C., a high for Three-dimensional of affinity Fab structure human tetanus toxoid. : with Immunotechnology 3:253–270. 1998,

Harris, Day, and Hasel, McPherson,A. S.B., Greenwood,A., J., L.J., Larson, K.W., intact antibody three-dimensional The structure lymphoma. an : for of canine monoclonal 360:369–372. 1992, Nature

A.N., S.K., M.H., Barclay, M.G., and van McKnight, P.A. A.J., Tomlinson, Brown, Merwe, der Law, The Antigen Leukocyte 2nd (eds): ed. Factsbook, Academic 1997. Press, London:

Lemmon, Immunoglobulin and adapters receptors: Brummendorf, cis-interactions, alternative superfamily T., V.: splicing adhesion. regulate intracellular and Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 13:611–618. 2001,

J.J., Marchalonis, Jensen, and Schluter, I., S.F. and cell analyses T Structural, receptors. and antigenic evolutionary of immunoglobulins : Mol. J. Recog. 15:260–271. 2002,

Crystal P.A., Farrugia, products. detailed of of human tapestry Ramsland, unfinished a W.: and antibodies: gene immunoglobulin and structures J. Mol. Recog. 15:248–259. 2002,

can molecule 4-4 readily distinct into cleaved be antibody functionally fragments. The

Porter, R.R. : studies Structural of immunoglobulins. Scand. Immunol. J. 1991, 34:382–389.

Shimada, sites Y., Yamaguchi, of cleavage H., region. Kim, fragmentation and high Masuda, I., in Proteolytic mouse Arata, of the with proteolytic Kato, K., specificity IgG—mapping hinge K., Y.: Immunol. J. Methods. 1995, 181:259–267.

4-5 of The flexibility the to hinge immunoglobulin binding antigens. multiple region allows molecule in

Structural C.: proteins. mechanisms Gerstein, A.M., movements Chothia, Lesk, and for in M., domain 1994, Biochemistry 33:6739–6749.

Baldridge, K.K., Salazar, R., Romesberg, F.E. G., Jimenez, and immune Flexibility molecular and : in system. recognition the Proc. Acad. Natl Sci. USA 2003, 100:92–97.

R.L., P.W., P.M., Burton, and Wilson, D.R., R.A., Stanfield, Saphire, Rudd, E.O., I.A. M.D., Dwek, Parren, Crispin, Contrasting : asymmetry extreme structures reveal IgG flexibility. and J. Mol. Biol. 2002, 319:9–18.

Localized site. of regions the hypervariable form sequence antigen-binding 4-6

cross-reaction Eiselé, Chitarra, Bentley, and heteroclitic A., H., Bhat, a J.-L., Houdusse, structure G.A., R.J.: J., complex. V., Souchon, Alzari, Lescar, T.N., P.M., Poljak, Three-dimensional antigen-antibody of Proc. Acad. Natl Sci. 90:7711–7715. 1993, USA

Wyns, antigen-binding canonical immunoglobulins: K., structures S., Muyldermans, loop classes? more L.: and structures, in more Decanniere, Canonical J. Mol. Biol. 2000, 300:83–91.

R.S., D.E., Ledbetter, H., Hayden, T.T., M.G., Norris, Gilliland, J.A. Yelton, M.S., and N.A., Mittler, Tsu, L.K., Marquardt, Neubauer, and regions of cloning recombinant fragments. : of and reliable generation variable antibody single-chain Rapid antibody Antigens Tissue 47:1–20. 1996,

G., T.T. Johnson, and Wu, applications: its 30 Kabat : plot. Database after first the years and variability Acids Res. Nucleic 28:214–218. 2000,

and E.A. Wu, Kabat, T.T., for of variable their the light regions implications the proteins of chains complementarity. Jones : Bence analysis and antibody myeloma sequences and of An Exp. J. Med. 132:211–250. 1970,

Deng, and Chen, I.A. J., Bartek, Wilson, Xu, D., J., Hilvert, Houk, J., Q., K.N., : template. from primordial Evolution complementarity a of efficiency and antibody catalytic shape 1999, Science 286:2345–2348.

anti-anti-idiotype X., of Crystal Day, Ban, structure and to shows an A.: Wang, Ferrone, McPherson, S., be N., J., it self-complementary. Mol. J. Biol. 255:617–627. 1996,

G.H. D.R., Cohen, Davies, and : protein Interactions antibodies. of with antigens Proc. Acad. Natl Sci. 93:7–12. 1996, USA

with M.A., and A., A L.: in RNase nanomolar complex structures fragment non-canonical single-domain M., loops. loop K., Muyldermans, and two CDR Decanniere, affinity S., Ghahroudi, Lauwereys, antibody Wyns, using Desmyter, A: Structure Fold. Des. 7:361–370. 1999,

Padlan, E.A. of molecule. : antibody the Anatomy Mol. Immunol. 1994, 31:169–217.

M.B., Morris, Stanfield, Zwick, P.W., Saphire, Rudd, Pantophlet, R., D.R., Wilson, Parren, R.A., G.M., Dwek, Burton, and R.L., P.M., I.A. E.O., structure against for vaccine HIV-1: : Crystal of IgG a neutralizing template human a design. 2001, Science 293:1155–1159.

and I.A. Stanfield, Wilson, R.L., interactions. : Protein–peptide Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 1995, 5:103–113.

Komissarov, A.A., Tanner, S.L. J.J., Deutscher, and of structure Crystal fragment antigen-binding DNA. an : single-stranded to bound J. Mol. Biol. 2001, 314:807–822.

Wilson, Stanfield, R.L. I.A., and interactions: new Antibody–antigen conformational : changes. new and structures Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 4:857–867. 1994,

steric Antibody constraints. with by intact antigens 4-9 is interaction influenced

the thermodynamics antibody studies of Poljak, antibody and R.A., mutational molecule: antilysozyme Mariuzza, Goldman, structure, Anatomy R.J.: D1.3. an B.C., E.R., and kinetics, of Braden, Immunol. Rev. 163:45–57. 1998,

and Braden, of between reactions protein antibodies features Poljak, and the antigens. Structural B.C., R.J.: FASEB J. 9:9–16. 1995,

Diamond, against The virus. Fremont, structural antibody M.S.,Pierson,T.C., immunology Nile West and D.H.: of protection Rev. Immunol 225:212–225. 2008,

S., Roehrig, Battisti, V., D., Sukupolvi-Petty, H.A., Chipman, A.J., Holdaway, P.R., Nybakken, al. J.T., Lok, et S.M., D.H., Fremont, Kostyuchenko, G.E., Sedlak, dengue surface of : a alters neutralizing to virus antibody arrangement glycoproteins. the of Binding Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 15:312–317. 2008,

forces D., R., Antigen Schäfer, molecules. antibody of Kubon, M., A., Anselmetti, Tiefenauer, R., Plückthun, Schwesinger, single-chain Ros, addressed binding Fv L.: F., and individually Proc. Acad. Natl Sci. USA 1998, 95:7402–7405.

antibodies structures. with alternative species 4-10 Some generate

Atarhouch, Hamers, Songa, Robinson, antibodies R.: G., S., occurring Muyldermans, C., Hamers-Casterman, of devoid Naturally Hamers, Bendahman, C., E.B., N., T., chains. light and 1993, 363:446–448. Nature

S.: Muyldermans, single-domain Nanobodies: natural antibodies. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 82:775–797. 2013,

Desmyter, in heavy-chain and antibodies V.K., Functional S.: Muyldermans, A., Nguyen, Camelidae. Adv. Immunol. 79:261–296. 2001,

is The 4-11 similar to Fab TCRα:β heterodimer fragment a very immunoglobulin. of

cell A.M., T B., αβreceptors. Lesk, hypervariable of for Al-Lazikani, Canonical structures the C.: and regions Chothia, J. Mol. Biol. 295:979–995. 2000,

Kjer-Nielsen, L., Å J.: immunodominance. J., Brooks, and cell a structure of receptor structural for crystal basis The Rossjohn, evidence A.G., 1.5 provides highly A.W., Clements, T a C.S., McCluskey, selected of Purcell, antiviral (Camb.) Structure 10:1521–1532. 2002,

and Cianga, M., Machius, J., Ward, P., Deisenhofer, E.S. canonical cell a determining for domain: (AV11S5) regions. second of receptor new the Crystal : structure T first forms Vα11 complementarity and Mol. J. Biol. 2001, 310:689–698.

peptide complex of 4-12 T-cell A bound molecule. antigen recognizes MHC to in the foreign form receptor a an a of

Adams, and E.J. K.C., Garcia, receptor cell antigen—a T : How view. the sees structural 122:333–336. Cell 2005,

of Hennecke, Structure and a into complex the receptor TCR cell hemagglutinin αβ of HA1.7, T complex and class influenza cross-restriction histocompatibility DRB1*0401): peptide, J., major HLA-DR4 human D.C.: insight and (TCR) Wiley, alloreactivity. II and molecule, (DRA*0101 J. Exp. Med. 2002, 195:571–581.

K.C., and I.A. Rudolph, M.G., Apostolopoulos, V., M., J.G., Luz, Garcia, Huang, L., Wilson, Teyton, receptor–peptide–major subtly and histocompatibility : cell increasing alters mutation complexes: Structural allogeneic substantially alloreactive comparison T of presentation Vβinteractions. buried a syngeneic peptide complex Exp. J. Med. 195:1175–1186. 2002,

Tan, Liu, et Xiong, P., Kern, R.E., L., al. Reinherz, A., Tang, K., Y., E.L., J., B., Hare, R., Zhang, Hussey, Smolyar, crystal with and T class complex The MHC a of peptide receptor cell : structure in II. 1999, 286:1913–1921. Science

R.L., Rudolph, Stanfield, and I.A. M.G., Wilson, bind : coreceptors. MHCs, peptides, and TCRs How Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2006, 24:419–466.

with subunit are but of similar two compositions MHC 4-13 distinct classes molecules three-dimensional There structures. to molecules, & cell MHC also 4-14 the are surface. on stably to the MHC bound Peptides molecule serve and stabilize

and human proteins MHC Bouvier, molecules: perspective. M.: I structural a class Accessory assembly the and molecular of Mol. Immunol. 39:697–706. 2003,

A., and D.M., collagen with HLA-DR4 complexed peptide structure from crystal (DRA*0101, Wiley, of D.C.: S., X-ray C.M., Cupo, II. human Dessen, a Zaller, Lawrence, DRB1*0401) 1997, 7:473–481. Immunity

molecule D.H., bound single peptides. Fremont, Kappler, Marrack, P., Hendrickson, II J.: covalently MHC with Structures of an and class W.A., 272:1001–1004. Science 1996,

Peterson, M., E.A., Wilson, Stura, Fremont, and D.H., P.A., Matsumura, I.A. H-2Kb. 1 Crystal : peptides MHC class of two with structures viral murine complex in 1992, 257:919–927. Science

C.A., Monnaie, D.H., Unanue, Nelson, Hendrickson, and E.R. D., Fremont, W.A., of dominant Crystal of lysozyme. complex a epitope : with I-Ak in structure 8:305–317. 1998, Immunity

Williams, Chang, Macdonald, Purcell, al. N.A., et C.S., W.A., D.S., Ely, L., D.M., Kjer-Nielsen, Clements, Mifsud, J.J., L.K., Gorman, Koelle, L., A.W., HLA-B44 the cell class structure, dimorphism A recognition. supertype alters : within and repertoire, selected I naturally peptide T J. Exp. Med. 198:679–691. 2003,

L., Corper, Zhu, Wilson, Y., I.A. Rudensky, Teyton, A.L., A.Y., and Crystal I-Ab of MHC human CLIP : complex II peptide: in class motif. with peptide-binding prediction a of an I-Ab structure J. Mol. Biol. 326:1157–1174. 2003,

MHC bind acids I of both short peptides 4-15 ends. amino molecules by class 8–10

to molecules. I class and carboxyl MHC M., stability of Wiley, D.C.: termini peptide the of and Bouvier, Importance amino 1994, 265:398–402. Science

for MPID: to Database sequence–structure–function T.W., MHC Kangueane, information binding S.: peptides MHC-Peptide on molecules. and Tan, P., Govindarajan, Interaction Ranganathan, K.R., 19:309–310. Bioinformatics 2003,

by ligands van and class of MHC Endert, P.: the Saveanu, trimming, Fruci, proteasome: D., and generation degradation I proteases. auxiliary L., Beyond Mol. Immunol. 39:203–215. 2002,

D.C., Schreiber, Garboczi, S.L. G.A., E.J., D.N., Weiss, Collins, Wiley, and alleles ring tricyclic of three human class of : system molecules. variable regions presented the by I A replaces peptides MHC Chem. Biol. 1995, 2:401–407.

class not The by 4-16 length of constrained. is II the MHC bound molecules peptides

MHC S.B., peptide influence Conant, cells. residues Swanborg, recognition flanking R.H.: II exogenous class by antigens and T autoreactive of Autoimmun. Rev. 2:8–12. 2003,

C., Flower, Guan, D.R. Doytchinova, P., Zygouri, I.A., and peptide–MHC server of a prediction MHCPred: : binding. for quantitative Res. Nucleic Acids 2003, 31:3621–3624.

T.N., J.D., Shabanowitz, White, D.F., Marto, Engelhard, V.H. Lippolis, Hunt, Bullock, and F.M., C.J., J., Luckey, J.A., II constitute MHC peptides quantitation : class of of sets. Analysis that processing antigen nested by Immunol. J. 2002, 169:5089–5097.

Kim, E.W. Park, J.H., Cho, Y.J., K.L., and Lee, processed HLA-DR-associated peptides. isolation presented : identification Selective and and epitope naturally of Immunol. Invest. 2003, 32:155–169.

H.G. Rammensee, with Chemistry associated class peptides : molecules. of II and I class MHC Curr. Opin. Immunol. 1995, 7:85–96.

Barlow, molecules. A., of analysis class II Jr.: Rudensky, Preston-Hurlburt, Janeway, MHC A.Y., and S.C., Hong, to C.A., peptides Sequence P., bound Nature 1991, 353:622–627.

large Maverakis, antigen and fragments. binding Sercarz, E.E., processing: MHC-guided of E.: Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2003, 3:621–629.

and G., Sinnathamby, L.C. Eisenlohr, : is class in that of the revealed hemagglutinin-derived II acidification. by recycling an MHC early influenza endosome by Presentation epitope molecules Immunol. J. 170:3504–3513. 2003,

peptide:MHC the of complexes a T-cell 4-17 peptide:MHC:T-cell similar crystal The several show orientation over complex. receptor of the receptor structures

Wang, Buslepp, Collins, H., E., Biddison, W.E., and J., E.J. Appella, correlation MHC Vαdocking implications for cell selection. TCR CD8 and T between A : dependence: on 2003, 19:595–606. Immunity

K.J., Two cell acids. to Utz, the Wiley, amino Biddison, U., D.C.: Ding, diagonal mode peptide TCR HLA-A2/Tax similar different D.N., Garboczi, receptors in Y.H., human and Smith, bind a complex T using W.E., 1998, Immunity 8:403–411.

Degano, Peterson, P.A., M., I.A. Garcia, L., M., Leyton, and L.R., Wilson, Huang, K.C., Pease, of plasticity cell : peptide-MHC T self in Structural receptor recognition of a antigen. basis 1998, 279:1166–1172. Science

for Burrows, dominant A.G., in J., Purcell, structural selection L., Brooks, αβ Whisstock, receptors Clements, J.C., of the immunity. J.: S.R., Kjer-Nielsen, A.W., A cell basis and C.S., McCluskey, T Rossjohn, antiviral 2003, Immunity 18:53–64.

M.M. M.S., Ely, Davis, and Reay, K.C., Kuhns, Lin, Newell, S.N., Garcia, A.C., A.E., Kruse, Rodriguez, E.W., L.K., P.A., cross-reactivity in cytochrome receptors specific Structural cell T for : and c-I-E(k). specificity basis of Immunol. J. 2011, 186:5823–5832.

Merwe, C., Malissen, of G., and P.A., Housset, loop van A., CDR3 J.C., Mosser, flexibility contributes T., degeneracy der the B.: to recognition. D., Fontecilla-Camps, Kearney, Mazza, Darnault, TCR C., Gregoire, Reiser, J.B., Nat. Immunol. 2003, 4:241–247.

Janeway, D.B., to S.T., Medzhitov, its peptide-MHC and class a and of orientation Sant’Angelo, G., Hong, Waterbury, P., Yoon, S.C., ligands. specificity C.A., Preston-Hurlburt, The II Jr.: TCR R., 4:367–376. Immunity 1996,

and Liu, Reinherz, S.G., Hussey, Teng, M.K., A., Tse, J.H. J., A.G.D., Liu, E.L., Chang, R.E., J.H., H.C., Wang, Nathenson, Smolyar, a substantial Identification topology different TCR–MHC–peptide variation complexes. of among common docking with : Curr. Biol. 1998, 8:409–412.

cells molecules response make T proteins required directly effective CD8 antigen. and The are of and MHC to CD4 contact to 4-18 cell-surface an

J., Ouyang, E., Chang, J.H. X., and Le, E.L., Wang, Parisini, J.H., Tan, H.C., Y., K., Reinherz, Liu, Wang, : mutational comparison with and CD8αβheterodimer the homodimer. analyses and CD8αα of Structural 6:661–671. Immunity 2005,

F.: of Doubting Cheroutre, and H., the Lambolez, TCR CD8αα. function coreceptor Immunity 2008, 28:149–159.

Jakobsen, Wyer, McMichael, J.R., Bell, Gerth, B.Y. J.I., G.F., A.J., D.I., U.C., Stuart, Tormo, Jones, and Gao, J., E.Y., of structure CD8ααand : complex Crystal HLA-A2. the human between Nature 1997, 387:630–634.

TCR: models Matko, Damjanovich, and oligomers Fesus, Bagossi, I Tozser, class crystallographic with of L., resonance HLA J., S.: L., J., J., transfer on energy fluorescence T.A., and Clustering R., data. Gaspar, three-dimensional based Bene, Jr., CD8 P., Szollosi, Waldmann, and Immunol. J. 166:5078–5086. 2001,

zinc cell CD8. A Sun, M.J.: CD4 S.C., Z.Y., G., and structure tethers clasp coreceptors Kim, P.W., Blacklow, and Lck T Wagner, to Eck, 2003, Science 301:1725–1728.

capping thymocyte-major E.L.: and Dell, North, CD8βcore J.D., 1-O-glycans H.R., S.J., acid Sialic S.J., class of Reinhold, controls Dyken, A.M., Rogers, Van B., M.E., Marth, Morris, complex M., A., I Moody, histocompatibility interaction. Panico, Reinherz, Biol. J. Chem. 2003, 278:7240–7260.

human Ferguson, Cheroutre, viral Kloverpris, Marrinan, L.J., and M., H., H., expanded T Barnes, Muenchhoff, CD8αα J., in CD8+ chronic P., differentiated terminally P.: Goulder, marks E., infection. Walker, Klenerman, expression cells E., Front Immunol. 2013, 4:223.

E.L.: peptides recognition of and bound T Wang, molecules. basis cell Reinherz, to Structural MHC of J.H., Mol. Immunol. 2002, 38:1039–1049.

of focused CD8βto proximal a basis I K., Wang, Natarajan, the CD8αβ/ recognition Margulies, D.H.: T interaction: cell Structural class and orients MHC position. R., J. Immunol. 183:2554–2564. 2009,

Gao, Yin, Wang, Mariuzza, of M., crystal surface W., maturation Y., CD4-HLA-DR1 yeast Y., R.A.: of complex. CD4 a Affinity Wang, display and and X.X., Q., Wang, structure human by L., Li, Mo, Proc. Acad. Natl Sci. 108:15960–15965. USA 2011,

Kwong, Wu, P.D., H., Hendrickson, W.A. and association in CD4. structure and variability human Dimeric segmental the of : Nature 387:527–530. 1997,

Yin, ternary complete of structure complex R.A.: peptide-MHC, and receptor, Crystal X.X., CD4. a T-cell and Y., Mariuzza, of Wang, Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 2012, 109:5405–5410. USA

Zamoyska, and CD8: immune responses? R.: of and recognition CD4 modulators T of receptor of antigen cell Curr. Opin. Immunol. 10:82–86. 1998,

of 4-19 two classes on expressed MHC The differentially molecules are cells.

trans-activator A., V., by Mach, Lisowska-Grospierre, CIITA. C.A., expression the Mottet, MHC gene by B., Siegrist, of Regulation and B.: mediated Steimle, interferon-γ class II Science 1994, 265:106–109.

up receptor alternative an δchains. distinct made of subset T of A bears 4-20 cells γand

and E.J., K.C. Adams, Chien, Garcia, Y.H., receptor MHC with Structure the T22. cell nonclassical of γδT a in : complex Science 2005, 308:227–231.

T.J., and Allison, Garboczi, D.N. recognition T of receptors cell non-peptide Structure antigens. : and of their γδ Mol. Immunol. 38:1051–1061. 2002,

Fournie, D.N. J.J., Allison, T.J., M., Winter, Garboczi, and C.C., Bonneville, human of antigen : a receptor. Structure T-cell γδ 411:820–824. Nature 2001,

Kamath, Wang, H., Bukowski, Das, J.F. L., A., and receptor-mediated Vγ2Vδ2 aminobisphosphonates. recognition T-cell of : 2001, 98:1616–1618. Blood

L.V., al. Mayassi, Kung, B., L., Luoma, T., C.D., Anderson, L.A., D., Bembinster, Scharf, L., Sibener, Castro, Picard, A.M., J.E., et Bai, cells. with shows a recognition complex by cell γδT T receptor self-lipid of structure of Vδ1 MHC-like : Crystal CD1d-sulfatide in human 2013, 39:1032–1042. Immunity

Six-of-the-best: immunology. of Vantourout, unique A.: and to P., γδT cells contributions Hayday, Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2013, 13:88–100.

R.L. I.A., and Wilson, Stanfield, : cell of mysteries recognition. γδ T Unraveling the Nat. Immunol. 2:579–581. 2001,

Chien, Wilson, I.A. Y., C., Wingren, M.P., Degano, M., Crowley, and structure of a T22: receptor a ligand MHC-like : cell fold. Crystal truncated γδT 287:310–314. 2000, Science

Groh, V., in T.: γδT J., I-related class by the antigen cell of T cells. stress-inducible human engagement epithelial specificity MHC Wu, Spies, receptor and chains and recognition Immunol. J. 2002, 169:1236–1240.

Lymphocyte Receptors of Antigen The Generation

a lymphocyte 1-12). (see expresses antigen-binding antigen site of has unique single copies a many Section A receptor that exact The lymphocyte means billions clonal is that each person of unique possesses. among receptors antigen that the each expression lymphocytes of 4 structural on T antigen features receptors the cells, cells T-cell B and the of respectively. receptors, immunoglobulins described and Chapter vast that acid antigen-binding repertoire is the from of in variations chains two the regions at receptors We the sequence amino the saw which receptor. variable of site, composed antigen the two of the from results in Vβ (VL), are the T-cell and region immunoglobulins, variable In and Vα receptors, (VH) regions. region these heavy-chain the the and variable light-chain loops specificity. diversity for antigen regions these receptor’s limitless The seemingly complementarity-determining regions 4-6) in comprise site immunoglobulin three and Section that contain the (CDRs) of hypervariable determine domains that allow three (see binding or regions,

genome encode (at antigen and not nucleotides) limited number 1970s, size billion of diversity could that the for the roughly of In 3 1960s receptors. genes meant recognized directly to of a the that the sufficient the observed genome account immunologists easily encoding gene by its fill could antibody but antibody genes. the genome own with nothing example, distinct each For DNA of see, are single receptor segment. the regions by not will we directly immunoglobulin encoded variable chains domain a a As as complete a so-called part regions initially only Instead, variable gene that the of segments are by encode the domain. immunoglobulin specified coding lymphocyte, each DNA by form somatic these variable-region the to segments sequence. of recombination of a are complete development During unique rearranged and gene process a is gene process as generally This rearrangement. known by present in assembled A types fully segments, or combining genome. of two of is region copies sequence three multiple the is which gene each variable germline in produced the complete different final many of of individual diversity each of assembling lymphocyte. development the The each antigen result repertoire is receptors during type segments the the receptor of gene from only possible diverse T providing B lymphocyte gives combinations and process new This many repertoire antigen each one antigen of the of receptors, of naive specificities cells. of cells

generate and of the first The repertoire rearrangements primary of T-cell and describe chapter that receptors. the this second parts gene immunoglobulins of and of gene both the system. cells was the evolution and to common evolution critical adaptive B rearrangement T its probably cells, mechanism The vertebrate is to immune the production plasma immunoglobulins from part explains chapter how of results transition antibodies The third secreted activated production by in the transmembrane B by cells the cells. of of unlike as synthesized or either which transmembrane receptors, receptors. exist be Immunoglobulins receptors secreted T-cell as antibodies, only can trans-membrane (see regions, different produced be with can constant 4-1). types of isotypes also Section Antibodies or describe how Here, the we

immunoglobulin Primary gene rearrangement.

gene T-cell rearrangement. receptor

constant variation regions. in Structural immunoglobulin

immune adaptive the Evolution response. of

Fig. 5.1 exon. regions single hypervariable are V-region within a encoded Three is β determine contains supported based Panel specificity. its that by regions the (yellow) on (HV) nine antigen three composed hypervariable a: fold immunoglobulin (red) framework that regions the and region sheets is of (Ig) variable three and sheets loops F HV between B C, acids Cʹ Cʹʹ, amino of between β the Panel the and of exist regions and between as b: and

G.

a lymphocyte a full Panel is complete region single in within antigen-receptor of encoded c: gene. a exon variable the four up Ig sheets regions between β regions three the framework made (FRs) of HV the interspersed of domain. are The

and an process affinity and of isotypes occurs isotype the postpone regulated, immune of Chapter expression occurs antibodies of IgD that we since 10, normally the is describing maturation until the in switching but response. context how IgM last rearrangements other immunity different examines The that give evolutionary alternative part species. gene briefly adaptive forms chapter rise of to this in forms of of

Primary rearrangement. immunoglobulin gene

with antibody affinity, can to Virtually be any binding the a an many substance single and comprises unique response, response even different a molecules, of antibody a the epitope different for subtly and strength. specificity epitope or the target each to in total humans of repertoire, known an least individual available is the probably specificities immunoglobulin and antibody as is greater. orders or at repertoire magnitude The of number several and antibody 1011 however, total by one B present the as number time each well individual, individual’s antibody number previous as by encounters specificities The any cells antigens. of at in with of an is, limited

Before the the immunoglobulin possible was for two main there to directly, genes were origin it hypotheses this examine diversity. of is gene antibody The and chain immunoglobulin largely that held repertoire a is that each germline for theory separate there the different inherited. theories undergo a contrast, during is inherited sequences B proposed observed cells somatic from number of limited the diversification In that lifetime. within V-region that individual’s repertoire alteration the generated of each of gene of revealed elements small both segments. DNA were the and a encoding rearrangements inherited variable relatively the genes sequence immunoglobulin that of by group that generated region Cloning is theories correct further hypermutation is Diversity somatic the of in activated process enhanced cells. B mature by somatic correct, existence proved diversification germline was the Thus, germline also genes concept theory of essentially although multiple true. the theory the of

progenitors in antibody-producing Immunoglobulin genes 5-1 of are the cells. rearranged

encodes gene it. structure, 5.1 a and the between Figure light-chain shows variable the site, relationships region’s its domain that antigen-binding variable is light immunoglobulin The immunoglobulin of on and are regions the of nine sheets. chains β fold, based heavy composed which HV1, The CDR3 formed HV2, of or loops three and regions known (see 5.1a). as HV3, site is CDR1, also acids and by anti-body-binding amino hyper-variable CDR2, Fig. β G of are Fig. located Cʹ and Cʹʹ, the and sheets These B and between C, (see F and pairs loops 5.1b). chains a are Fig. heavy encoded from exon, regions light (see the one for In this another sequence within B cell, separated are but coding mature single and by a variable 5.1c). This gene’s 2). is (exon exon exon the second or the antibody’s surface into of The exon for sequence, first expression directs endoplasmic antibody reticulum leader which the the secretion. variable the encodes regions

individual, of by present variable-region illustrated most genes, not is two germline of the exon is DNA in in encoded Fig. sequence complete originally as the segments, the separate the DNA Unlike but 5.2. to develops segments complete bone spliced as 2 DNA are the marrow. the two together in form cell These exon the B region, regions, originate variable βsheets two of acids the a 95–101 from first the amino The encoding and first complete A–F hypervariable

Fig. are 5.2 that joined two during originates gene region from or lymphocyte CDR3 more segments development. The individual a variable exon. CDR3 CDR1, in a resides complete region light-chain CDR2, encoding loops single and the a: Panel Panel DNA germline b: variable the from derived is sequences. complete distinct region by loops, A V and nucleotides the segments when joined added the and or beginning from sequences and formed encodes is V the gene the gene during segment of lost of the loop are by segment and these gene J CDR3 CDR2 lymphocyte gene development. the end segment, CDR1 V, is CDR3 (not loop segments and formed shown). of from heavy joining exon The the the J the chain sequences for of D, by gene

segment variable Fig. or gene (see V 5.2). also hypervariable This third the segment contributes of region. part including originate 13 of the the segment. parts region third of to G or gene J region, hypervariable amino variable β remainder a joining sheet from the and acids), (up Other the region V-region convention, complete splicing encoding exon gene these segments the formed variable together as refer the gene. will the to of By by we

are and original sequence segments from germline cells, In encoding the in the configuration, nonlymphoid their a C V-region gene remain distance the region. considerable away as C B assembled mature region, of a gene’s the DNA. to event the V-region sequence a lies lymphocytes, however, splicing closer of much consequence the In immunoglobulin possible cells. discovered nonlymphoid of both originally B study restriction to genes enzyme the and the immunoglobulin first Rearrangement in was organization within analysis genes it of cells techniques almost ago, the 40 made years when the but DNA genes B-lymphocyte experiments in cells Such immunoglobulin that the of of showed rearranged lineage, in cells. are not genomic within the other segments process meiotic of as is from distinguish to This production place that ‘somatic’ rearrangement gametes. recombination DNA known during recombination takes the the it of

recombination Complete genes somatic gene of generated are a variable encode 5-2 separate segments. the region by that

light-chain in genes the shown heavy-chain Fig. and The that immunoglobulin rearrangements are produce complete 5.3. a and VL For chain, of an that gene JL VL segment a light-chain encodes region. light exon the joining creates the whole the from In (CL segments unrearranged region the the region). the constant the of the light located are exons far gene VL encoding relatively chain DNA, away the located sequence. of VL joining The JL to the CL-region and the segment a a are close a VL close however, segments segment also CL JL gene brings to gene segment gene to gene region, sequence rearranged is only separated by a VL of intron. gene JL a region CL-region short the from The segment splicing RNA, immunoglobulin joined complete is sequence a messenger exon RNA V-region after the the by C-region To transcription. make light-chain to

one complication. For is additional heavy-chain, there the three rather is two. than region The segments, V in (VH) gene heavy-chain encoded light-chain DH addition uses them heavy lies chain J to third (denoted gene and diversity VH segment segments. the the VL In JL), between the and JH and segments gene the gene gene from the called VH and which segment, or to distinguish V JH a in is heavy-chain process complete a shown recombination region Fig. generates The that V panel), 5.3 two in stages. occurs separate and (right then make a exon. to First, a is DJH segment segment to JH DH gene gene a VH joined gene VH-region rearranges segment; to a complete light-chain C-region neighboring sequence gene. assembled the As splicing V-region with RNA to genes, joins the the

Fig. from are segments. constructed V-region genes 5.3 gene from are Heavy-chain three Light-chain gene constructed segments V-region constructed regions from (right genes segments panel). V are two join, the J and First, and segments panel). (D) diversity (center gene genomic forming the segment DNA (V) to a in segment V A complete joining variable gene the light-chain then VH joins sequence, the a to (J) joined are form complete a and combined DJ V-region gene exon. C-region gene heavy-chain is A exon. chains encoded are extracellular by proteins, exons. several Immunoglobulin the and are a RNA the the gene cell’s into to transcript. the C-region leader which exon leader (L), heavy-chain preceded the peptide V processing pathways V-domain directs the spliced protein is segment during The secretory sequence, encoding by together with of an exons, sequence then cleaved. sequence The is and leader encoded link exon The C is translation, in is of removed light-chain to bonds polypeptide separate exon the after and splicing formed. is chains region the and disulfide joined are a that by V-region the The region purple. shown hinge in is L-to-V J-to-C remove RNA light-chain to and introns. the the the

5-3 V segments at are contiguous present Multiple each locus. immunoglobulin gene

though complete For segment. gene a a each we there the only single sequence were simplicity as of discussed of formation have copy V-region fact, copies germline multiple gene In segments V, in J of are D, there DNA. and the of each selection the the V segment is It gene of diversity great of regions just one produces immunoglobulins. random that among type segments in type each Fig. of numbers by functional in human of and are the sequencing, gene determined genome, shown cloning The gene as 5.4. them from discovered as segments that all are the protein. mutations functional, some gene accumulated prevent encoding functional a have Not pseudogenes. a essential, large of is no single ‘pseudogenes.’ gene V, are DNA, Such D, genes in J segment many there in number relatively are and Because gene termed resulting segments germline a be some these nonfunctional. rearrangements like a significant undergo will just thus of a gene and pseudogene incorporate rearrangement Since segment, functional of can proportion

λ immunoglobulin two chain, of there We chains— 4-1 in are saw chains, three types equivalent heavy chains. κ Section the sets light the and that of and chains immunoglobulin which segments clusters complete organized are encode gene assemble a or can loci—the κ, loci—each genetic The that V-region into λ, three heavy-chain of and sequence. these a human slightly Each loci organized is locus in the and as is Fig. different for on chromosome differently, shown 5.5. of gene. human each individuals (or Cλ gene the cluster five) on located in Vλ At by a Jλ sets a segments λ of light-chain is followed linked four segments 22, single chromosome to locus, some gene is single segments a locus, gene Jκ the cluster gene the cluster of chromosome and by κ Cκ In Vκ on by of segments, then gene. 2, a followed light-chain

the and and organization JH CH 14, on DH, chromosome heavy-chain separate locus, contains of The clusters genes. gene segments VH, of of differs arrayed way: one a after it The C each a single immunoglobulin Fig. corresponds other, locus important isotype (see C one contains a which the regions series of heavy-chain different in to of instead of region, 5.19). encode these which proteins, function isotypes structurally distinct contains functions. similar regions, have are C the distinct quite similarly, the different whereas locus and heavy-chain several Cλ While different

and accomplished initially as immunoglobulins express 4-1), mRNA heavy-chain in expression isotypes which IgD, is leads δ the of B alternative splicing we and see Section (see and cells IgM which the Section to 5-14. shall μ by as in DNA later an activated at stage, IgG), a cell is switching, after immune place B response. by γ expression isotypes, occurs of The and as through such a (giving class to takes referred other antigen rearrangements describe in class We switching Chapter 10.

sequence each into in the segments all families identity gene be which DNA The shares least at V grouped 80% human in with others member can

Fig. functional and light V for gene heavy the of The of number chains. human regions segments 5.4 sequence). and one versions sequencing derived nonfunctional a and all and of The individual cloning exclude exhaustive pseudogenes from from (mutated numbers gene of are DNA shown people. all a the not be As genetic numbers the result for polymorphism, will same of

Fig. human The loci genome. light-chain organization germline in the 5.5 heavyand immunoglobulin of the 29 Vλ Jλ has chain locus functional on gene the segments 22) 33 segments pairs for or and and the Depending of genetic between gene light functional λ individual, Cλ genes. and five the four (chromosome with cluster but way, segments gene. Cκ five is Vκ (chromosome with accompanied a about single 38 a by locus gene of segments The 2) similar gene κ a Jκ organized functional in undergone by has an shown, for cluster 50% segments gene (not the individuals, approximately of simplicity). duplication increase In of entire Vκ JH heavy-chain has cluster of gene and these 14) segments and (chromosome gene segments segments. 23 around The gene VH locus DH lying 40 between a 6 functional about VH segments CH genes Fig. (see cluster a heavy-chain contains large locus The of also 5.19). illustrating gene Cμ) simplicity, omitted. chromosomal V without For same been shown separate and (for in have the its the segments CH shown, is orientation; all first exons; gene all have been only pseudogenes D some total the bases), 6 whereas heavy-chain This 2 the locus is more bases scale: is megabases (2 of not diagram long. only are gene million length segments of than to the

Fig. J conserved nonamer the flank sequences and heptamer D, gene 5.6 segments the signal are Recombination and sequences that encoding V, of regions immunoglobulins.

of (ACAAAAACC) that 12 nucleotides. Recombination (RSSs) or and either separated bp composed sequences by heptamer sequences of approximately (CACAGTG) 23 nonamer signal are bp are as that here 23-bp the purple motif is the The is heptamer–12-bp an includes depicted as depicted orange arrowhead; motif arrowhead. spacer a spacer–nonamer gene and a of segments Joining 12-bp almost 23-bp always involves 12/23 a rule. RSS—the gene (green), and light D is heavy RSSs shown (red), The of the V (λ immunoglobulin here. of in segments arrangement J of and κ) chains (yellow) (H) and V first the segment. the Section first DNA gene nucleotide of The the and the precisely and nucleotide G or the gene of recombinase of between 5-5) last J the or cuts between heptamer; RAG-1 of last C heptamer the (see segment the the D 12/23 arrangement according of the RSSs Note joining. V-to-J gene immunoglobulin that the to in rule, direct precludes heavy-chain segments the

family. V can families, κ-chain segments. are seven gene and Both heavy-chain there subdivided the and Vλ the segments families of gene eight be into families are to each grouped that up clans. of more families other clans, to be other into can than similar families made The in segments clans. gene Human fall three into VH amphibians, clans existed a suggesting also mammals same into from VH reptiles, segments gene in three these clans, the modern these animal the identified common All and groups. ancestor fall of that series have diversification V through by a evolutionary and we segments today gene gene the time. duplications that of Thus, arisen see

segments is by and sequences. V, flanking DNA J of gene Rearrangement D, 5-4 guided

gene to T-cell at segment chain receptor or be rearrangements DNA place correct the relative or to immunoglobulin For must coding a expressed, complete the locations V, D, take regions. J to to another gene a DNA joined must V segment is a addition, that regulated not such In and J a or V joined segment. be these rearrangements gene D signal recombination found called the by which guided takes recombination DNA (RSSs), are rearrangements sequences, adjacent to sequences conserved place. DNA that points are noncoding at are shown Fig. arrangements the of structure in and RSSs The light-chain for the heavy-chain λ the loci 5.6 loci. and and κ is consists a always heptamer followed a conserved An nine of as the which pairs conserved the nonconserved of of which followed region either nonamer base nucleotides, nucleotides—the second 5ʹCACAGTG3ʹ, seven coding by is block the or sequence; long; RSS a known block with 5ʹACAAAAACC3ʹ. by 23 12 (bp) contiguous spacer,

the gene out enzymes of but in in flexibility sequences, The vary to segment the from as these sequences here one is even carry can individual, recognition some sequences the consensus they another, given there the same by the recombination. are that substantially the vary one to sequence, turn turns spacers bp) bp) their (23 conserved double helix. DNA or two in lengths (12 correspond The but of that the sequences the but This of to proof. nonamer with catalyze proteins structural and same interactions to to allow still thought concept DNA is lacks this heptamer the helix recombination, side bring gene heptamer– J spacer–nonamer adjacent the motif—the to sequence of coding The found segments. RSS—is or always D, directly sequence V, between segments the normally chromosome. on located gene Recombination occurs same a spacer be with RSS flanked gene 12-bp RSS. can by joined A one an segment spacer to a typically flanked 23-bp by only 12/23 as This the is rule. known

between It by spacers 23-bp (see important segments the of pattern Fig. the that recognize various is gene the is used different 12and λ, κ, loci heavy-chain to and 5.6). Thus, by JH joined gene gene but VH to flanked be be both VH directly, chain, DH 23-bp a segments VH for to segments the gene and segments gene can segment, and gene a JH JH a are segment cannot DH joined a gene as segment gene spacers. segment heavy to can between on them, segment DH 12-bp However, joined a (see DH both have spacers Fig. gene sides segments with they as be 5.6).

an are CDR2 encoded the segment antigen-binding in the gene CDR1 V immunoglobulin, (see region of In Fig. directly and 5.2). V, sequence J heavy and segments is the additional the chain, D, joining of and and V chain. the is segments created gene the the J DNA for for by that by encoded the gene CDR3 light CDR3 by can to D gene D another before regions repertoire a that the joining diversity J segment. gene by being be supplied one the antibody of joined segment, gene in result segment from Further violate rule, suggesting at and of frequency. seems joining D–D 12/23 that the the violations 12/23 such occur low rule can is infrequent to Such long some loops accounting unusually humans, of in mechanism the for In CDR3 chains. found is is found antibodies 5% the joining in major approximately D–D and heavy

is the of gene DNA to one but generate joining event needed The light-chain mechanism rearrangement similar a loci, are a is heavyand light-chain although gene. required only two heavy-chain for for the segments germline and DNA, DNA looping transcriptional the them same the two the of deletion rearrangement their are between orientation When gene involves in (Fig. out in left 5.7, panels). (see inverted orientation transcriptional an opposite DNA By the gene when orientations, retains intervening with segments rearrangement chromosome the have the in Fig. contrast, but the 5.7, right panels). opposite of it humans but to for the orientation all half mode gene of the recombination because segments of Vκ Vκ common, accounts in to the about less Jκ segments. This of gene that is is joins half Jκ

J segments and enzymes. 5-5 modifying The reaction D, recombines V, gene that

in overall mechanisms recombination, Fig. are rearrangement, involved The illustrated or V-region V(D)J enzymatic in 5.8. interactions RSSs specifically Two rule thus recombination. the spacers of the together recognize for by between and 12/23 that brought proteins enforce length are the is locations at activity and two in DNA then rejoined precisely is configuration. molecule then a The different endonuclease cleaved by a ends head-to-head of The are fashion signal joint. in sequences the joined heptamer a to form cases, are In no sequences, a between DNA the nucleotides of heptamer or the sequence added lost creating molecule. within majority the double-heptamer 5ʹCACAGTGCACAGTG3ʹ two contained in When the signal joining piece in of DNA a the Fig. circular (see the orientation, extrachromosomal segments same is are joint lost which cell is when left from 5.7, genome the the divides. panels), The and is the what segments, remain on J chromosome, which coding form joint. gene to called join the V chromosome orientation other Fig. joining each the relative When to opposite are (see segments the the in within the the joint J within of is is panels), region the of DNA inverted the coding gene and form segment signal the retained right segment and RSS between gene to the also joint. 5.7, V the chromosome, rearrangement situation inversion. This by leads to we lost meaning junction later, joint the added or the coding between see be segments process. joined is can during nucleotides shall rearrangement imprecise, As that to diversity. V-region the adds This joint formation imprecise coding called junctional sequence, the of nature in variability

MOVIE 5.1

Fig. segments are by joined 5.7 gene recombination. V-region V-region sequences recombination segments take the (RSSs) are allow recombination signal flanking together place. Top to panel: in every recombination the gene to event, brought shown the 12-bp-spaced in 23-bp-spaced The orange, in RSSs are RSSs purple. region. to are events recombination a for recombination is For heavy-chain two required simplicity, a generate gene functional light-chain of illustrated; gene, separate V the a RSSs Left example) out cases, in rearrangement V segments panels: segments this orientation (the in results in in the of most gene of J two chromosome, and the and the transcriptional juxtaposition undergoing are looping the DNA. the same in intervening the arranged at closed joint in DNA signal RSSs, the the occurs creating the of a the in form of ends the and so-called the intervening sequences heptamer circle. releasing Recombination DNA. in segments and J coding V joint creates the the joining Subsequently, the gene the chromosomal of Right directions. segments in opposite J cases, gene other initially panels: are V and the transcriptional oriented in coiled the a of In integration the chromosome. than of DNA the and configuration position case, the that two the rather simple of sequences alignment loop, RSSs on in ends shown, heptamer joining new intervening this results into now the requires so the a inversion exon. joining V-region J the a Again, functional the and creates segments V of

transcription the V gene transcription DNA recombines the gene After V1 segment forward-oriented J retained V2 intervening recombination L2 J V2 in into is Vn segment inverted V2 23 is Ln the may orientation in V1 be downstream J the alignment to intervening V1 of L2 When L1 When with gene an a Ln taking L1 the segments coding Vn with gene of with downstream reverse two a joint After Vn gene V1 forms downstream a region signal recombination loop recombines regions JLn L1 L2 chromosome, orientation gene two loops regions segment, 12 V2 either regions the Vn relative L1 23 or reverse-oriented RSS RSS joint Ln a forward Ln JL1 a DNA from transcriptional inverted V chromosome V1 the coiled L2 V alignment excised of 23 of out coiled the Vn in L2 deleted segments conÿguration this it segment, direction V2 RSS direction

complex The that act termed recombination the concert carry V(D)J is V(D)J of enzymes in to somatic out recombinase. genes, recombination-activating RAG-1 called encoded RAG1 are are and by the two RAG2. components RAG-2, lymphoid-specific recombinase of The and they and lymphocytes 8. antigen receptors, expressed genes recombination, lymphocytes is are in engaged developing more they assembling the while detail and their in as V(D)J are essential only Chapter in pair of described for This in such can fibroblasts is the RSSs; how RAG-1 together genes the cells and to were RAG-2 discovered. nonlymphoid as DNA capacity expressed appropriate exogenous containing Indeed, of RAG the segments this initially confer rearrange on

1223 Ku70 DNA-PK:Artemis Ku80 deoxynucleotidyl Precise JV Imprecise RAG-1:2 ends transferase covalently closed DNA Signal DNA terminal ligates Artemis (TdT) binds ends joint RAG-1/2 DNA Germline hairpin joints Ku70:Ku80 DNA binds ligase:XRCC4 DNA ligase ligase:XRCC4 ligates blunt opens confguration joints ends DNA Coding Ku70:Ku80 ends DNA 5´-phosphorylated DNA of two Ku80 IV:XRCC4 coding ends Cleavage ends RSSs binds RSS signal Synapsis processes DNA-PK hairpin TdT ligase DNA IV:XRCC4 of Ku70 joint RSSs ends DNA

Fig. 5.8 V(D)J steps Enzymatic rearrangement. in RAG-dependent

complex signal proteins and (not the binding flanking (second RAG-2 be gene RSSs (RSSs, a of joined the (HMG) shown) of row). begins of triangles) high-mobility-group the of containing Recombination sequences recombination segments to RAG-1 (blue), (purple), sequences with one coding to other RSS. RAG then the recruits complex The DNA each the backbone its In endonuclease step, segment activity between RSS. and precisely RAG in coding cuts the cleavage of single-stranded makes the strand DNA on the with point then RSS. of hairpin, leaving opposite this end a bond the phosphodiester blunt double-stranded at which reacts At cutting creates to a group, generate break 3ʹ-OH the a a each of ends different types are two resolved ways. These in DNA to such hairpin. the proteins coding essential the (green) (left as panels), bind Ku70:Ku80 ends At repair monomers ringlike not a as structure the a encircle DNA. heterodimer, the do forms but Ku70:80 the then extension. or the joins DNA hairpin and a activity DNA (purple) endonuclease random complex single-strand flush-ended two its strands either complex, DNA-PK:Artemis site, opens at The a yielding randomly end by add nucleotides, then is respectively deoxynucleotidyl terminal The in pink) transferase more detail and (TdT, is in which shown remove and (this Fig. exonuclease, modified cut step 5.11). The ligated IV finally ends two XRCC4 DNA by in association with coding are (turquoise). ligase (right binds the are but not Ku70:Ku80 At signal modified. ends RSS panels), further the to the ends ends DNA two joint. signal of precisely joins complex the a ligase form IV:XRCC4 the to Instead,

as double-strand nonhomologous break proteins members repair repair joining the known (NHEJ) complex of expressed are DNA the The other of in recombinase pathway end (DSBR). ubiquitously in of cells, is the at responsible break a In this site rejoining for process ends DNA. all the two double-strand meaning or nucleotides gained joining lost The imprecise, of is process joining. frequently site at that the DSBR are would has not This lose it evolutionary when or to DSBs. nucleotides be most gain cells repairing relevance advantageous as in the nature junctional and adaptive in of imprecise However, DSBR diversity is critical immunity. for lymphocytes, for driving NHEJ Thus, the joining. mediate may this to be imprecise pressure with to a (Ku70:Ku80); protein heterodimer ring kinase associates DNA (DNA-PK). catalytic DNA-PKcs, and a kinase is Ku, is tightly forms protein the subunit, DSBR around this to ubiquitous contributing protein the DNA-dependent a One form which protein with associates Artemis, is that Another activity. DNA-PKcs which nuclease has together DNA which are complex finally the ends The joined IV, repair DNA with a XRCC4. enzyme protein the ligase forms by DNA synthesis. in DNA μ λ fill-in polymerases participate DNA-end and In add polymerase addition, in can a nucleotides template-independent manner. μ that used is several V(D)J to RAG-1 V(D)J by the the recombination of In RAG-2 summary, and common adapted complete lymphocytes repair DNA pathways initiated have process somatic enzymes in help recombinases.

cleavage that first endonucleolytic The is coordinated RAG activity requires of the reaction proteins. an both and the RAG-2 protein are Initially, group of recognizes a RAG-1 target HMGB1 complex proteins, that the RSSs the reaction. and chromatin two aligns of HMGB2, with high-mobility or cleavage together acting cofactor as RAG-2 RAG-1 as (Fig. with a dimer, a 5.9). operates endonuclease of of complex. RSS contains and Zn2+-dependent protein RAG-1 the the binds heptamer and the the and the specifically RAG nonamer activity recognizes seems dimer, undergo RSSs align As two will RAG-1 rearrangement. to a that the essential for of established types RSS different of 12/23 elements the preference models may Recent the induces that complex a orientation suggest be to (Fig. because binding asymmetric rule RAG-1:RAG-2 an 5.10). bound the complex segment. a makes the break of of heptamer DNA at nucleotide the thus free RAG of the coding The end 5ʹ at a group just the 3ʹ-OH RSS, creating single-strand of a double-strand phosphodiester at creating a strand, sequence. the group break making ‘hairpin’ flush break attacks double-strand 3ʹ-OH heptamer coding immediately region This the a the bond the DNA the end on at and DNA opposite nucleophilic and for process the four and joined, twice, gene being coding the at ends each This regions occurs heptamer hairpin once cutting flush ends: producing segment sequences two ends Fig. at (see two both 5.8). held has joining the however, ends apart, in a are been not completed. until These step float tightly do complex DNA but DNA sequence blunt signal precisely XRCC4 joined of IV complex are and a joint. ends The by form the of heptamer ligase the to

joint coding complex. of is Formation the more the recruits two The by subunit. are DNA-PKcs ends Ku, which coding hairpin each bound into DNA-PK. phosphorylated is and this Artemis is recruited by complex nick then Artemis a single-strand DNA DNA. hairpins by the in the making opens sequence which nicking happen final along to variability in leads can This the hairpin, the various at joint. points in repair complex DNA the the modify The enzymes opened

two blue) RAG-2 diagrams, RAG-1:RAG-2 contains the and two RAG-1 as (green (purple). ribbon and proteins complex Shown before amino were acids RAG-1 of first 383 The crystallization. truncated and RAG-1 swapping N-terminal mediates proteins. (NBD) nonamer of the proteins the undergoes two two domain binding dimerization of domain The The dependent of protein is the contains endonuclease of binding that remainder the a RAG-1 the activity on Zn2+ ion. a Each separate protein RAG-2 RAG-1 protein. binds Courtesy of Gellert. Martin

bound 23-bp 12-bp 12-bp binding nonamer RAG-1 one A 23-bp of to RSS RSS Zn2+ favors RAG-1 other RSS region Zn2+ V J RSS the region a to heptamer

Fig. from pair RSSs 5.10 asymmetric The may the 12/23 of base RAG-1:RAG-2 rule result dimer. binding to

lymphoidspecific complex, removing to (TdT), at which the nucleotides, ends. the same adds of while enzyme the part recombinase nucleotides single-strand also the terminal hairpins randomly transferase time by deoxynucleotidyl is other. and not nucleotides does in precede one deletion necessarily order, the any Addition occur and of can chromosome the that together, DNA rearranged gene. the thus includes reconstituting a IV joins processed Finally, ligase ends damage ensuring as a are that gene chromosome joint while the ends segments unintended between is break and RSS ligated genetic that without This repair such in process the creates avoided. modification diversity evolution repair, unique of the of in receptors to chapter. of ubiquitous and to some antigen DNA its this mechanisms RAG-mediated part immunity recombination adaptive last vertebrates, the the seems be based the of discussed somatic is generation jawed on Despite by use

artificially V(D)J induced The recombination natural both mutations. roles enzymes in in vivo involved and the been have through of established have joints the about to level TdT added lacking non-templated segments. 10% nucleotides between normal gene of of Mice the template-independent from result activity This μ. DNA remainder may small the of polymerase

which RAG T of inactivated, make either in complete or development Mice suffer numbers lack gene-rearrangement the block cells. has in which at B the only Ku, of been and Artemis, a or DNA-PKcs, or stage genes lymphocyte trivial severe said combined suffer immune are They deficiency from (SCID). to before were subsequently mutation discovered recombination as original and scid mutation DNA-PKcs. components time a pathway The of identified the in the some was was identified partial for result is called an oligoclonal and of activated disorder responsible by an B inherited characterized infiltration lymphocytes. by RAG1 activity an V(D)J syndrome, that absence cells recombinase skin or of T In circulating mutations RAG2 humans, Omenn in are in which Artemis, produces double-strand break and as are pathways, general in DNA-PKcs, double-strand in radiation hypersensitive ubiquitous such deficient ionizing or to Mice of components in defective therefore (which repair Ku, repair are breaks). also DNA Artemis associated B is Defects produce humans that a cells T in in of radiosensitivity. combined immunodeficiency increased and with SCID called caused (IR-SCID) due to is to from DNA lymphocyte-specific SCID mutations in by defects. it SCID distinguish repair irradiation-sensitive pathways

and kinase genetic the protein mutations condition which some telangiectasia, degeneration degree sensitivity is due ATM immunodeficiency telangiectasia are Another (ataxia associated associated with which radiosensitivity in also with which cerebellar of mutated), increased ataxia in to radiation is is

hinge Left Fig shown NBD the domain to cartoon of in This flexibility panel: the illustrates RAG-1. the structure 5.9 catalytic connecting the of of the (red) with the of (blue), RAG-1 that bound RSS endonuclease nonamer interacts while the heptamer RAG-1 is NBD panel: sequence the Right Zn2+ domain of sequence contains the the RSS to portion activity. interaction to accommodate the In the domain rotate RSS. catalytic RAG-1 with RSS toward induces 12-bp subunits the of domain RAG-1, one model, a the of the this the length to NBD of cartoon of RSS. Since NBD then prefers away induced its domains the this NBD the from domain subunit, the binding pulls two other are conformation which 23-bp by RAG-1 coupled of swaps, the the gene by DNA endonucleolytic of J the V, heptamer cleavage respective (arrows) between junction the at RAG-1 or segment. and occurs precisely The D,

cancer and risk. can deletions and prevent during resolution the is ATM that serine/threonine by DNA-PKcs, DNA V(D)J like activating DNA large functions sometimes recombination breaks. translocations kinase, occur double-strand and of chromosomal that pathways a during can in a severe cells severity the numbers Some switching, and which less occur antibody of T V(D)J recombination and/or class seen are the and in low since their in than B of include in ataxia deficiencies absence variable are deficiency telangiectasia, SCID. ATM, immune in that severely B kinases comes partially sequences redundant and ATM lacking from with compared functions either abnormal more cells Evidence alone. observation much the their enzyme joining are show signal both that B lacking in cells DNA-PKcs

5-6 by immunoglobulin diversity main repertoire is of generated four processes. The the

to diversity a that The segments V-region in two combine rearrangements generate form complete gene gene ways. exon of of segment, each gene copies segments rearrangement different gene First, events. different are of in can different type combinations multiple be and there used for regions. combinatorial diversity the of of responsible is substantial part This V a diversity Second, junctional addition result is the joints a segments the the recombination of process. nucleotides of at between as subtraction diversity the and different introduced gene by is diversity that in combinatorial, to combinations molecule. regions V light-chain form also possible antigen-binding from immunoglobulin different A heavyand many the site third the the of source pair arising of means to below. The × theory, in combinatorial different generating antibody diversity could molecules, 1.9 106 see approximately will we rise, give alone of two as greater, make naive depending B diversity, calculates it Coupled of several magnitude diversity. least the cells, that even one on expressed could repertoire could junctional and is estimated at be junctional 1011 by with up orders receptors diversity of receptors how different 10, Chapter hypermutation, into an and mutations which the Finally, response genes. somatic B V-region only the in occurs introduces cells immune describe rearranged in initiation after of we point generates in selected antibody process can repertoire for antigen. diversity enhanced binding This to that the be further

different gene inherited segments 5-7 The used in combinations. are multiple

There region. an segments, to copies can V contribute multiple each which the immunoglobulin gene D, of of V, are J and by these regions different segments. made different therefore combinations of be can Many V selecting there segments, regions. and of and Vκ gene κ 40 Jκ chains, gene functional complete approximately thus 200 different human combinations 5 light segments Vκ For potentially are least gene there 4 segments functional yielding approximately 30 Vλ at Vλ chains and segments, 5 120 light (see For Fig. to Jλ are regions λ possible gene 5.4). of can segments. result light-chain chains all, in combining as light different made a So, gene different be 320 and gene VH of = ×6 segments, are DH 6000). gene ×25 regions 6 40 heavy functional segments, For (40 chains the there thus and segments, possible around JH 25 approximately VH humans, 6000 gene different chains cell development, B-cell by at is with gene takes place, gene heavy locus chain rearrangement cells. in division paired being of heavy to rounds rearrangement light-chain before chain same a followed in heavy-chain During different the produce several resulting light the different to specificities. of antibody 1.9 each the the antibody different 106 be V both specificity, approximately different give could 320 × light-chain regions the with of Because the combined heavyand light each chains heavy around chains contribute to 6000

is number on diversity gene contributing segments germline combinatorial antibodies (see to Fig. functional of This V based of the theoretical estimate 5.4); are but gene is segments expressed appear additional number immunoglobulin total not do molecules. and the the of larger, gene in segments V pseudogenes likely be one less combinatorial from to might calculations practice, above. than diversity expect In the is others in antibodies, only are some V reason not gene that rarely. all while frequency; One is found used are same the at segments are common heavy-chain bias regions certain proximity recombination control intergenic segments or V cells. developing in that V(D)J their gene to for activate relates locus This B with within against the pair regions Also, stable of light not certain chain molecule. not VH every every will a chain: heavy with and can form combinations VL chains they undergo a heavy will may gene suitable further pair produced light-chain which to rearrangement until fail in chain eliminated. Cells be light or is and diversity immunoglobulin can wide that forming of repertoire role range a this with an light thought pair other, has most that a specificities. and is type of each combinatorial in and heavy it major with Nevertheless, chains

of between 5-8 nucleotides gene of segments addition contributes hypervariable diversity junctions the region. the Variable subtraction and third to at the

in CDR2 an three immunoglobulin gene noted As earlier, within segment. CDR1 the are V the loops and hypervariable encoded chain, of segment and however, chain D at by falls encoded between gene heavy it the joint is gene segment, the and J gene the in V segment. CDR3, the partly the between is nucleotides at of by steps In deletion the CDR3 light addition the of significantly segments. increased gene formation chains, in the and and diversity two of both the junctions heavy N-nucleotides, illustrated The addition Fig. added their known and nucleotides and are as P-nucleotides is in 5.11.

palindromic they added segments. ends up make the are to so called gene of P-nucleotides the because sequences ends at cleavage D, sequence hairpin first but where after which RAG described coding or the the was V, Section the hairpins single-stranded coding of DNA proteins As Artemis the a point in at generate segments, 5-5, catalyzes formed. J within random the near a When nucleotides of tail DNA formed by break the at sequence this a from few plus RAG1/2 other the induced initial complex, from point the nucleotides occurs coding is from the different a the single-stranded a cleavage complementary

Fig. N-nucleotides The during between diversifies segments the Pand 5.11 gene gene introduction joints of immunoglobulin rearrangement. illustrated is DH rearrangement the DH in VH to occur however, JH to panel); steps JL (first in for to and VL same rearrangements. The a process (indicated at to the formation to (not complex by DNA DNA panel), cleaves After the hairpin signal single-stranded the the yield DNA a hairpins of the (second Artemis:DNA-PK joint shown end arrows) two a form are heptamer sequences ligated random (third here), panel). site while the as box. such TCGA on contain complementary the may as site form Depending palindromes, which DNA of and short DNA originally nucleotides light the by blue-shaded the cleavage, in indicated that and double-stranded DNA ATAT, therefore single-stranded this were preceding D For sequence end GA shown to sequence the TC. the at segment of complementary the the is example, of strand P-nucleotides. that complementary are as Such nucleotides known originate from stretches the single-stranded or by indicated shaded (fourth present, panel); of these terminal segments Where box. the ends added are are the nontemplated, (TdT) transferase at to N, the random deoxynucleotidyl enzyme is nucleotides the nucleotides pair ends (fifth two then single-stranded The panel). of blue of in panel) the and DNA final trimming (bottom joint. repair panel) light (sixth by both coding shading) synthesis the leaves coding unpaired (indicated N-nucleotides Pand nucleotides and ligation Exonuclease joint by an of an individual for B-cell virtually randomness instance unique in marker clone of makes valuable insertion and N-nucleotides for of as it studies Pand hypermutation. region following somatic a The individual P–N develops,

nucleotides ATATATGCJDRAG complex removed ÿlled DNA DJN-nucleotide to of opens coding form (see synthesis generating an exonuclease generates hairpin TCCGGCAATGCTTAADJUnpaired complex strand joint are and TCGCCGGCAGATATATATGCGCATATPPNDJThe JDArtemis:DNA-PK additions DNA P-nucleotides coding gaps ligation strands by TdT palindromic brought Fig. RSSs hairpins, ATATATGCGCGCATATATGCGCGCGCATATATGCGCJD at by DNA by ends are TCCGGCTAAATGCTTAAAATGCTCCGGCTATTAAATGCTTAADJPairing together 5.11). In the nucleotides many further (the the at which joint then without light-chain any DNA complementary were would on in ends enzymes gene rejoined sequences if tails, leave short the single-stranded activity. palindromic P-nucleotides) rearrangements, repair fill exonuclease

before human gene heavy-chain In rearrangements, quite light-chain mechanism proportion N-nucleotides gene however, rejoined. and a in a are the are different rearrangements added ends by of they called non-template-encoded. N-nucleotides because are so are the hairpin of are They TdT after to single-stranded cleavage. ends coding added by the enzyme the DNA single-stranded After addition 20 the stretches nucleotides, pairs. to have complementary may of some base up the Fig. ligate region to new synthesize then gaps, complementary DNA off to the the nonmatching DNA remaining and in nucleotides, (see Repair fill enzymes palindromic trim single-stranded 5.11). so the heavy-chain and the maximally during gene period expressed development assembled, in B-cell TdT junctions. and V–D is common in being when D–J are is N-nucleotides heavy-chain N-nucleotides explain rearrangement we stages genes, developmental specific which further when light-chain undergo expression as cells. discussing will been are heavy-chain in Chapter less and in has common after when 8 the B TdT of off, genes, T shut

be at segment deleted junctions. Nucleotides can gene also and endonuclease accomplished be exonucleases, step. this not dual and although involved is these been could by have This so activity and yet identified, exonuclease in has Artemis well CDR3 heavy-chain Thus, the segment. than can shorter D smallest be even a the it D contributed is of impossible, most because excision the to nucleotides. In if that segment some recognize its formation of not instances to difficult, CDR3 of the the time introduced hairpin of of also at traces palindromes P-nucleotide erase Deletions opening. may P-nucleotides. this not evidence joins of For reason, show obvious VDJ completed many do processes by nucleotides the these often of disrupt the sequence As reading the added of beyond total joint. number the is frame nucleotides the random, coding added to frameshifts a are will such nonfunctional Such and rearrangements known lead DNA protein, nonproductive rearrangements. disruptions leading as to B cells. never nonproductive, in every succeed two producing rearrangements three in and mature B-cell As roughly many will therefore immunoglobulin be become progenitors functional never diversity B-cell is of at considerable only development. during the loss cells of junctional Thus, achieved expense V, we J gene how we of temporal the the to receptor the return and development rearrangement to and this D, stages the of relate antigen topic segments 8, of cellular when Chapter discuss sequence In B-cell of they chains.

Summary.

ways. diversity extraordinary is in repertoire of achieved the several The immunoglobulin are V(D)J V V-region (V, is segments), brought encoded produce by by a together diversity exon. enabling most separate and the a recombination—to important J somatic process— regions gene Perhaps complete which recombination factor are that this gene D, segments present a individual, an source that combinatorial genome different use. heritable the of thus mechanism gene in of segments Many this are can diversity providing the recombinases, modern of the adaptive proteins catalyze with required RAG absolutely and coincided appearance system. are vertebrate to RAG rearrangement, the this evolution lymphocyte-specific Unique of the immune proteins, of imprecise Another of the the joining the nature immunoglobulins itself. from diversity process functional comes of substantial fraction deletion by gene coding segments nucleotides random variable the the insertion is at at ends numbers joints some of of Pand segments. of Variability of the by generated and N-nucleotides between the actions TdT. random by by the by of These Artemis hairpin are about the brought opening of and the association molecule immunoglobulin regions The contributes an to form site the lightand further antigen-binding diversity. heavy-chain V of different of The antibody of of repertoire primary diversity vast of generates sources combination these all specificities. of a

receptor gene rearrangement. T-cell

of such generated same antigen it which is the that that The B-cell surprising antigen creating cells diversity powerful receptors not is bear immunoglobulins mechanism are of the to structural means are generated resemblances mechanism. and by receptors a by T of genes the In the chains. organization describe loci receptor and this T-cell receptor we generation the for of the chapter part T-cell individual the the of

gene to The 5-9 gene in immunoglobulin are are receptor pattern segments same T-cell segments rearranged a enzymes. and the similar by arranged

heavy variable amino-terminal of (V) and a a and receptor (C) α chains (see 4-10). chains, Section β T-cell and constant Like light region (TCR) each consist region immunoglobulin The of loci the TCRβ in organization TCRα is and Fig. shown 5.12. gene of segments the segments gene the homologous organization broadly immunoglobulin that to 5-2 5-3). is and The Sections of (see segments and The loci Jα). immunoglobulin chains, TCRα light locus, (Vα like and the contains J the of V gene heavy gene Vβ the chain, of like gene locus, to segments TCRβ locus and immunoglobulin the in The addition Jβ D segments. contains form development segments during to exons T-cell The receptor V-domain complete rearrange (Fig. gene T-cell 5.13). rearrangement regulation T-cell in are Chapter 8. detail and gene dealt the order thymus; the in in takes place rearrangements with receptor of the of are and similar gene cells. T rearrangement the mechanics however, B Essentially, for T-cell are segments signal immunoglobulin receptor are by 12-bp flanked that spacer homologous The gene to flanking (RSSs) and 23-bp sequences those recombination

Fig. receptor organization The human T-cell 5.12 germline and the loci. α β of

that receptor the joining separate gene with genes. of immunoglobulin segments, segments (V), loci, the and at T-cell gene resembles (J) (C) constant (D), the and The diversity arrangement variable for preceded leader (L). each Vα the TCRα The 70–80 segments, consists an locus encoding 14) sequence by exon of (chromosome gene many are exactly. of known not is these Vα How segments gene functional segments. cluster distance located gene A a Jα Vα considerable of segments from gene the is 61 The exon Jα separate single domains a constant (not encoding followed single the are hinge shown). C regions and a by for gene, transmembrane the and cytoplasmic exons contains and gene segments which a located a each distant cluster or C functional of a clusters with TCRβ locus single organization, and contain separate (chromosome a 7) that gene six different The gene. gene segments with gene J together from two has 52 single segments Vβ D seven segment Each hinge, transmembrane region, constant region has separate the cytoplasmic C the and gene (not TCRβ the encoding shown). domain, the exons interrupted gene V another is segments see (not by locus T-cell The Fig. and shown TCRδ locus locus—the the TCRα between here; J receptor 5.17).

recombination cell. discrete during TCRαand that somatic are by genes of The of development segments composed β-chain joined T are the way same that genes Functional in the are generated created. immunoglobulin genes αand complete are β-chain For of functional a Jα V-region figure), the part a rearranges chain gene (upper α gene create to a Vα exon. segment to segment yield the of protein. T-cell and to VJα the generates splicing that exon mRNA is α-chain Transcription Cα receptor to the translated encoded is segments, of the Dβ, and in figure), variable heavy three domain the like β the chain, For Vβ, Jβ. gene (lower part immunoglobulin chain transcribed is these that functional gene and spliced to join translated exon the segments V-region chain. Rearrangement β generates to receptor T-cell of Cβ; mRNA resulting the to is a VDJβ yield and T-cell β pair to their synthesis The chains yield receptor α α:β heterodimer. the soon after gene Not segment simplicity. each segments for all J preceding are sequences gene are leader and the omitted shown, V

Fig. segments. signal sequences T-cell 5.14 gene receptor flank Recombination gene the loci (see As immunoglobulin Fig. in the segments signal 5.6), at recombination sequences TCRα and the heptamer–spacer–nonamer flanked individual are (RSSs). gene loci by TCRβ motifs and orange 23-bp arrowheads, containing as shown are depicted here purple. 12-bp those are containing RSS in spacers spacers almost the 12/23 of follows segments always gene rule. Joining heptamer is in nonamer occurs in immunoglobulin TCRβ joining by gene), this and rule principle of allowed very regulation. (unlike other although the to the types loci, heavy-chain disposition and rarely in of TCRδ Vβ the Jβ direct to 12/23 owing RSSs the Because of

Fig. αand expression. β-chain 5.13 rearrangement receptor and T-cell gene

segments gene (Fig. by are 5.14; recognized the Section and same enzymes. see 5-4) from gene DNA circles The (see rearrangement resulting Fig. are cells excision receptor used that for (TRECs) thymus. have emigrated recently 5.7) known from as are T-cell as T and the markers circles B these genetic lack cells 5-5). in (see and and with V(D)J recombination affect that B cells genes known T Section defects lymphocytes T and altogether equally, defects functional All animals control V, the between is the rearrangement gene. feature the gene TCRβ gene of segments of T-cell Pand further immunoglobulin N-nucleotides and A junctions shared receptor presence the J rearranged of in and D, all are addition, immunoglobulin genes well also between J (Fig. left V T joints Pand of gene and in are as about In segments and the added of by these often rearranged genes, without are whereas light-chain the cells, half V–J N-nucleotide TCRα only P-nucleotides modified any N-nucleotides 5-8). see Section 5.15;

receptors the cells function. between encoding reflect genes B differences cells those and The main the differences T-cell immunoglobulin and how T in isotypes upon heavy-chain C-region secreted different distinct cells antibodies whose effector B effector trigger functions of the mechanisms. All depend functions which upon of the by T-cell antigen mediated contact not cells, receptor, effector cell–cell The for and contrast, T depend directly only are serves in

Fig. receptor sources compared of gene T-cell of and 5.15 those receptor number The immunoglobulins. human the diversity of segments T-cell with κ N-nucleotides. Note contain chains half about of that only human this cells. because diversity T a Somatic does source it not in occur not in included as is hypermutation of figure

recognition. of TCRβ loci much those C heavy-chain the are TCRα the locus. of than Thus, the and simpler regions immunoglobulin are there although only very their functional and between one no there distinction is products. closely they genes, is Cα gene, Cβ two homologous and There known are only genes C-region transmembrane polypeptides. receptor The encode T-cell

difference the and D surrounding in RSSs genes is segments. nature receptor Another rearrangement the genes T-cell of gene of between immunoglobulin the the RSSs, heavy with chain, D a For segment the (see both is the surrounded immunoglobulin 12-bp Fig. two spacing by 5.6), whereas a in have (see 5ʹ D RSS and RSS 3ʹ a the TCRβ loci segments and the Fig. 12-bp 5.14). 23-bp TCRγ in immunoglobulin direct D enforces joining The to V of locus segments the region, heavy-chain 12/23 violate since V would naturally the in the arrangement J the inclusion rule. yet to and is V segment RSS is of 12-bp violate this Vγ since the compatible 23-bp RSS with the gene would joining However, or no to in the Vβ receptor T-cell rule, observed. joining little loci, the direct not segment, J of J normally, such direct the are still gene these be rearrangements the by beyond appears and investigated. mechanisms being controlled rule, 12/23 mechanisms to regulation of Instead,

the third 5-10 T-cell region. hypervariable concentrate in receptors diversity

like antibody three-dimensional The T-cell the 4-10 antigen-recognition structure looks and (see Sections site of site of 4-7, a respectively). antigen-recognition molecule an receptor of that of the much heavy CDR3 and the the light of antigen-binding formed the chains. site loops the is antibody, of center In by an The of the and are receptor the hypervariable site structurally chains, within third the of V site which the form αand gene the which receptor; a germline α the also contribute, gene J of to encoded center antigen-binding the CDR1 loops, periphery consists and the of equivalent and β β CDR2 segments chains. the T-cell segments loops for D of T-cell distinct nature The variability their pattern ligands. immunoglobulins extent the and receptors and T-cell of reflect in of must an thus bound major the in sites MHC of human antigens, to chemical immunoglobulins an the wide (α:β) the and of of come T-cell antigen-binding Whereas molecule. class always the of conform a to different ligand properties, variety of almost shapes a variety is for infinite receptors and surfaces peptide antigen-recognition a sites of As T-cell the receptors group,

Fig. most parts the peptide:MHC variable of a of receptor T-cell complex. 5.16 peptide The interact the with

as receptor a N the this atoms tubes, of red (MHC, O and loops superimposed are T-cell complex gray; yellow-green in in shown which figure are in peptide:MHC CDR atoms peptide, blue). The on with colored are α of are magenta. in chain in CDR the while green, of loops β chain The those the and peptide:MHC contact in interface the and with The of T-cell the receptor make lie CDR3 direct center loops complex, the antigenic the between the peptide.

would the occupying of contact center antigenic less predicted receptor. surface on the the be therefore focused with have bound of most the shape, in variability variable with to a the peptide contact T-cell regions ligand, and relatively Indeed, variable a variable MHC CDR1 contact highly the component (Fig. of of CDR3 the variable the the whereas less the mainly component loops receptor unique less CDR2 peptide mainly 5.16).

mainly generated during junctional combinatorial The gene attributable to of of receptors rearrangement. the is T-cell diversity process structural and diversity can Fig. It from seen be are 5.15 in J chains of V, regions, encoded D, the Pand is segments variability T-cell gene by that junctional by N-nucleotides. and most in the which modified and receptor most 5 loci (see immunoglobulin light-chain at whereas in TCRα J Jα more J segments the are humans, gene about DNA, loci: light-chain segments distributed immunoglobulin 80 many contains gene The of over of than Fig. locus either 61 gene have segments kb only 5.15). J TCRαlocus so T-cell greater region immunoglobulins. has variability in the even for for Because than this many segments, generated the receptors is gene of most diversity of the resides the Thus, the the center form site. and CDR3 junctional the loops antigen-binding that contain region in

T-cell gene receptors are also 5-11 generated rearrangement. by γ:δ

bear receptors and T of cells γ Section chains A δ composed T-cell (see minority 4-20). of TCRγ The of loci and the TCRδ organization (Fig. loci, TCRβ important are differences. of the 5.17) resembles TCRα that there and although gene within segments. TCRα cluster segments locus, is and chain the the δ The Jα of the entirely the Vα gene found encoding between are Vδ genes

Fig. δ-chain The of γand T-cell 5.17 receptor loci humans. organization in the The TCRγ and D, have V, segments, and J loci, and genes. C loci, TCRβ gene and TCRδ TCRα discrete like the within the encoding chain entirely Uniquely, δ the the α-chain is located locus. locus C segments segments, gene of lie the The segments, gene δ Jα gene the three and cluster gene four the Dδ Jδ single of cluster segments. between gene and Vα There just one two of one C near are gene. regions in δ gene C the gene, upstream downstream segments just orientation the the Vδ (not and located of inverted shown) D In addition, Vδ segments. interspersed the gene segments six there Vα are gene among and either Vα locus, can locus. δ shared Five and are unique with to one used by is be the with locus J locus own two C the each in its gene having set segments. resembles TCRγ The of TCRβ genes, human gene. gene complex and and segments are segments, more and has a C γ functional The mouse shown) V containing three a each of locus J gene γ clusters (not organization there T-cell two gene. the exception in δ proceeds at segments loci, can rearrangement and the γ other as receptor be the for during D TCRδ the same Rearrangement that used with loci junctions. be two N-region between mainly nucleotides variability the extra segments well because the D use segments two increases D as The at D–J greatly at chain, and junction the the V–D added gene can δ the as of of

region the of are 3ʹ genes located the interspersed with the in primarily Vα locus. but rearrangement locus locus oriented any will the gene loss the δ that segments α all intervening of in the rearrangement Because such delete DNA, results the Vα are (Fig. at 5.18). loci the than There loci at gene or the TCRγ loci. fewer at TCRδ segments are substantially and V TCRα any of or immunoglobulin the either TCRβ δ V in junctional variability the effect junctional variability Increased compensate segments the almost region. number may of the γ:δreceptor focusing has in the of all for the and in the chains gene small seen lie α:β for T-cell site. receptors, receptor encoded of the As T-cell amino at have junctional regions the the center the by acids binding we the I MHC some cells, receptors of γ:δ other T whose discussed expression molecules a 4, damage and distinct be or bearing T nonclassical class cells Chapter of an in infection. recognize as lineage molecules γ:δ cells are indication cellular and may T permits cell cell As the CDR3 an γ:δ with Section a CDR3 receptor; the these frequently in of receptors to to longer saw of we T-cell T γ:δ than contributes α:β the CDR also receptors. and interact T great of ligand 4-20, in the is directly this diversity fate We the discuss lineages in choice between will the T-cell Chapter γ:δ regulation 8. of the α:βand

Summary.

and similar encoded immunoglobulins T-cell homologous to structurally receptors by genes. are are are. recombination are same the somatic receptor gene the genes by in immunoglobulin assembled that from way T-cell segments sets of genes is gene the segments rearrangement. the number and process Diversity of segments differently the same immunoglobulins distributed during segments, roughly between however, of diversification gene and gene of V the in the immunoglobulin receptors: but greater gene more is, T-cell loci J junctions T-cell there as receptor loci have the T-cell in in the of diversity the contacts which ligand. receptors of peptide CDR3, greatest the fragment receptor, T-cell Thus, part case within receptor of the central is bound the the the α:β of of T-cell among the can than γ:δ within the diversity CDR3, also and Most α:β frequently receptors the with interact which CDR3 ligands directly the is also receptors longer T cells. by is T-cell γ:δ of recognized

variation immunoglobulin constant Structural regions. in

of assembly the immunoglobulins This on T-cell for chapter of has the mechanisms so and V regions receptors. far focused to regions. We turn C now the membrane, gene. C T-cell of the support complete receptor after regions receptor V they The only not the and anchor to and a vary receptors do regions into the act of assembly in they can both regions in by several heavy as and Immunoglobulins, the contrast, different different a C made made receptor the secreted trans-membrane be antibody, chain. classes, be depending and can on a used light be provide structural light-chain C functional λand regions seem to and V between attachment The κ differences only for (CL) there no chains. regions, locus V-region encodes The different as (CH) C downstream heavy-chain regions genes present located the segments. are separate of that on B IgM Cδ surface of only cells the of Cμ B and V-region first naive Initially, are along transmembrane use naive the sequence the associated to cell. which with produce two the these, IgD the and expressed assembled genes,

structural heavy-chain properties regions five In well isotypes of their we features different antibodies as major of some as discuss and the the introduce distinguish classes. that the of CH section, the special this We how explain

Fig. 5.18 rearrangement to gene locus segment. TCRδ of the Jα by Vα induced is Deletion a of The is chromosomal TCRδ locus. within TCRα the locus region entirely the containing contained one region, region is Jα the Vα/Vδ the locus, region segments, the Vδ When rearranges in any entire V any to the deleted. of intervening and development and precludes pathway. a the prevents continued of rearrangement down any Vα gene Thus, γ:δ lineage Vδ expression

both gene Cμ same can at mRNA alternative membrane-bound Cδ both the splicing. antibody the and isotypes time through immunoglobulin secreted same generate naive express B cells how immunoglobulin and and heavy-chain other expression type VDJH B of gene links Cδ and rearranged Chapter switching a as During C the to recombination to switch can the segment. (CH) an regions different 10) cells somatic in genes response, CH antibody (discussed of by activated Cμ than known class that

Different of constant their are the classes regions. structure heavy-chain distinguished immunoglobulins 5-12 of by

can immunoglobulins receptors (Fig. antigen all main IgM, The secreted occur IgG, IgE, transmembrane antibodies IgD, of classes as and are of five which IgA, or 5.19). IgA by In subclasses in IgG humans, IgA2). their found of serum, four and subclasses antibodies decreasing as (IgG1, as IgG3, found and are IgG4), two and (IgA1 IgG2, order is named abundance The heavy by designated α. as define ε, the known Greek that lowercase letters are classes and γ, isotypes different μ, chains δ, these are and is JH a encoded in cluster chains that heavy segments different illustrated are The CH of located in gene the different 3ʹ by genes immunoglobulin Fig. as 5.19. major the 5.20 the of lists human antibody Figure and classes. different functional physical properties

just briefly. in touch immune in 10, in The we functions the humoral immunoglobulin the classes of here, detail discussed context Chapter of are the on them response; immunoglobulin B secreted of the and a IgM is first of Section a 5-14 IgM is the Fig. antibody as activation and after (see cell, pentamer produced class 5.21). the is but accounts tissues. of it bloodstream the IgM in weight for in high the and fact This molecular present normally not that Being a pentamer

panel) main The denoting with indicated, immunoglobulin is an in upper of general isotypes immunoglobulin (above each rectangle domain. structure the C-region a are by separate heavy-chain mouse cluster encoded isotypes and human in both These arranged panel). (lower in genes heavy indicated it. of gene C-region segment constant isotype region that The each the the for the is as by same chain encodes color and IgM an a hinge each region domain. lack but extra contains heavy-chain IgE bonds Note the location linking number the of the disulfide the and differences lines) chains. (black in of groups, differ in isotypes carbohydrate the as hexagons. N-linked also shown distribution The cluster consisting of unit duplication evidence In evolutionary a the of and α an two of ε humans, gene γ gene. shows gene, an genes, of expressed. only hence a IgE pseudogene One is of is one ε genes subtype (ψ); the each and are pseudogenes shown. C exon gene within illustrated, simplicity, details the For not are not other IgG3, found The IgG1, classes IgA, IgM, mice of immunoglobulins in IgG2a, called and IgG2b, IgE. are IgD,

Fig. the immunoglobulin human of functional properties physical The 5.20 and isotypes. Fig. pentamers, IgM the it molecular normally large IgM forms although monomeric 190 weight is because of very M), (see size: is macroglobulin only its as so kDa, (hence of called known 5.23). of an IgA secretions. give molecular weight in around dimerizes approximate 390 to kDa with associated hypersensitivity. immediate-type is antibody IgE half-life When half-life has tissue here. to its much a mast cells, in longer shown IgE fixed plasma than relative isotypes for from inactive (–) activities several functions, to compared active various (++++). of The most ranging are the

for process before the its IgM antigens of affinity also increased increases maturation. affinity avidity of through the is

during response are extracellular bloodstream spaces immune in the an found IgG the produced in in tissues. and isotypes IgM interact can activate C1 pathway in the (described complement isotypes IgG most complement the Section and with 2-7). component to classical and activate not IgE complement. do IgA in secreted into mother’s also the into also it it and surfaces; gut respiratory found and IgA the bloodstream, acts is be in the can tract, mucosal milk. defense of but as involved allergic also defense asthma. particularly IgE but antibody parasites such the example, involved common against in multicellular in it schistosomes), allergic is is diseases (for but and IgG a can dimer. are as or always be either monomer a monomers, IgA secreted IgE

the chains antibody regions distinct heavy of immunoglobulin produce characteristics isotype. in each the Sequence differences the constant of number attached the interchain the and hinge Fig. C location number of groups, These of region of length the disulfide domains, include (see the the carbohydrate characteristics number bonds, of and 5.19). domain γ, δ, and α an chains. that and heavy found replaces region IgE the IgM in contain chains C extra hinge show to binding does The not and absence flexibility; molecules portion. arms bend that that relative the molecules region the of hinge IgM imply micrographs electron IgE to can of lack ligands IgM the Fab Fc structure yet such a characterized. may are However, have difference that in functional consequences not to various their ability also subtypes engage and Different effector described below. in isotypes differ functions, as

on functional 5-13 confers constant The the antibody. specialization region

a variety can Antibodies the of protect ways. in body to In cases some antibody the it is enough bind simply for antigen. tightly prevent a by toxin antibody it can Fig. an For a or host instance, cell receptor to recognizing (see from binding its on virus, 1.25). V The for this are activity. regions antibody sufficient molecules antibody The region help C the to recruiting cells which pathogens of to is and bound. dispose the has other destroy for essential, and of however,

and of functions: all three Fc-receptor complement activation, binding, has contains secretion. C effector Fc region of main regulation and The antibody an regions receptors binds specialized the by certain of First, to region Fc immune Fc isotypes effector cells. expressed neutrophils on these portions facilitating macrophages IgG1 phagocytosis of of the and the coated with IgG3 antibodies, receptors the of Fcγ surface bind antibodies. expressed Fc and pathogens high-affinity binds IgE region and on response of eosinophils, mast a The to inflammatory the antigens. activated receptor to cells, triggering Fcε Fc release mediators in basophils, of topic Section 10-19. will in to this return We

in (see complement which cascade, the Section initiate and and complexes pathogens. Second, can antigen:antibody and phagocytes classical bind recruits activates to regions destroy Fc protein engulf C1q to complement the the 2-7) places transport. not deliver they Fc can antibodies without to Third, the reach portion active would pregnant mother the and transport IgA into of These from blood of fetal include mucous into IgG transfer and milk, secretions, the circulation. tears, the actively that IgG to or receptor, immunoglobulin the body both receptor specific Fc reach through neonatal the cases, portion engages different In compartments. transports (FcRn), Fc a IgA cells of the and IgG from FcRn at blood in basement accumulated has glomerulus help the the glomerular been Podocytes remove kidney membrane. that filtered express to the

or that of in more functions effector portion had genetically. has Fc by immunoglobulins demonstrated these the have domains one off or modified role studying cleaved enzymatically been The Fc cleave destructive potential are of microorganisms Staphylococcus portion proteins by and D responded that either have from to A of examples bind Protein or Many the the it region G prevent and working; Protein Fc so Fc and Haemophilus. the of it, evolving Protein Researchers as reagents. help to region the map Fc proteins and also have these exploited immunological effector Not capacity each Fig. all the immunoglobulin engage to same of have functions the (see classes 5.20). receptor. and a affinity common IgG1 higher For example, IgG2 of have Fc for most type the IgG3 than

from expressed of the on 5-14 both transcript mature and and IgM are cells. surface same pre-mRNA derived the are IgD B

immunoglobulin about of a cluster form the the 200 segments (see spanning large The gene side Fig. genes kb JH CH to 3ʹ 5.19). C in to individual region. domain (not corresponding exon the with an shown several folded split is exons immunoglobulin Each CH each the into gene figure), in closest lies exon gene VH-region μ to assembled segments, JH encoding gene and the after rearrangement. exon) closest the therefore region (VDJ to The the DNA C rearranged to transcript. VDJ transcription 5ʹ heavy-chain μ from exon just the completed, promoter a a rearrangement Once complete produces is are mRNA. removed mature the segments the generate to processing Cμ gene remaining RNA V and gene JH between gene assembled during Any the is The IgM during to to μ expressed, development. first therefore be B-cell chains first immunoglobulin the the produced be are heavy and

the encodes region the 3ʹ gene, Immediately (see chain the C lies to Fig. δ IgD which the gene heavy of μ 5.19). in surface is cells, all small IgD with IgM of coexpressed only mature by cells. almost B the secreted but is on plasma amounts of function unique matter of is still active IgD a The research. unclear and that more in to antigens has B naive regions are suggested be Because may binding hinge IgD cells. flexible receptor IgM, than those auxiliary that of an has IgD facilitate by been the a of normal of the for show responses, B-cell in show development antibody antigens. Mice affinity and exons can Cδ but delay largely lacking antibody maturation generate process normal the return hypermutation. Chapter to in We 10, when discuss topic somatic this we

the and expressing IgM have requires to B which not switching, DNA. IgD undergone changes cells irreversible class B distinct mRNA two a molecules long produce (Fig. transcript yield Instead, spliced to either that these mRNA of primary differentially cells is 5.21). In from encode is exons a undergoes complete nearby exon the VDJ Cμ to spliced IgM a the to one (pA1), site molecule. and transcript, polyadenylation the extends Cδ RNA includes second this exons. downstream site and transcript beyond well The transcript, and downstream a to spliced (pA2). these polyadenylation Cδ exons at occurs is this the site VDJ separate exon In molecule. transcript This encodes an IgD

explanation. the since cells long transcript It along μ, the transcript molecular B although the μ cells the until mostly little with of 1980s immature B been the mature mostly that no making δ some known is mRNA developmentally processing has making was regulated, with to recently and there A mice mutagenesis alternative involved in IgD (ENU)-induced in identified that a N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea regulates process. screen of splicing genetic gene forward the recent expression the of complex that protein related a encodes U1 RNA– protein structurally ZFP318, required gene The for the splicing. small is mRNA the spliceosome, ribonucleoprotein nuclear to coexpress that mature B not not ZFP318 IgD is becomes produced, in IgD and immature IgM. transcript cells with in cells, where expressed but the expressed activated B is exon fully inactivated express gene a mice IgM. long to fail of alternative IgD ZFP318 and exons, the levels increased to with the of express is required for as from VDJ pre-mRNA splicing the Cδ ZFP318 While splicing Cμ directly the is the that to VDJ transcript on precise during may of mechanism the unclear, to act exons, exons. promoting it by and the seems splicing elongation the elongation, likely transcript ZFP318 exon Cδ pre-mRNA suppressing allowing unknown. is In cells B ZFP318 and immature is how still ZFP318 although mature regulated expression short, IgD in itself expression expression, promotes of

transcripts. secreted 5-15 mRNA are and heavy-chain alternative of Transmembrane immunoglobulin generated forms from

produced as receptor can the a either secreted of isotypes antibodies. immunoglobulin Each or be membrane-bound as stimulation antigen, express form of the of cells transmembrane by initially B their after some IgM;

initiated through In at transcription B VH Cμ both the and mature extends cells, exons. Cδ promoter by then cleavage primary (AAA), polyadenylation and long processed transcript splicing. is This by and the mRNA Cμ (pA1) splicing site panel). and yields (left Cleavage the μ polyadenylation an chain heavy exons between and μ at encoding at polyadenylation panel). yields splicing Cleavage and exons heavy Cμ different site region complete mRNA the exons of δ δ (right the the pattern V to joins the exon and and the chain that a encoding Cδ removes (pA2) we exons. C-region For shown the individual all have simplicity not

into secreted progeny IgM followed new plasma immunoglobulins antibody others the of class cells producing antibodies, express by of the of a class. transmembrane class, whereas to undergo production switching differentiate different chains. immunoglobulin comprising classes heavy monomers are two and of forms membrane-bound The two light all polymerize have been when and they only secreted. IgM IgA acid the terminus B surface 25 amino of lymphocyte. of carboxy it a membrane-bound about the at form anchors immunoglobulin The transmembrane hydrophobic that residues of to the heavy has domain chain form composed transmembrane this with of terminus secreted a domain a carboxy The hydrophilic tail. secretory replaces found exons these of termini by as exons of at each gene different processing. forms are CH alternative carboxy two the RNA undergo end These encoded

encode that Cμ4— four heavy-chain its gene example, exons—Cμ1 heavy-chain contains For IgM to domains Ig the four (Fig. 5.22). exon the The the encodes of the carboxy for form. end secreted terminus Cμ4 also forms. additional encode M1 downstream exons, M2, and transmembrane Two the but (pAs) is exon the polyadenylation before produced. at cleaved secreted the exons, primary can downstream last only the then the located be the just Cμ4 molecule If site of transcript two M1 the Cμ4 the If occur to then first within site, transcribes polyadenylation through can the a site splicing exon splice-donor this exon. polymerase non-consensus from polyadenylation a (pAm) downstream form the occurs of can be produced. case, cell-surface and at In site immunoglobulin this but understood, incompletely is This splicing alternative

VDJ carboxy protein processing RNA C˜3 transcript IgM pAmM1 terminusfor AAA C˜2 L Primary forms Transcription C˜1 L mRNA Different VDJ carboxy terminusfor pAmM1 C˜3 RNA AAA pAs Rearranged Secreted DNA secreted IgM C˜2 AAA IgMTransmembrane C˜4SC transmembrane M2 C˜4SCpAs Translation, IgM Protein processing AAA of C˜1 M2

Fig. by Transmembrane RNA immunoglobulins alternative processing. the heavy-chain secreted are 5.22 same and sequence derived forms from of of the yellow) the heavy-chain two exons region together and transmembrane there are of transmembrane form. the cytoplasmic and M2, the (M1 end At encode that tail gene, C last the terminus encodes of C-domain secreted carboxy (orange) the exon, the form. Within sequence a secretion-coding (SC) SC here, as with other but in exon the sequence the isotypes, of In case SC exon. sequence the (not IgM including the contiguous last a shown the separate for is is shown), IgD, C-domain the heavy-chain will events or RNA of during secreted immunoglobulin dictate result transmembrane pre-mRNA occur a a The transcript. that in a whether processing as polyadenylation pAs and C pAm). Each potential two (shown gene sites has heavy-chain is second transcript (AAA) polyadenylated (pAm). site the cleaved Left panel: the and at SC upstream site at to within last end Cμ4 occurs the exon from of (yellow). just a located a the exons Splicing site 5ʹ the (orange), sequence M1 the second of to joining the This in the Cμ4 the heavy sequence removal of of chain. exon transmembrane the and exons SC form the of generates and M1 M2 results and panel: (pAs), the of terminates M2, at transcription and the secreted chain, and of M1 transmembrane form. the the generation preventing polyadenylation first exons producing poly(A) the and addition before occurs Right form the heavy site

regulation polymerase RNA transcribes the involve IgM may polymerase of as locus. the activity through the production polyadenylation cleavage stimulation which the IgM. a for that favors subunit, is of RNA the secreted factor of factor regulates transcripts CstF-64, One transcript induced pAs in transcription polyadenylation ELL2, plasma favors the The factor promotes at and site form. secreted is the also elongation cells, which ELL2 RNA and within immunoglobulin co-associate with locus. CstF-64 the polymerase illustrated differential Cμ for is in Fig. RNA processing This 5.22, same it in the for but way all occurs isotypes. to that cells heavy-chain secreted In antibody-secreting the become cells, expressing. most of isotype form cell rather whichever the the transmembrane plasma to B the spliced is activated yield of are transcripts differentiate than B

form IgA chain. IgM J the polymers interacting by can and 5-16 with

both Although form two and molecules IgM from all of immunoglobulin of can multimers a IgA constructed basic these basic (Fig. unit light heavy and chains, units are two 5.23). include acids 18 of regions for a essential cysteine residue of contains IgM a can amino IgA that ‘tailpiece’ polymerization. and C J is the of the which the chain of the cysteine found chain only A to tailpiece, forms by in linking promotes polypeptide 15-kDa secreted μand α this separate polymerization called chains. the (This be chain J with not Section see segment; by 5-2.) a encoded J region gene immunoglobulin should confused J will In IgA, in for epithelia, we of 10. through the required Chapter is dimerization transport case discuss as IgA as a in occasionally a are is (without molecules in found IgM as as mainly pentamers, mucous whereas secretions and chain), dimer plasma, monomer but found in J plasma. hexamers

important Immunoglobulin of also antibody thought the to epitopes. in repetitive to is be polymerization binding given least sites, affinity, of has An two antibody or at for which a each strength, binding antigen-binding antigen. identical has molecule epitopes only to antigen, it dissociate a antibody when will the on If attaches all identical sites binding multiple target dissociate. be slower antibody multiple rate strength, single much of a site; binding binding whole will the for rate therefore total give antibody or than thus avidity. dissociation binding The sites greater a the dissociation the which is This 10 for IgM, pentameric sites. particularly has consideration relevant antigen-binding

Fig. and multimers. form IgA molecules 5.23 IgM can The J chain, IgM association usually an synthesized in as the IgA polypeptide with chain. are multimers additional and to disulfide bonds as have dimeric each the other. well (left to the monomers J panel), as chain In IgA are each IgM the chain. panel), bonds other J In to monomers cross-linked the and disulfide by (right pentameric to form hexamers (not a can lack chain also J shown). that IgM

early are on of immune as bacterial in and individual affinity often cell-wall IgM made maturation. because those such low frequently repetitive sites before epitopes IgM affinity but polysaccharides, somatic hypermutation binding recognize is responses, antibodies Multisite functional the up for markedly improving this, makes binding overall strength. binding two IgM case in IgGs, biological the could proximity. a to sufficient single close to of effector that molecules to pentamer target be a binding be mediate target need activity, This whereas independent implies may in of located

Summary.

C-region heavy-chain immunoglobulins of encoded their with different isotypes by C the regions, being heavy-chain defined are different by genes. The classes 3ʹ J D, a and cluster genes present segments. The the gene are to V, in heavy-chain C-region initially that an μ is in both genes, productively δ association naive with B by δ of exon CH exons. expressed contains cells splicing rearranged are in mRNA transcript A the CH μ coexpressed V-region and alternative and which addition, membrane-bound antigen immunoglobulin class as a receptor as or antibody. secreted cells express In B of any can a exons a hydrophobic include encode secretable differential anchor This by a or that either mRNA achieved to of splicing membrane is tailpiece. receptor. secretes activation The a antibody thus B its via cell antigen B activated initially antigen the the cell that recognizes upon that the Chapter of antibodies subsequently different be of class process The the in described can by V-region any same switching, is the exon other of classes direct to 10. production associated isotypes of with one which

adaptive immune response. the of Evolution

book so diverse generate repertoire that immunoglobulins have The adaptive in the far RAG-1/RAG-2 recombinase this on enormously of distributed form action immunity depends discussed T-cell and to the an clonally receptors. of we of around years vertebrates, vertebrates off from jawed million the 500 the split ago. only system is This in the other gnathostomes, found which abruptly to arisen in Adaptive seems immunity have evolution. immunoglobulins, present of organized the responses. T-cell tissue, jawed lymphoid the to immune and to receptors have fishes adaptive fishes, mount Even group earliest the and to cartilaginous ability survive the day, immune diversity among viewed as The system within vertebrate unique was animal the immune generated once adaptive systems. insects, now molecules, although pathogen-detecting immunity. genetic organisms as true know do repertoires that a their achieve as different mollusks But adaptive they to mechanisms of echinoderms, of we use and variety not increase adaptive species gene of is ‘antibody’-like and based a a quite V(D)J found is proteins of that it been Nearer distinct involves the to from somatic rearrangement. system RAG-dependent on and that of home, has vertebrates, ‘anticipatory’ rearrangement or hagfish—have form non-immunoglobulin surviving the agnathans—the jawless that lampreys immunity adaptive to for problem most one solution, So only systems powerful, of the recognition. immune as our view we albeit should highly diverse now the generating system pathogen

in a genes. Some invertebrates 5-17 immunoglobulin-like diversity generate of repertoire extensive

an system immunity was diversity in limited recently, a was invertebrate very recognizing had pathogens. thought that restricted to innate that very it Until

around on PAMPs, of no the vertebrates and number assumption recognize that was also receptors and Toll-like greater. This of based receptors the receptors relied on invertebrates in innate number idea a 10 that other knowledge was on also distinct similar immunity that in the of of extensive an which could two extended uncovered potentially provide have, of diversification Recent at of recognition pathogens. however, superfamily an member, invertebrate examples range immunoglobulin studies least

cells hemocytes the and part act as of Drosophila, In system. immune fat-body and hemolymph. as such (see 2 Fat-body cells antimicrobial defensins 3), secrete the into Chapters the proteins, protein is hemolymph of in syndrome Another superfamily. member a immunoglobulin cell adhesion molecule (Dscam), the the Down found originally in specifying Dscam in the fly protein a involved discovered as neuronal was wiring. the their cells where and which also bacteria recognize it in fat-body hemolymph, is by invading it thought to is made into hemocytes, can It phagocytes. secrete engulfment and aid in

10, immunoglobulin-like domains. multiple, protein Dscam usually contains The however, encodes a The alternative evolved Dscam (Fig. number domains to contain several that has, large these for of gene of exons 5.24). Dscam can exons, an Exon each 4 1 any encoding of different protein sequence. the domain the be immunoglobulin specifying 12 gene of differing of gene Exon the is 2: has isoforms. 38,000 a encode it that cluster alternative protein further 6 Dscam exons, and around could 48 9 cluster cluster another estimated 33, 17 efficient Dscam that normal was in for lacking A by found was vitro was less Dscam when it role of proposed Escherichia than hemocytes hemocytes. immunity coli in by isolated phagocytosis to to of of diversify evolved pathogens. recognize that ability observations least These alternative repertoire insects’ suggest extensive exons this some at may have confirmed for the shown to mosquito’s silencing weaken role has Dscam and Plasmodium. bacteria the parasite of malaria to the Dscam which in This AgDscam resistance been normal gambiae, been homolog to mosquito has in Anopheles the mosquito There some particular from evidence pathogens. also Dscam that for the exons have is specificity expressed a not Dscam isoforms It clear whether manner. in are clonal is

Another immunoglobulin protein an a this superfamily a diversify immunity. different time for in to mollusk, strategy use uses invertebrate, fibrinogen-related have expresses small proteins a family (FREPs) snail in role of to The a freshwater innate thought Biomphalaria glabrata immunity. and FREPs domain have fibrinogen end their one or carboxy their at two domains amino-terminal a terminus. immunoglobulin at the help on immunoglobulin pathogens, complex. the while may lectin-like fibrinogen confer the domain The interact that properties with FREP may precipitate domains produced are FREPs by

Fig. immunoglobulin innate domains of protein Dscam alternative is contains immunity through Drosophila and splicing. The highly 5.24 diversified multiple in alternative exons. contains several The Drosophila large encoding of gene clusters Dscam 9 clusters exon (light (red), 2 alternative respectively. 4 and blue), The exon and exons, exon exon 6 33, (green), 48, (orange) 12, 17 encoding contain alternative only one used the complete in of Dscam is For each mRNA. exon these clusters, There fat-body in and usage differential neurons, hemocytes. some of is exons cells, 4 exons range exons three of for use alternative All entire cell the types and 6. use alternative 9, a restricted fat-body is in of exons there exon For cells. hemocytes and exons in generate Dscam possible combinatorial The than 38,000 to use the more it gene makes protein isoforms. of alternative from Genome Anastassiou, D.: Adapted Biol. 2006, 7:R2.

hemocytes and the secreted hemolymph. into parasites—it Their is, infected schistosomes the for is that increases the schistosomiasis. the by snail example, parasitic when intermediate human concentration for cause host

can FREP be B. copies The that genes subfamilies. into divided genome 13 contains glabrata approximately of many genes. individual germline A that an compared are in FREP3 extensively subfamily expressed the the members the of has diversified FREPs organism with sequences study of revealed expressed distinct 45 five slightly different than sequences. genes with There generate FREP3 all proteins, but fewer to are in individual FREP3 subfamily, the an found than was more snail of mutations one the that the genes. of sequences diversification of suggested analysis germline FREP3 protein the point accumulation in was this to An due it in not known, some similarity Although of type hypermutation the the occurs, cell mechanism it occurs that yet somatic to suggest the diversification, does are immunoglobulins. this and which in precise a clonal Both ways evidence molecules resemble strategy examples but and adaptive no of represent the immune some insect in an way adaptive the they selection—the true to although Biomphalaria there response, seem cornerstone in of is of immune involved of defense, immunity. diversifying

gene rearrangement diversify to built from receptors LRR somatic domains.

exhibit and that of early transplanted the hagfish jawless 1960s of the lamprey, a of and grafts delayed-type the hypersensitivity. known accelerated could certain fishes, Since immunological mount been a skin has it form rejection kind to an a agglutinin, a immunizations, behaved vertebrates. secondary increasing as specific response higher way Their seemed in also activity to in titer an in after similar that antibody contain serum adaptive immunoglobulins, genuine reminiscent morphological considered these of the but thymus to did phenomena basis of or a that Although of there have these cells on analysis. be was no lymphocytes and seemed molecular animals immunity, of be could evidence the Petromyzon by none revealed the to related or immunoglobulin T-cell expressed Analysis of lymphocytes genes. marinus of receptor lamprey sea genes Section same large protein cells amounts built genes the However, expressed which multiple domain domains, with pathogen-recognizing proteins the from are of encoding these mRNAs Toll-like 3-5). (see from (TLRs) receptors LRR

proteins these meant have to reacting store. specialized some This but for recognizing cells surprises LRR are expressed pathogens, in the simply that had might and and the of number large found TLRs), forms they variable units LRR acid to Instead amino a of highly LRR present invariant placed being less sequences, relatively between have a carboxy-terminal variable amino-terminal few with (like in variable units. were be or, they the and an to lymphocyte glycosylphosphatidylinositol membrane invariant the them either the by into variable stalk region can tethered These linkage, connecting times, proteins, at receptors like plasma be blood. to LRR-containing have secreted a called (VLRs), cell other antibodies,

process Analysis indicates genes somatic assembled of they are of a gene expressed by (Fig. VLR the lamprey rearrangement that 5.25). sequence (see blocks a neither VLRA, genes, of splicing are unit, configuration, these DNA typical contains genes partial and LRR by in for three the encoding that nor signals coding partial germline RNA VLRB, present noncoding Section and signal unit, a LRR there incomplete In three amino-terminal RSSs each carboxy-terminal VLR separated 5-4). but the immunoglobulin peptide, are a VLRC, VLR or LRR time. a that of contain regions large Instead, flanking three a LRR incomplete domains include at DNA ‘cassettes’ the genes number the units—one, two,

gene, VLRB, unique with lymphocyte of the VLR regions these VLRC, VLR lamprey or and recombination a complete germline either flanking gene. Each has undergone mature expresses VLRA, which

but similar, currently replication occur to lymphocyte 5-20). The DNA a mechanism is is in (described identical, not gene Section complete of conversion of during a ‘copy-choice’ to VLR by gene that lamprey thought creation units sequences synthesized templates flanking when gene LRR one of VLR from strand these into DNA LRR the units. copied gene—presumably the VLR During are switches and copies replication, DNA being a that by AID-APOBEC DNA start triggered still may could enzymes breaks expressed (CDA) and is are this lymphocytes, copy-choice family mechanism activity proof final the of Although lamprey can deaminase single-strand the cause the that be process. cytidine template-switching by whose lacking, lymphocytes, in which is and in VLRB-lineage which two expressed CDA2, lymphocytes. VLRA-lineage is CDA1, Lampreys enzymes: expressed possess such or yet if expressed not is lymphocytes. CDA1 in It known CDA2 is VLRC-expressing 24 LRR subunit, by domain the each amino-terminal capping Fig. amino carboxy-terminal and complete noncoding internal formation acids seven (see VLR the contains LRR the domains, regions LRR gene long, addition to of of to followed complete internal of final a the up removal The the 5.25).

as for somatic is immunoglobulins. this mechanism that It can rearrangement in as the proteins much generate is estimated VLR possible diversity repeats a a the interacts surface of surface of structure insert carboxy-terminal LRR by with shows protein VLR capable of in with diversity interacting great the the form series of the concave Indeed, antigens. variable a that formed LRR a to crystal limited immune their present of the possible of receptors of Thus, agnathans of adaptive any system repertoire be not can they diversity the individual, in evolutionary lymphocytes generate of numbers the but in by the cousins, as by anticipatory number may the gnathostomes. the of one or each genes, above, VLR or either VLRC expressing two complete VLRB a the rearranges only germline lamprey As protein. noted VLRA lymphocyte cell characteristics some mammalian have lymphocytes, two seem to T B populations first The of and

light an the sequences. split parts red) dark two intervening lamprey CT, into an the contains DNA LRR signal and copy unit red; germline gene: amino-terminal incomplete a of (right) complete LRR encoding VLR part (SP), noncoding a peptide carboxy-terminal unit framework (NT, (LRR, a gene that and by the Top for of is portion blue), panel: LRR and cassettes VLR (green) amino-terminal flanking the single blue, that part domains domains copies of variable of or LRR yellow). encode Nearby copies contain gene-‘cassettes’ multiple (left) with double (light of regions copied be to into recombination Middle the original LRR units various causes panel: somatic VLR gene. variable units (green) several (LRR completed contains LRR NT) LRR unit, assembled region ends that portion of first and by stalk a with and amino-terminal followed receptor. gene creates LRR the (yellow), LRR VLR cassette encodes that the This VLR the the the and carboxy-terminal complete the PmCDA1 The and PmCDA2 cytidine lamprey from deaminases

rearrangement. are marinus enzymes gene may that initiate P. for candidates this rearranged of to glycosylphosphatidylinositol attached by cell in linkage of the membrane that the a complete results gene its stalk. Expression be (GPI) can receptor gene a VLR unique rearrangement individual produce somatic an undergoes to Bottom receptor. panel: lymphocyte blood. into the surface via or secreted can to of tethered be the lymphocyte These the can the linkage receptors GPI be developing each repertoire a differing of receptors VLR Unique somatic events lymphocyte generate of rearrangement in specificities. from and Z., Adapted Cooper, Pancer, M.D. : Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2006, 24:497–518.

evolution two RAG-mediated into rearranged genome receptor in RAG1 vertebrates, transposon site gene multipart RAG1/2-like gene can gene can gene genes domain from the reinsert gene RSS the RSS sequences excise TR-tagged a gene Insertion at gene and Transposon-derived in the excision RAG that repeat locus antigen-receptor be the deuterostome it Ig the the new the of In JVV a terminal activity at recombination Transposase RAG2 location J locus of segments by Recombination in V-type ancestor TRRAG1 transposon V-type results Ig-like somatic cluster RAG2 splits into TR gene separates a a

Fig. receptor a is have receptor immunoglobulin the 5.26 into to immunoglobulin thought V-type transposon and Integration of genes. a rise gene given to T-cell

respectively, lineage. more the VLRC to appear VLRA cells and closely related also genes, appreciated. system VLRA-expressing suggesting similar For to than immune own our mammalian similarity an adaptive T-cell cytokine even to genes lymphocytes previously some was express RAG-dependent example, closer

appeared abruptly genes repertoire immunoglobulin-like of the in cartilaginous fishes.

then finally the agnathans to to and to fishes vertebrates, bony fishes, reptiles birds, mammals. we the the the from the cartilaginous and amphibians, trace of (sharks, to and can the development rays) immune skates, Within through functions been recombination V(D)J chordates, other invertebrate. not agnathans, has in any found or RAG-dependent now clearer the as available. immunity sequences adaptive becoming RAG-dependent of genome The more animals origins many become of are DNA allows site activity first that transposition clue in transposons—mobile excise one The genome was and their them the recombination features that genetic an encode enzymatic many transposase, themselves mechanism that from of the with elsewhere. to elements reinsert RAG-dependent own shares of in close of genes, structure of as the which usual together introns the RAG chromosome vitro, transposase and mammalian reminiscent act mammalian a The transposon. lack lie RAG a and is the even the genes, complex in can

a similar T-cell vertebrates RAG-dependent the the a DNA an a All speculation or invasion receptor jawed (Fig. immunity the would some ancestor event into to transposon origin provoked gene of of gene, that have was of adaptive occurred immunoglobulin V-region this in an that 5.26). to end, carry which for the are repeated transposase transposition either by inverted at sequences DNA occur. transposons bound the the RAG-1 considered be have are in evolved from terminal ancestors is to repeats protein the of Section a to transposase. 5-4), (see These antigen-receptor genes while present-day RSSs believed to the RSSs RAG to immunoglobulin the eventually and led of duplication, gene separation and vertebrates. inserted of genes immune-receptor the multisegmented transposon the present-day and reduplication, Subsequent loci from the rest recombination relic and of receptor its of T-cell the

of in origins has now DNA anemone RAG1 vertebrates and to to the the the the are genome as discovery led to the related and to distantly of sequences in sequencing thought Transib ultimate superfamily animals transposons, as related catalytic RAG-1 Nematostella. sea of lie The RSSs core of is The RAG2 origin

an to transposon (blue), to which transposase. (the the of and chordates as its have deuterostomes related of is Top which genes panel: ancestor and had thought RAG2 DNA RAG1 large belong) acted RAG2—prototype a in phyla group RAG1 to the (purple) inverted (TR) repeat by bounded are sequences. DNA transposons terminal activity a the leaving transposon excise and (purple enzymatic bind TRs, resembles the that host proteins of transposase from DNA in bringing a DNA, to transposase panel: the TRs. the Second the together, and the DNA, transposon them footprint the blue) cuts out this excision case from receptor in in elsewhere the into the genome, After immunoglobulin transposon site, a reinserts one V-type (green). is The enzymatic to DNA transposon of reaction insert that the activity reaction. reverse transposase the enables the into the of a excision in transposon exon the RAG1/2-like into V middle a integration gene the the two panel: the V-type Third parts. receptor for into immunoglobulin the splits of of TRs, DNA integration genes) we the genes, RAG2 been evolution in panels: that the from followed T-cell receptor recombination RAG1 event transposase Fourth which rearrangements term transposon signal as the initial the and (RSSs). of separate by fifth (now has immunoglobulin and now genes known the the sequences the and immunoglobulins, T-cell but shown) deuterostome) and (not not adaptive a cluster immunity. sea and have or urchin (an purple to proteins expresses The gene does receptors, invertebrate RAG1/2-like RAG-1 RAG-2 has similar proteins, in The unknown) far other retain proteins cellular this (so animal. presumably RAG-like some function

was urchins, relatives RAG1–RAG2-related gene cluster the more a in but sea invertebrate recently of discovered chordates. obscure, mammals. T-cell jawed a of with immunoglobulins, complex the vertebrate, from form evidence RAG expressed shark with immunity, and no but primitive bull but themselves with leucas), proteins (Carcharhinus the other sea-urchin urchins or Sea show adaptive RAG receptors, from each a the not those by genes proteins present indeed vertebrate fulfilling related belong), were This could presumably chordates sea urchins common and RAGs, suggests cellular and a to some the already in and RAG-1 these to which group RAG-2 function. of ancestor proteins (the that that other echinoderms be

gene in rearrangement element a apparent origin an of of rearrangement paradox of the makes sense transposable immune-system the in The genes. excision somatic of which joined a is immunoglobulin part further has joined error-prone DNA, and could by fate ends Section the cut or whereas RSSs precisely (see is genomic excised DNA the form no an whose viewed which gene, the are to irrelevant in which T-cell the receptor of the cell, in function are that process, as disadvantage. 5-5), This be the this the makes However, it. of point because excision the integrity of DNA at its the when fate looked no significance by leaves to transposon’s this view, behind is sense, it transposon preserves of from mechanism, the whereas in molecules generated joining useful and turned immunoglobulin diversity antigen-recognition gene the for. primitive it selected was As out, the strongly in error-prone else rapidly the that just modifying not means could also The something not—a coding of size provided system of RAG-based diversity. the its region, mutations rearrangement

gene what of question is the The sort transposon next into. inserted domains families been immunoglobulin this Ig-like have genome. one of protein whose kingdoms, species one bacterial in the most domains the plant, Proteins the of throughout the the superfamily fully super-families; in ubiquitous abundant sequenced, protein largest and are making of genomes containing animal, is structure— are different the fold—and Ig-domain and basic of the it taking this disparate, striking a members to of very functions selection a useful of natural The adapting they purposes. are superfamily example

of families into The domains the immunoglobulin basis on of can four immunoglobulin divided in and the sequence structure superfamily domain. be differences a called C2 immunoglobulin I C1 V are and domains), (resembling and variable These immunoglobulin (for an an of (resembling intermediate). domain constant-region type domain), domain type Ig-like similar element have a probably a the The is cell-surface receptor present-day domain, likely of encoding an VJ gene V RSS-containing domains. been a containing most to to target of of one J some so of the the and domains to These because are resemblance strands a invariant proteins found segment. in are receptor called could segments such to produce is V gene how movement (see into separate J Fig. imagine a possible gene It transposon and 5.26). receptors which in the multigene a On or basis agnathan the and currently analysis, receptors, found resembling hagfish best phylogenetic antigen the Ag for are by ancestor receptor. lamprey, of APARs, being of family of relatives are candidates the paired encoded sequences proteins Their cytoplasmic region domain containing signaling a a transmembrane VJ DNA and modules. single-pass predict with single extracellular in APARs are expressed leukocytes.

diversity different in generate immunoglobulin 5-20 ways. species Different

vertebrates in combinations. with we different receptor humans, the large of as diversity are generate mice of Most antigen same gene part by a together and their putting familiar the segments way in are the There mammals. even within however, exceptions, segment same J rearrangement the and region. recombined together V then this to animals use Some join always and V initially, gene gene diversify most V, the D, receptors, sheep, is that cells. gene immature In and and B-cell for pigs, rabbits, the identical little or the the form J are initial V-region and cows, sequences no are germline rearranged genes rearranged in B segments in or there to similar horses, diversity birds, These Fabricius intestinal cells of B in of immature the chickens, microenvironments—the gut rabbits. to organ another specialized lymphoid migrate and bursa in and diversification. proliferate rearranged genes immunoglobulin their cells Here, undergo B rapidly, further

a segment pseudogene. sequences short rearranged which occurs birds and V in by upstream conversion, are process V-region gene mainly expressed sequences gene this with rabbits In an from the by replaced gene segments set rearranging chicken gene V, single copies pseudogenes. V-segment C germline The heavy-chain is of a D, the arrangement and of and locus multiple J, of the in are system created is by Diversity sequences copied VH in which 5.27). this gene VH the conversion pseudogenes rearranged from gene single (Fig. into related to hypermutation It that gene is somatic conversion seems

Fig. gene chicken diversification occurs of immunoglobulins through 5.27 conversion. The extremely limited. chickens, immunoglobulin be can V(D)J by diversity created In is that recombination the and D at one J, left there gene chicken at the segment are V gene one and one the and V, active active locus panel). single light-chain segments locus (top one only Initially, heavy-chain 15 J panels). very rearrangement receptor can a specificities (second Primary thus produce number of only limited gene of surface Immature the (sIg) Fabricius, (second to immunoglobulin cell panels). B migrate expressing proliferation cells induces the bursa this receptor where cross-linking of chicken The VH–D a contains with structure. pseudogenes genome numerous prerearranged into pseudogenes Gene V diversity these receptors events the (third gene introduce in conversion segment the adjacent sequences panels). expressed from gene, creating gene gene previously inactivate Some will shown). these of conversions the expressed (not gene conversion, after such express If longer B no a is eliminated. can cell a it sIg events (bottom repertoire conversion panels). gene continue Repeated to the can diversify

Sequences conversion for introduced antibody can cells. from through alter chicken B antigen rearranged gene affnities are of C˜VDJ˜C°VJ°C˜VDJ˜C°VJ°C˜VDJ˜C°VJ°Immature V genes of V conversion pseudogenes Multiple into rounds gene require H enzyme chicken rearranged mechanism, V B-cell deaminase D˜C˜J˜V°C°J°VH pseudogenes genes conversion been genes chicken VH in V˜ have shown and to Germline because has same activation-induced a the line V° in the its pseudogenes (AID). immunoglobulin gene cytidine All affinity In class maturation enzyme see of is and switching in that the this involved will response. 10, antibody same Chapter we the V DNA by segment signal thought repairs V-region used that that the pseudogene the the it the repair the endonuclease single-strand template DNA in after that initiates endonuclease-1 replication of which cuts AID in process are is conversion, generated gene for actions is (APE1) gene. homology-directed apurinic/apyrimidinic as a homologous a For

somatic organ is which an hypermutation, of cows, diversification result In patch. as and occurs known ileal the sheep immunoglobulin Peyer’s in the sheep, to diversification cells contributes a in and hypermutation, of immunoglobulin Somatic driving and independent antigen, birds, particular rabbits. T also

found genes more of is vertebrates. the different jawed fish, A immunoglobulin organization cartilaginous the fundamentally primitive most in within and and cassettes, cassettes of VH–DH–JH–CH multiple copies have activate Sharks (Fig. individual discrete VL–JL–CL rearrangement 5.28). is a cases kind the is in higher somewhat from event. different most there RAG-mediated for a combinatorial rearrangement somatic of of still vertebrates, this rearrangement Although requirement gene As have Fig. well multiple genome as (see regions) rearranged cartilaginous regions in genes, germline fish rearranging VH ‘rearranged’ the VL (and sometimes different apparently by the transcription of generate and copies. diversity activating 5.28) diversity also Even subsequent chains. heavy and the light here, means is by some by contributed pairing combinatorial of

heavy-chain the the and have This would loci to that convergent light-chain to case unlikely evolution. because an by stage, represent ‘germline-joined’ intermediate acquire in for light-chain rearrangement is evolutionary the independently genes organization capacity of had by likely RAG rearranged through cells, germ activation germline ancestors immunoglobulin inheritance the is in the with of loci loci the became the after some the genes the much in It that, of divergence various cartilaginous the rearranged of offspring. consequent more fishes, of pathogens ensuring germline species, of some advantages, responses these as preformed chains. such rearranged set immunoglobulin the loci to might In producing confer by rapid a common

immunity. adaptive isotype thought origins to go IgM The of is antibody to the back form of the immunoglobulin is predominant It cartilaginous in

Fig. The can in is of 5.28 genes but all a diverse species, immunoglobulin of different generate repertoire different receptors. organization

genes and mammals, diverse heavy-chain of clusters the repeated gene in separated in organization segments, a only generating of which V, the immunoglobulin The J of to problem D, the solution repertoire are there is of not receptors. found alternative Other solutions. vertebrates have sharks, basic repeats segments, a gene of groups, the gene consists two gene segment. J segment, multiple a such a unit locus a the as of and segment, gene V C or of In D composed ‘primitive’ one carcharhine of consists which some repeated already and VJ–C light-chain choice organization made sharks, for is such found random of the κ-like extreme this locus unit of the rays fishes as in rearranged is in A a genes, the which from cartilaginous version the expression. more set locus there segment gene single multiple copies there are at VH–D of of pre-integrated heavy-chain is chickens, but rearranging pseudogenes. a In the segments this from the Diversity in the in are copied VH-–D pseudogenes single conversion, VH is onto rearranged gene system sequences which created by gene.

fishes and fishes. bony species. in heavy-chain cartilaginous have not recently The also least more two other found isotypes at fishes evolved lost domain of in second, not chains. light described Section but six does One, IgW, with be related to immunoglobulin pair region the which a has we composed and domains, to constant first IgW seems constant-region the whereas has 4-10, IgNAR, Instead, forms each homodimer heavy-chain antigen-binding a separate V it a in forms domain site. which immunity. to seems of (which IgW in to IgD to to back adaptive origin and, first seems go related be the is found bony fish) like IgM,

present 5-21 T-cell and receptors Both are fishes. α:β in cartilaginous γ:δ

in cartilaginous evolutionarily have any essentially in form the receptors earlier they Neither the have immunoglobulins same fishes, we see than that which nor T-cell the found the mammals. been species in from γ, The already be and they into earliest diversified identification a least immune δ-chain δ chains systems. and can had and the that TCRβ-chain that even identified, distinct TCRα, show sharks, system these receptors adaptive homologs at recognition of from β, two of at time skate, from somatic rearrangement. diversity lineage resulting each combinatorial Moreover, shows T has identification by γ:δ their response. clarify the role of The many cells helped ligands recognized in immune of list T of appears the more similar lacking, trend to be innate the is sensing rather a α:β a peptide to specificity fine cells. the than kind Although complete still expression and of derive cellular MHC 6-17). cells an various whose (see molecules Ligands be that indication nonclassical Section include from may class microbes of T may Ib or lipids γ:δ stress infection as participate innate in mucosa-associated cells recognition, Even Section 4-18. α:βT appear such a cells T described in to invariant certain of form the the early could were infections, retrotransposon populations excision primordial day. the this minor T-cell of generated this has and evolution of innate of adaptive in the useful in certain receptors sensing role in indicate RAG-dependent This to immunity, that by persisted an T-cell two of early subsequent any case, of and their conservation very suggests the early important of through In functions. evolution these divergence separation receptors classes

fishes. class molecules I 5-22 in MHC found first the also cartilaginous and II class are

time specific expect around the T-cell MHC receptors, see receptors. molecules, One the at the emerge would the evolution same ligands as of to in been invertebrates. are but, receptors, fishes and all cartilaginous MHC they the have like in T-cell or in found present higher agnathans not vertebrates, the Indeed, molecules in sharks, molecules. seem an identical class are mammalian α-chain in I their to MHC and products function present class way and MHC Both II and genes in to β-chain are or of that in class region molecules. cleft with The I in in with the central of of molecules MHC the shark peptide peptide-binding II ends interact class the residues key molecules conserved the the MHC peptide MHC

are I genes sharks, the and in also of class class loci. alleles MHC with Moreover, II polymorphic multiple 20 more been class identified In alleles MHC so species, some I than far. have MHC and both II β shark class II the chains the class polymorphic. α For II class are the molecules, selection peptides in evolved feature polymorphism resulted that in the the the is fishes, only has the of of MHC not a but function the during imposed Thus, agnathans divergence selecting has also pathogens by presentation and continuous the characteristic for MHC. molecules the cartilaginous the of

class be genes class classical between called in Ia) I (sometimes Section introduced MHC will Chapter 4-20 nonclassical MHC class the which 6. discussed division genes, and the Ib Ib class because resemble molecules. of the some in is This also fishes, class division I mammalian present sharks cartilaginous include that genes class direct Ib the are of However, genes. mammalian it thought the class that shark ancestors the Ib genes not is I within lineages separated independently amphibians, class genes classical fishes, each vertebrate have the that into fishes, of (cartilaginous seems ray-finned For nonclassical genes, lobe-finned the studied and it major five mammals), these loci. fishes, and

to the intermediate encountered, are guide forms of these molecules our of Thus, understanding all there MHC when no are and first characteristic evolution. are molecules features the present their of the evolution largely can the immune mystery trace still the system innate the origin the of Although of adaptive we of components persists. immune system, the led wonderful to to elaboration so evolved.” forms Darwin general, simple and are a evolution has we never of most that, selective endless forces question what have “from been, most sure RAG-dependent remarked beginning may clearer answer have adaptive of about not beautiful Charles it being, immunity, But as been although and a in the

Summary.

has inexplicable that Bang.’ adaptive wholly time a was unique now evolution. other considered adaptive independently least Evolution once immunity ‘immunological and understand Big RAG-dependent in evolved one jawed we during immunity at vertebrates of also However, domains a of diversification a the fishes, vertebrate built have rather essential immune evolved completely basis—the of through to which than close domains—but on system clonal all LRR features rearrangement an the features produced with have cousins, seems form immunoglobulin of otherwise adaptive of immunological different immune memory, an a adaptive Our expression of somatic receptors system. jawless and appreciate transposon superfamily a immunoglobulin system the an primordial is of of ancestor into adaptive vertebrates. in germline insertion in the a of member of evolution probably a We must cell gene, related now which RAG-dependent the a to have that occurred immune the intramolecular somatic the forerunners transposon this receptor RSSs, antigen-receptor By within the sequences, recombination, enable rearrangement were in way gene location present-day somatic of paving in immunoglobulin chance, gene and seen primordial terminal placed to genes. T-cell for an thus the appropriate the full-blown that immunity. coevolution the T-cell fishes, for ligands cartilaginous first MHC with adaptive are the suggesting in RAG-dependent molecules The appear receptors some RAG have ancestor. present genes) in active other and the function transposase been of could genome genes this in (the already The found in animal seems a very of of been sequences as origin, RAG1related have RAG1 to variety genomes. wide be ancient

Summary Chapter 5. to

same diverse, and cells basic developing are to lymphocytes diversity. achieve and B of mechanism The receptors antigen use this remarkably the T cells V gene together for recombination by that encode immunoglobulin receptor cell, In chains from sets somatic functional T-cell the are and assembled genes separate segments each region. of the which substrates for are joining are gene gene similar all process in loci. antigen-receptor arrays the segments, the V, The of D, J and B and RAG-1 lymphoid-specific The the of double-strand and segments recombination cells. to site-specific form breaks process direct the RSSs at and J flanking V, RAG-2 initiate the both T cleavage that DNA in proteins D, the with function lymphoid-specific enzyme, DNA-modifying complete concert break rearrangements. one pathway, ubiquitous and to at enzymes in other least double-strand in with proteins repair the TdT, acting gene These of type a diversity. set in present potential segment of As each of substantial each multiple, different, one from gene selection is the slightly gene source versions, segment is random diversity imprecise the loops center antigen-binding at lie sites. high junctions CDR3 receptor, of a During the concentrated at the of joining the which coding assembly, create mechanisms degree the of in the immunoglobulins multiplies the chains antigen to independent or two the available. of complete of overall The receptor a T-cell association diversity form receptors in and immunoglobulins is between forms T-cell forms and important immunoglobulins membrane-bound receptors) An secreted that both (B-cell exist difference receptors (antibodies). heavy-chain form exons terminus. same ability encode to membrane-bound express include forms molecule of is the a to that of due mRNA the The both secreted splicing different a and of carboxy alternative to the regions one. of whereas the or only contain chains have domains, C four Heavy-chain T-cell receptor immunoglobulins three strategies of own our and system species use somatic that VLRs similarities specific some have to system. immunity, a receptors diversify that adaptive developed immune involved the Other undergo to rearrangement agnathans in has a integration a V-type generate gene genes into retrotransposon the Adaptive jawed Tand have prototype arisen RAG1/2 receptor to by to that genes. B-cell that subsequently immunoglobulin-like diversified vertebrates—gnathostomes—appears of in encoded immunity preexisting

Questions.

chance developing 5.1 all recombine may heterodimer A if False: and cell successfully. the express or an T both heterodimer a by True loci γδ αβ

ablating involved Choice: factors of without Which recombination the following 5.2 receptor completing be could deleted antigen in Multiple formation? antigen-receptor

Artemis A.

C. TdT RAG-2 B.

Both order to XRCC4 of and False: immune receptor 5.3 in an in the E. can of hypermutation D. antigen enhance or undergo B response True somatic Ku T affinity. context their cells antigen

contribute diversity of 5.4 receptors? the vast four B-cell and processes to What antibodies Short Answer:

to protein(s) (their) Match Matching: function: its the 5.5

of RAG-2 RAG-1 Nontemplate A. and i. addition N-nucleotides

B. Artemis ii. open to P-nucleotides and Nuclease activity the DNA hairpin generate

TdT iii. C. Recognize(s) RSS single-stranded create(s) and break

D. DNA ligase IV iv. and DNA ends Join(s) XRCC4

rule joining? ensure phosphorylate Answer: how it v. does proper Ku segment DNA and and is with the E. Short What a V(D)J 5.6 DNA-PKcs to complex Form(s) hold 12/23 together Artemis

disorder Matching: 5.7 the to the clinical gene defects: Match

decreased or Ataxia telangiectasia in resulting activity i. mutations RAG-2 recombinase RAG-1 A.

ii. Irradiation-sensitive B. SCID (IR-SCID) ATM mutations

Omenn iii. syndrome C. its to function: immunoglobulin Match class Artemis 5.8 Matching: the main mutations

A. i. IgA response and in immune strongly during induced an abundant serum Most

IgD ii. B. activation B-cell after one First produced

iii. C. IgE sites Defense at mucosal

D. IgG iv. allergic parasites in but Defense involved also against diseases

are two 5.9 E. of IgM Out Fill-in-the-Blanks: Function well serve as v. known; as five BCR the not classes, antibody different auxiliary secreted multimers. may a(n) secreted as a and the of which _______ complex. dimer _____ _______ as is as pentamer, have a multimeric is of part both secreted both B the at cells expressed surface and of are transcript. mature the ______ from and derived are same pre-mRNA IgM these The by by balance expression is snRNP two _______________ between alternative the is regulated determined and of __________. of two versus secreted process ___________ determined ___________. by regulates antibodies is that The factors: forms membrane-bound and and bind of the and class. of antibodies _____ portions neutrophils macrophages _____ IgG the on to Fc Fcγ isotype receptors and Mast _______ that cells, eosinophils, class bear activated to will Fcε basophils, bind receptors however, antibodies. actively half-lives. body and loss their transports tissues prevent ______, able to to to them recycles antibodies prolong their which different are them class to glomerulus at the kidney IgG IgA and and bind

is the Choice: of 5.10 true adaptive history immune of Which evolutionary concerning the system? Multiple not following the

in evolution. immunity A. abruptly Adaptive arose

mosquitoes diversity diversity these in vast mutations exons, splicing a accumulation of genomic and secreted the protein Fruitflies exhibit Dscam freshwater by snails while different exhibit in genes alternative FREP in of genes. B. by of array differential

recombine DNA diversity engender VLR in GPI-anchored to genes Jawless which genes, expressed replication have lymphocytes fish these secreted C. forms. on are and during and

from from terminal it recognizes transposons. RAG-1 RSSs from arose repeats arose the transposases DNA D. while

I II genes in fish. MHC and before class arose T and E. class cartilaginous immunoglobulins cells

references. General

I.J., Shockett, D.G. and P.E., Fugmann, Schatz, Lee, S.D., A.I., Villey, transposition. RAG and and The proteins V(D)J complexes, recombination: : ends, Annu. Rev. Immunol. 18:495–527. 2000,

C., D., Jung, Alt, and F.W. Mostoslavsky, R., Giallourakis, recombination locus. immunoglobulin and : the at Mechanism control of heavy chain V(D)J Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2006, 24:541–570.

Schatz, D.G. : V(D)J recombination. Immunol. Rev. 2004, 200:5–11.

and Swanson, Schatz, D.G., P.C. : recombination: mechanisms of initiation. V(D)J Annu. Rev. Genet. 45:167–202. 2011,

references. Section

5-1 progenitors antibody-producing genes rearranged the Immunoglobulin of are cells. in

S.: Tonegawa, constant immunoglobulin and of somatic Hozumi, and Evidence for regions. for N., coding genes variable rearrangement Proc. Acad. Natl Sci. USA 1976, 73:3628–3632.

antibody The rearrangement Leder, and J.G., P.: and genes. of arrangement Seidman, Nature 276:790–795. 1978,

and Tonegawa, S., V.: immunoglobulin of Organization genes. Hozumi, Brack, C., N., Pirrotta, Symp. Cold Spring Harbor Quant. Biol. 1978, 42:921–931.

region variable of gene the Complete a that separate by segments. somatic genes encode recombination are 5-2 generated

M., L.: of gene and and chain D immunoglobulin three Huang, Early, K., variable An from H., region P., Calame, heavy generated is Davis, Hood, DNA: segments JH. VH, 19:981–992. 1980, Cell

light variable a Tizard, Sequence Tonegawa, Gilbert, gene region and R., immunoglobulin mouse of Bernard, O., Maxam, of A.M., germ-line for chain. W.: a an S., Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 75:1485–1489. USA 1978,

present contiguous 5-3 are segments each V Multiple immunoglobulin at locus. gene

immunoglobulin generates H., gene. R., an Exon heavy shuffling A., Tonegawa, Traunecker, Roeder, W., S.: and Sakano, Maki, chain Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 1980, 77:2138–2142. USA

of T.: Organization F., immunoglobulin heavy-chain Honjo, the locus. human Matsuda, and Adv. Immunol. 62:1–29. 1996,

Roschenthaler, F., J., Kirschbaum, T., et R., Brensing-Kuppers, Heim,V., al. Ohnrich, H., S., M., Thiebe, Bensch,A., Schable, K.F., Pourrajabi, Mitlohner, and kappa genes The immunoglobulin families variable gene : the of mouse locus. Eur. J. Immunol. 29:2072–2081. 1999,

D, by flanking segments Rearrangement guided sequences. of J is V, 5-4 and DNA gene

and M.R. R.B., West, U., Lieber, Grawunder, : rearrangement. gene receptor Antigen Curr. Opin. Immunol. 1998, 10:172–180.

The end nonhomologous joining. human of Lieber, R.: DNA mechanism M. Biol. J. Chem. 283:1–5. 2008,

K., G., Sequences Sakano, light-chain H., Tonegawa, S.: at Huppi, recombination and of somatic sites Heinrich, immunoglobulin the genes. 1979, Nature 280:288–294.

and that DNA-modifying ubiquitous V, and recombines involves gene lymphocyte-specific enzymes. 5-5 J The reaction D, segments both

Schatz, D.G. A., and Agrawal, complex and stable RAG1 form RAG2 containing : with recombination. in DNA V(D)J signal postcleavage synaptic ends a 1997, Cell 89:43–53.

P., Smith, and Ahnesorg, S.P. Jackson, P., ligase with end-joining. complex the IV XRCC4DNA promote XLF to nonhomologous : interacts 124:301–313. Cell 2006,

Pannicke, Ma, T.M., J., G.E., Blunt, M.R. T., Y., Demengeot, Smith, Lieber, and G.C.M., Schwarz, N.J., Finnie, K., Taccioli, Gottlieb, U., overhang complex nonhomologous joining. opening : V(D)J processing end recombination and and in in an by Hairpin Artemis:DNA-PKcs 108:781–794. Cell 2002,

A., M.-C., Barraud, Diest, L., F., Plebani, Stephan, M., le Buck, al. Malivert, A., deChasseval, Xanal, D., et O., Hufnagel, R., J.-L., Fondaneche, a immunodeficiency : nonhomologous factor, Cernunnos, mutated microcephaly. novel end-joining human in is with 2006, 124:287–299. Cell

R., F.W. and Jung, Alt, C., Mostoslavsky, D., Giallourakis, immunoglobulin of control and : V(D)J at heavy locus. the recombination Mechanism chain Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2006, 24:541–570.

structure Crystal Yang, M.S., W., M., recombinase and V(D)J the RAG1-RAG2. Kim, of Lapkouski, Gellert, M.: Nature 518:507–511. 2015,

H.L., G.E., B., Otevrel, Gao, Li, Alt, Z.Y., T.D., Taccioli, Seed, and Stamato, Y.J., Cheng, T., F.W. break V(D)J DNA encodes involved : The recombination. double-strand novel and a XRCC4 gene protein repair in Cell 83:1079–1089. 1995,

S.P. Jackson, Jeggo, F.W., P.A., Mizuta, and A.J., Alt, R., Varghese, recombination scid associated V(D)J the protein is linked murine with activity kinase and to Defective : DNA-dependent DNA-repair defects mutation. 1995, Cell 80:813–823.

Sanal, F., Callebaut, I., Corneo, Chasseval, Bertrand, I., N., Tezcan, al. R., de Moshous, Philippe, et O., Deist D., Cavazzana-Calvo, Y., M., , B., le Artemis, recombination deficiency. mutated protein, : break repair/V(D)J combined double-strand human DNA immune in novel is severe a Cell 2001, 105:177–186.

Oettinger, D.: synergistically Schatz, activate RAG-1 Baltimore, M.A., genes RAG2, C., that D.G., recombination. adjacent V(D)J and and Gorka, 1990, Science 248:1517–1523.

A., Bozzi, Santagata, Schwarz, L.D., L.B., K., Villa, Gatta, Imberti, F., S., et Giliani, L., S., Ochs, Notarangelo, H.D., Frattini, A., al. recombination V(D)J Omenn leads Partial to syndrome. activity : Cell 93:885–896. 1998,

F.F., S., T.A., C.A., Steitz, D.G. and Yin, Bailey, Innis, Ciubotaru, Kamtekar, Schatz, S., M., DNA dimer a DNA reveals nonamer binding : with synapsis. RAG1 Structure mediates of that domain the Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 16:499–508. 2009,

of generated diversity four is the by The repertoire 5-6 immunoglobulin processes. main

and T., The segments gene and M., V L.: R., D., Hood, Weigert, creates Kelley, Schilling, Hunkapiller, diversity. J., Perry, antibody of joining J Nature 283:497–499. 1980,

combinations. are multiple used in 5-7 different The segments inherited gene

individual Desravines, A., diversity in Lee, Hsu, an E.: S., IgH B lymphocytes. with one million only and Dev. Immunol. 1993, 3:211–222.

contributes third of the nucleotides addition junctions 5-8 the region. gene of segments to subtraction the and at hypervariable Variable between diversity

G.H., Gauss, Lieber, M.R. and V(D)J on human constraints diversity Mechanistic : recombination. in Mol. Cell. Biol. 1996, 16:258–269.

Lemeur, A., C., Mice with M., mature repertoire. S., Dierich, Mathis, TdT: lacking lymphocyte Gilfillan, D.: and an animals immature Benoist, Science 1993, 261:1755–1759.

A., F.W. Komori, T., V., Alt, Okada, and Stewart, antigen N in lymphocytes. : variable genes Lack of of region receptor regions TdT-deficient Science 261:1171–1175. 1993,

may of genetic L., and diversity. Weigert, L.: produce Hood, Loh, J., Gatmaitan, immunoglobulin information Schilling, Rearrangement E., M., 276:785–790. Nature 1978,

to 5-9 gene enzymes. gene similar pattern T-cell The same receptor segments are in segments and immunoglobulin arranged a the rearranged are by

C.H., M.M., B.P. and Woodman, Sleckman, F., F.W., J.M., M., Wehrly, T.D., Hughes, Alt, D’Auteuil, B.B., Gärtner, White, Davidson, Bassing, L., sequences : Recombination V(D)J chromosomal 12/23 the restrict beyond signal recombination rule. 405:583–586. 2000, Nature

Bertocci, Reynaud, J.-C., Weill, DeSmet, and A., B., C.A. during and μ, polX of λ, functions immunoglobulin TdT, Non-overlapping V(D)J pol family polymerases, vivo. pol in DNA recombination 25:31–41. Immunity 2006,

Lieber, M.R. polymerases recombination. The : for V(D)J 2006, Immunity 25:7–9.

685-kilobase sequence the receptor Koop, L., of The complete DNA and Rowen, B.F., cell human L.: locus. βT Hood, 272:1755–1762. 1996, Science

K.P., Shinkai, Charron, E.M., al. Rathbun, Young, V., Stall, et M., Lam, M., Datta, Oltz, J., F., G., Mendelsohn, Y., Stewart, A.M., lymphocytes mature owing : rearrangement. lack to RAG-2 mice deficient to initiate V(D)J inability 68:855–867. 1992, Cell

hypervariable T-cell third the receptors concentrate 5-10 in region. diversity

Bjorkman, M.M., and Davis, P.J. T-cell and genes T-cell : recognition. antigen receptor Nature 334:395–402. 1988,

Ghosh, Biddison, Structure P., W.E., U., the receptor, HLA-A2. Fan, peptide D.C.: and viral Utz, T-cell between of complex and Wiley, Q.R., D.N., human Garboczi, Nature 384:134–141. 1996,

complex Wiley, a J., of molecule, influenza Carfi, stabilized D.C.: receptor, a αβ covalently and HA human Structure of II A., peptide Hennecke, HLA-DR1. T-cell class and MHC EMBO J. 19:5611–5624. 2000,

J., T receptor–MHC up D.C.: cell Wiley, close. Hennecke, and interactions 104:1–4. 2001, Cell

Reay, Esser, St. Fazekas B., Jorgensen, de M.M. P.A., U., and J.L., Groth, Davis, contacts T-cell receptor–peptide : Mapping single-chain variant peptide of immunization transgenics. by 355:224–230. Nature 1992,

5-11 gene receptors γ:δ also T-cell by rearrangement. generated are

J.F., Elliott, Iwashima, M., Y.H., K.B., M.M. Davis, and Kaplan, Chien, the alpha gene T-cell within early receptor new in expressed located : and A differentiation. T-cell locus 327:677–682. 1987, Nature

cell gamma for gamma Bonneville, joining. DeCloux, genes: Tonegawa, Lafaille, T V-(D)-J Y., J.J., S.: novel A., T M., sequences of lineages a implications for cell intermediate of and delta receptor Junctional and delta Takagaki, Cell 1989, 59:859–870.

O., C.A., Kanagawa, Tonegawa, K., R., Bonneville, Kubo, M., Ishida, Itohara, Ito, et A., I., S., S., A.G., Farr, Berns, al. Janeway, Jr., probable and gamma delta functions development, cells. : Diversity, of T ligands, Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 1991, 292:53–61.

of distinguished regions. 5-12 are of the by classes structure heavy-chain their immunoglobulins Different constant

function. Metzger, H.: and basis Davies, Structural D.R., of antibody Annu. Rev. Immunol. 1983, 1:87–117.

functional region constant The the antibody. 5-13 specialization confers on

D.C., Helm, Machado, Higginbottom, I., Padlan, Ahmad, Wilson, A., Sayers, A.P.M. E.A., and Ling, K., Y., B.A., IgE. : receptor the affinity Identification in high human binding of region Biol. J. Chem. 1996, 271:7494–7500.

F., and J.V. Nimmerjahn, Ravetch, of Fc-receptors : regulators as immunity. Adv. Immunol. 2007, 96:179–204.

Kane, M.G., Sensel, Morrison, S.L. L.M., and IgG3 to of relative complement. activate CH2 N-terminus : of and differences in acid Amino the abilities the influence IgG2 Mol. Immunol. 34:1019–1029.

are IgM on are 5-14 surface the mature IgD and B both same derived of the transcript and expressed pre-mRNA from cells.

Parkhouse, M.D., and R.M. Lawton, E.R., J.F., A.R., Kearney, Cooper, Abney, a model survey expression that diversity. : Sequential the immunoglobulin of a suggests mouse of developing on for lymphocytes: immunoglobulin isotype B generation systematic Immunol. J. 120:2041–2049. 1978,

F.R., and Blattner, Tucker, P.W. : immunoglobulin biology 1984, The D. Nature of molecular 307:417–422.

Bergmann, A., et Y., al. Bertram, B., B., L.A., Sjollema, Balakishnan, K., H., E.M., Short, A., Whittle, Enders, Yoshida, G., Miosge, Sontani, mature : is alternatively ZFP318 IgD, Igh made essential for spliced product B protein the of by expression lymphocytes. Zinc-finger Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 2014, 111:4513–4518. USA

D.W., and J.E. Goding, Scott, J.W., Layton, : function Genetics, of IgM and and receptors. expression cellular IgD Immunol. Rev. 1977, 37:152–186.

immunoglobulin forms transcripts. Transmembrane generated mRNA secreted and 5-15 of heavy-chain from are alternative

processing be and R., M., Hood, single by alternative Early, Bond, K., RNA mRNAs from P., Calame, pathways. Rogers, a produced can L.: immunoglobulin Davis, J., μgene Wall, M., Two Cell 1980, 20:313–319.

stimulating A., Borghesi, elongation K., S.A., RNA Alkan, C.: in Transcription Milcarek, immunoglobulin and Martincic, L., altered cells processing. directs ELL2 factor Cheatle, by secretion plasma Nat. Immunol. 2009, 10:1102–1109.

Gimmi, Peterson, E.R., R.P. M.L., Perry, and from cleavage-polyadenylation in membrane mRNA production : to measurable developmentally in increase splicing accompanied is The by regulated an μ change efficiency. secreted no shift efficiency but Mol. Cell. Biol. 11:2324–2327. 1991,

membrane-bound Hood, 3ʹ M., J., secreted Early, R.: Wall, C., Calame, ends mRNAs of P., L., K., with and different encode immunoglobulin and Carter, Bond, forms Rogers, μchain. Two 20:303–312. Cell 1980,

Y., and Takagaki, J.L. Manley, with other polyadenylation accumulation IgM cell B control differentiation. of mRNA events CstF-64 associated Levels and chain : heavy factor Mol. Cell. 2:761–771. 1998,

R.L., Y., Manley, and Peterson, Seipelt, J.L. Takagaki, M.L., factor IgM : cell The CstF-64 processing during heavy chain polyadenylation differentiation. regulates premRNA alternative of B Cell 1996, 87:941–952.

J with can chain. form by IgM interacting IgA and 5-16 the polymers

Casanova, Neutra, C.E., and Seidman, D.A., Max, B., Seidman, Corthesy, Ladd, Kendall, M.R., J.E., B.A., E.E., Hendrickson, D., D.J., J.G. Conner, IgA in mice of the J lacking transport Altered chain. : hepatic J. Exp. Med. 1995, 182:1905–1911.

Matsuuchi, Koshland, L., M.J., and M.E. Niles, and required : chain pentamer is that IgM lymphoid assembly secretion nonlymphoid in IgM cell-lines—evidence synthesis. for Polymer and J Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 92:2884–2888. USA 1995,

genes. immunoglobulin-like diversity generate invertebrates repertoire extensive in Some a 5-17 of

receptor Y., G.: Dong, system. and Taylor, innate H.E., domain-containing gambiae AgDscam, immune immunoglobulin hypervariable a the Anopheles Dimopoulos, of Biol. PLoS 2006, 4:e229.

T.B. Zhang, S.M., and Adema, E.S., Loker, C.M., Kepler, simple, systems—not homogeneous, : immune not Invertebrate well not understood. Immunol. Rev. 198:10–24. 2004,

Kondo, insects. D.: Hughes, immune R., V.I., proteins F., M., Ig-superfamily in of M., the Thomas, of Schmucker, Puttmann-Holgado, Rebel, diversity and F.L., Watson, Extensive system Lamar, D.L., 309:1826–1827. 2005, Science

C.M., Loker, S.M., Kepler, and Zhang, T.B., Adema, E.S. of Ig genes in Diversification superfamily an invertebrate. : Science 2004, 305:251–254.

somatic rearrangement adaptive Agnathans diversify built to domains. from that LRR 5-18 an possess gene uses system receptors immune

Schorpp, Y., M., Cooper, M., M.D. Sutoh, T., Kasahara, McCurley, and Boehm, N., adaptive : immunity. VLR-based Annu. Rev. Immunol. 30:203–220. 2012,

Good, Finstad, The J., immune response. of evolution and the R.A.: 3. the lamprey. in Immunologic responses Exp. J. Med. 1964, 120:1151–1168.

Sadlonova, Yu, Herrin, Li, Cooper, J., Guo, and Hirano, A., C., M.D. B.R., P., M., system in of Dual immune the lampreys. : nature adaptive 2009, Nature 459:796–801. 2009, Nature [Erratum: 460:1044.]

I.A. Herrin, Cooper, M.D., B.R., Han, and Wilson, B.W., recognition variable by Antigen lymphocyte receptors. : 2008, 321:1834–1837. Science

Cooper, M., M.D. McCurley, Guo, T., and S., M., N., Das, Boehm, Hirano, Schorpp, P., lineage : lymphocyte Evolutionary a of third in implications lampreys. 501:435–438. 2013, Nature

B.W., response. of R.A.: Finstad, immune J., Good, The the G.W., F.J., Howell, Litman, Pollara, evolution and 3. lamprey the studies immunoglobulin. of Structural J. Immunol. 105:1278–1285. 1970,

immunoglobulin-like fishes. of abruptly the cartilaginous appeared in genes

R.A., of and S.D., Novack, gene evolutionary An the C., Rast, Cameron, Rag1/2 Messier, Fugmann, origin J.P.: L.A., locus. ancient Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 2006, 103:3728–3733.

J.: signal V(D)J Transib and core recombination and from Kapitonov, Jurka, sequences were V.V., transposons. RAG1 derived Biol. PLoS 3:e181. 2005,

J.P., G.W., Litman, Rast, and Fugmann, S.D. vertebrate The origins adaptive immunity. : of Nat. Rev. Immunol. 10:543–553. 2010,

a resembling T., with paired antigen a family domain receptor Kasahara, those express Hagfish of variable and Suzuki, M.: Fujiyama, receptors. Kohara, leukocytes Y., Shin-I, T., A., J. Immunol. 2005, 174:2885–2891.

ways. 5-20 species diversity Different different in generate immunoglobulin

Becker, K.L. and R.S., Knight, heavy diversification somatic for gene of immunoglobulin chain rabbits. VDJ evidence in conversion Somatic : genes: Cell 63:987–997. 1990,

Crane, M.A. K.L., Knight, and repertoire : rabbit. Generating in the antibody Adv. Immunol. 1994, 56:179–218.

Genetic by conversion. gene Ohta, somatic K., and Kurosawa, diversification K.: (Basel) 2011, 2:48–58. Genes

of chicken J.C.: repertoire—ontogeny, and gene C.A., Bertocci, B., Formation conversion. regulation B-cell rearrangement, Reynaud, by Dahan, the Weill, diversification Ig and of A., gene Adv. Immunol. 57:353–378. 1994,

Garcia, C., sheep independent antigen Reynaud, immunoglobulin process. J.C.: Hypermutation an Weill, W.R., generating and C.A., repertoire the is Hein, 80:115–125. 1995, Cell

and Knight, Vajdy, P., Sethupathi, K.L. M., on rabbits. lymphoid in gut-associated Dependence of somatic diversification antibody tissue : J. Immunol. 1998, 160:2725–2729.

Zhai, C.R., S.K., Sethupathi, and Knight, Winstead, P., K.L. rabbit Antigen-induced genes: point of gene conversion IgH and diversification somatic : mutation. J. Immunol. 1999, 162:6602–6612.

cartilaginous 5-21 in α:βand fishes. present γ:δ Both receptors are T-cell

Rast, J.P., C., Strong, R.T., and M.K., Litman, S.J., Luer, Anderson, G.W. Litman, : T-cell and β, in phylo geny. vertebrate genes antigen γ, α, δ arose receptor early 1997, 6:1–11. Immunity

Rast, and J.P., G.W. Litman, primitive most gene the in present vertebrates. homologs are jawed receptor : T-cell Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 91:9248–9252. USA 1994,

I cartilaginous found the MHC first in fishes. are II and class class molecules also 5-22

molecules T., of and Conservation M., Ototake, its I Hashimoto, in Kurosawa, vertebrates. H., Okamura, and related Nakanishi, class Y.: MHC diversification and Yamaguchi, K., K., Immunol. Rev. 167:81–100. 1999,

did MHC cell molecules function Hashimoto, initially? and the primordial How receptor Y., K.: and T Kurosawa, Immunol. Biol. Cell 1997, 75:193–196.

E.C., Hashimoto, S., M.F. Ohta, K., McKinney, and Flajnik, Y., Okamura, K., Bartl, and major : Primitive II vertebrate of class synteny genes. complex histocompatibility I class Proc. Acad. Natl Sci. USA 2000, 97:4712–4717.

Ototake, jaws The vertebrates and genes most humans. M., polymorphic Okamura, to those T., with K., comparable K.: possess I highly Hashimoto, Y., Kurosawa, Nakanishi, MHC of primitive class 1997, 7:777–790. Immunity

to Presentation T Lymphocytes Antigen

antigen adaptive cells, the on cells immunoglobulins the and that T-cell antigen immune receptors. Vertebrate receptors: possess of as receptors types B serve two only can on cells are surfaces. native by MHC cell recognize antigens T recognize displayed complexes that While antigens, immunoglobulins antigens Section cells recognize α:β complexes The T peptide:MHC conventional (see 4-13). as from peptides fluid. turnover the from or such pathogens recognized taken The the self pathogens, intracellular products be from T can of normal by cells extracellular proteins, as up of derived from viruses, α:β immune responses, self normally in these peptides an 15. mechanisms prevent of from response; discussed Various fail, can Chapter the peptides become self target initiating autoimmune tolerance when as mechanisms cells or γ:δ and cellular of as and Other infection cells such indicate stress. MAIT T recognize surface of may molecules whose cells, T different (see 4-18 4-20), expression types Sections classes

the of of recognized complexes by part by first types generate cellular pathways cells peptide:MHC various T α:β this used The describes cells. to chapter This in different in process immunity ways. two participates adaptive least at can peptide:MHC for somatic of complexes elimination signal cells, In pathogen the an cells. presence T intracellular effector armed by effector infected, dendritic not may In to antigen-specific peptide:MHC cells, cells. T be activate serve which themselves complexes production complexes. which introduce mechanisms by also peptide:MHC immunity We adaptive certain will defeat the blocking pathogens of by

their focuses genes and chapter The class on second I of II this MHC variability. tremendous part the and the powerful immune and a therefore genes the histocompatibility encoded molecules transplanted The by tissues identified called complex large (MHC). first that effects of MHC their were are to within major were cluster response on many MHC several population. with There polymorphic, different variants class, each in are highly is molecules genes each present of the and in their of and effect individual and the T that and can potential extends has thus to of MHC polymorphism a T greatly to in cells, as to be range enabling genes polymorphism will in multiple by antigen peptides populations wide pathogens respond presented a combination the recognition the encounter. profound individuals each they range whole, of on cells to genes antigens genes also the these molecules; contains of the those some than processing The of other for MHC peptide:MHC involved produce are in complexes. MHC

the discusses part unconventional chapter for classes the of The T cells. of ligands last class We and others MHC the limited encoded I a will of within proteins to examine molecules similar MHC encoded the have outside MHC. that polymorphism, group some class some and nonclassical receptors These ligands NKG2D for expressed and serve cells, MAIT functions, or T acting MHC I by cells as so-called various for T-cell NK as ligands cells. γ:δ proteins by we cells T as special introduce lipid of microbial subset invariant addition, known that a In cells proteins. presented recognize these antigens NKT will α:β

The α:β ligands. T-cell of receptor generation

The its histocompatibility complex function. major and

T-cell ligands of Generation subsets. for unconventional

ligands. receptor The α:β T-cell of generation

of T function pathogens cells or cells that intracellular protective The depends their harboring on recognition of their internalized products. have a ligand 4, receptor recognized an in the by an T-cell surface. we a As Chapter peptide bound on to MHC is cell molecule α:β displayed and saw to is as presentation. referred of MHC surface the antigen by processing, as to from generation at commonly peptides referred proteins molecule cell is display native while the antigen The peptide surface described We on of and Sections seen 4-13 a in (see antigens outer cleft, molecules their already the MHC how to groove, peptide have 4-16). bind structure or they loaded the look class at pathogens generated and We onto proteins I or will from from they class molecules. how II now peptides MHC are MHC derived are how

pathogen- and their cells. infected in triggering attack functions to effector

effector purposes: development functions armed armed the cells, two of effector processing of pathogen-derived T The has and and sites the inducing distinct cells of antigens of triggering at infection. presentation these bind binding and Section class molecules peptides determined respective (see 4-18). by MHC CD4 of molecules recognition bind MHC CD4 the a cells, MHC recognized I T the cells, T to class are by specific CD8 of molecules recognized or by are CD8 molecules pattern that II that peptides distributions the throughout MHC lies different of on and the molecules recognition specificity this class importance in The of II I cells body. of class (except class cells molecules. cells) MHC I Nearly all express blood red somatic for the Consequently, responsible cells. of surveillance pathogen somatic CD8 cell primarily T and cytolysis is kill cytotoxic cells, their Also T they cells is the function called to recognize. live host and new that bacteria the viral cytosol, particles cells eliminating mechanism an CD8 thus in and in freeing are T therefore sources of important the infection. from only

By dendritic the by MHC macrophages, primarily cells are expressed contrast, cells, particularly and cells. of immune B only II system, on class molecules and molecules, can be the Thymic not and cells epithelial class activated, to but T naive, many can express II cells which MHC IFN-γ. response cortical cytokine in also on cells induced on set development limited other thymus, during on and their conditions. cognate Thus, inflammatory ‘professional’ T of somatic CD4 cells specific their a cells, antigen-presenting under antigens recognize the in can cells help the different CD4 eliminate with cells Effector subsets activities that pathogens. comprise T several processed only effector cells activated been once cells after by naive cells. it their CD4 has Importantly, encountering presented become dendritic CD8 cognate armed can T and and antigen

various is cellular 6.1). it which derived from considering be antigens processing, antigen between can to (Fig. In the important distinguish compartments endocytosis compartments in vesicular separated These include and the cytosol by membranes, the are compartments, which involved various secretion. and as loaded cells, I we endoplasmic synthesized into T for reticulum the newly the detail. on in and the recognition Peptides class directly onto discuss derived transported MHC molecules cytosol below cell by greater will are same from and nuclear process MHC viruses I can bacteria in the Because peptides components (Fig. by compartment, some cytosol in from contiguous be onto the this loaded class replicate or molecules their panel). 6.2, first upper

Fig. compartments, intracellular are major membranes. separated There by two categories of 6.1 the membrane. with the communicates in the compartment which is pores via nuclear cytosol, nucleus One endosomes, other Golgi the comprises lysosomes, vesicular other vesicles. apparatus, which the The and is reticulum, intracellular system, endoplasmic with thought can extracellular being the as The system vesicular be of continuous fluid. move the to cell. of Secretory fusion contents with reticulum endoplasmic are out off membranes and the vesicles from via vesicular Golgi transported bud respectively. or taken or endosomes phagocytosis endocytosis into Extracellular by material phagosomes, up is The as outgoing both of for vesicles is and important for neutrophils in such cells fusion incoming antigen destruction pathogen presentation. and components them process lysosomes to cytosol as autophagy. Autophagosomes known and in surround in deliver the a

identify is by referred immune can recognition a are direct pathogen. and of infected cells as pathway somatic both and sometimes presentation, to that This

survive able and are the system pathogenic and (Fig. to by replicate macrophages bacteria intracellular ingestion the vesicles inside protozoan parasites of endosomal–lysosomal Certain second panel). 6.2, bacteria digestive endosomes macropinocytosis by broken internalized, cells, and be down Other and with into proliferate lysosomes, pathogenic are or toxic outside phagocytosis, along can receptor-mediated enzymes. endocytosis, where products, by their they endocytosis through by extracellular can B-cell receptor-mediated efficiently (Fig. For internalize cells receptors antigens B example, third 6.2, panel). fluids Virus their particles T routes these degraded, to and by can in peptides extracellular and cells. antigens also taken parasite up be and presented

or either compartments. cytosolic vesicular the the and in Top, viruses some the replicate first cytosolic bacteria compartment. panel: to by activate by class are killing cells. I presented antigens MHC CD8 Their T cytotoxic molecules such up taken are parasites endosomes, into other and usually phagocytic some as by macrophages. bacteria specialized Second cells panel: are the degraded, able and within are some to or Here they cases proliferate vesicle. survive and killed in CD4 class MHC presented to antigens II by T cells. Their cytokine by are production activate molecules derived B pathogens may by receptors proteins surface the here vesicular by bound cells. bind panel: and of immunoglobulin illustrated antigens extracellular endocytosis, Third enter the system to cell-surface for from can B the stimulate are antigens to II which T antibody. MHC molecules to produce CD4 by cells helper These presented cells, class then

Fig. class cytosolic for presentation deliver by MHC molecules. II pathways 6.4 can Autophagy antigens autophagy, and are In of autophagosomes, contents specialized portions catabolized. process eventually lysosomes, cytoplasm are vesicles the are of into that taken with vesicles with fused the endocytic the where presented Some bound of and on II to resulting cell process MHC molecules this the the surface. peptides can be class of cells cells than context, this absence peptides tolerogenic can may in immature inducing dendritic T-cell the responses antigens. self so macrophages, of that dendritic In to and in express rather self occur a activation,

Fig. class antigens on I molecules extracellular of cells. by Cross-presentation MHC 6.3 dendritic of derived them are I capturing dendritic molecules. and MHC class loading peptides subsets cells efficient from in proteins onto Certain exogenous be cellular pathways evidence There is involved. may several that the where from passing way. degradation by the in translocation onto 6-3) they molecules into endoplasmic then the Section of the involve cytosol route may resultant with peptides ingested proteins into the (see the for I TAP reticulum, One through class usual proteasome, the MHC phagolysosome load to transport Another cytosol—where compartment—without allowed the to loading of vesicular passage through MHC may the involve mature phagolysosome antigens a peptides direct into bound class from be route molecules. are I

and peptides able II and through are exogenous endocytic cells B capture proteins MHC receptors. loading molecules, to onto vesicles macrophages, dendritic For cell-surface specific via cells, class process capture receptor. include this B-cell the of can cells, B For antigen from proteins II compartments peptides The molecules these detail in endocytic MHC specially more derived loaded class are later. which in onto modified that these are discuss in we will antigen-presenting cells, cells CD4 this cells. In operates T naive dendritic cells, effector activate to become to pathway T phagocytosis pathogen-derived MHC II particulate and mainly on by class take material present up peptides molecules. Macrophages so antigen presentation presence In indicate such vesicular used pathogen be to macrophages, its within of the may compartment. a Effector to recognizing cytokines the the antigen, on produce pathogen. cells, macrophage CD4 that can T destroy activate the roles pathogen: CD4 to this of live T in adapted intravesicular intracellular pathogens the have they cytokines is resist of killing, Some and require the TH1 macrophages kill these to which subset cells. of the one the response, cell immune Other cytotoxic and activity. roles even subsets in CD4 have have T regulating aspects cells of other some CD4 T help the same from CD4 B cells serve as antigen recruit cell. that In recognize T the presentation cells, B to may protein antigen immunoglobulin of molecules, that CD4 production as via against antigen. MHC will the in activate turn on T endocytosing antigen specific peptides and presenting cells their B can class helper antigen-derived T II a cells surface cells antibodies efficiently for the that By serve

cytosolic into proteins which with proteins Beyond exogenous class degradation cytoplasmic endocytic in by the in be from of a presentation lysosomes proteins, loaded II can delivered MHC autophagy, (Fig. pathway molecules for the also system are ubiquitous peptides of derived 6.4). that virus, cell’s as cytosol. such herpes also self tolerance for means in as the serve for accessed to presenting and of antigens, have from pathway antigens induction pathogens, proteins can presentation the self-cytosolic a of the simplex This

in 6-2 from the by generated ubiquitinated cytosol the are Peptides proteins proteasome.

degraded synthesized with continually cells newly and in Proteins are replaced being proteins. degradation carried protein proteasome called Much by the multicatalytic is out protease a cytosolic large, complex (Fig. 6.5). catalytic of two the of both 20S and one regulatory complexes A caps at 19S proteins. typical core the is composed and multisubunit caps, end; each core are one proteasome hollow stacked rings of a is in cylindrical core. seven of four 20S some large subunits, a complex The subunits each arranged 28 core around noncatalytic. and are composed subunits are α of The rings distinct outer seven two proteasome subunits. core 20S β The two of inner seven composed the of rings distinct are subunits are chamber. catalytic the form The β1, proteolytic constitutively and expressed which β5, β2, the a has directly 20S binds containing particle α subunits. the regulator core and is The of of lid 19S 10 to up that subunits nine a base different composed to that ring ATPase 20S the well of the as activity association a The subunits. as requires of ATP 19S caps’ with of core cap many the of delivers into the prematurely. One other and 19S caps the binds proteins them keeps the while exiting from proteasome,

for in are ubiquitin–proteasome the degradation (UPS). Proteins system cytosol the tagged via called the a the of begins ubiquitination. to with molecules target This attachment chain ubiquitin several a protein, process of lysine terminus ubiquitin the targeted carboxy one protein residue on the chemically a to the at linked First, is molecule. of glycine at a ubiquitin ubiquitin until chains glycine lysine (K48) least the ubiquitin, on residue at and second 48 molecules formed 4 bound. carboxy-terminal then so first to linking of are the the Ubiquitin by are of of cap the then recognized proteasome’s type which into be unfolds introduced that can is tagged the 19S chain K48-linked core. by catalytic the ubiquitin proteasome, it of protein so the This a is into with specificity released into are protein of cytosol. chain short the There the general which sequence subsequently peptides, degraded lack molecules can have antigen produce. The that functions the been degradative peptides presentation, the co-opted general proteasome that of work so evolved for proteasome the with have to MHC

I of class MHC of production the Various in peptide implicate for the ligands proteasome molecules. lines evidence inhibit antigen peptides I molecules. with by results Experimentally more inhibitors activity of efficient proteasome MHC their ubiquitin tagging of presentation molecules, class proteins proteolytic and presentation the the of class in MHC I by Whether generating of peptides for the cytosolic proteasome protease known. only not the the reticulum capable endoplasmic transport into is is

chamber alternative catalytic replaced catalytic interferons. are by the induced and three subunits β5 are by that constitutive sometimes subunits β1, The β2, of called These (or β2i are β5i (or MECL-1), and LMP2), β1i LMP7). induced subunits (or and MHC Both located genes, in are encoded and locus, by PSMB10 the locus. β5i the MHC the PSMB8 is whereas which encoded β2i outside are β1i by PSMB9 present all immunoproteasome, proteasome can exist cells in Thus, present stimulated is proteasome and as in with both the the interferons. as constitutive both which a cells induced by proteins I are interferons. MHC class also of after the of cleavage specificity after cleavage there interferon-inducible and such replacement β The residues, alters hydrophobic of by polypeptides increased residues. decreased proteasome acidic counterparts subunits the enzymatic that is the their 4) by and residues transport MHC with preferred to molecules This are are peptides TAP. the anchor most I binding (see also class residues carboxy-terminal for produces for that structures Chapter preferred

in substitution to the subunit a β in for thymus. cells Another in the been occur has found chamber catalytic of a Epithelial the β5t, express PSMB11. unique called is that β encoded (cTECs) subunit, cortex by cells thymic proteasome the proteasome cTECs, is and a association In β1i the and in β5t thymoproteasome. with β2i, specialized type of becomes called this component of thymus. in development in indicating Mice complexes of are the CD8 T cells, have important β5t numbers thymoproteasome lacking the reduced produced T-cell the peptide:MHC by that CD8 expression of

proteasome. proteasome-activator expression complex the Interferon-γ the inducing binds to antigenic further (IFN-γ) production of peptides by the increase that of PA28 can of induced composed are a both PA28β, by of which PA28 and seven-membered two ring sixor proteins, PA28α IFN-γ. is which the cap, of released 20S to are the A proteasome increase regulatory either of end bind the at peptides core rate 19S can to in which (Fig. place acts ring, PA28 6.6). rate peptides, the more of to increased simply In providing addition

are cytosol cap the the core, degraded peptides within and releasing into Polyubiquitinated the bound proteins catalytic 19S by

Fig. peptides. the degraded proteins into by short system are ubiquitin–proteasome 6.5 Cytosolic composed of The proteasome regulatory of consists a 20S either (see two multisubunit rings and on caps which 19S end. catalytic text), four core, is the (orange) actions Proteins become tagged (yellow) covalently through E3 various chains of polyubiquitin with K48-linked targeted ligases. that are the small fragments draws is giving the the that there, inside degraded, and recognizes catalytic protein polyubiquitin protein peptide cap into back tagged are cytoplasm. regulatory the to The 19S rise chamber; released

β of the the view that of in blue). rings interact subunits activator a: end the at α of are Panel this side in the (yellow) with subunits either cavity core proteasome cross-section, (the proteasome PA28 heptamer catalytic (pink) make up the the core is parts a narrow α-annulus the region blocked this is α the subunits that opening in other (green), by red). normally of Within (shown ringlike α-annulus view the PA28 the a from without Panel close-up looking into b: bound. top, of cylinder. Panel the parts the PA28 changes of c: the the block the of with same the perspective, the that molecule the of α-annulus, subunits, conformation opening α end those to the proteasome binding moving and For shown. is simplicity, not PA28 of Whitby. F. courtesy Structures

Fig. of PA28 either end 6.6 activator the proteasome to The binds proteasome.

might antigenicity. that to antigenic peptides processing potentially destroy additional allows escape their flow

the and pathogen-derived or self but 30%—of in also generates only of defective as quantity—possibly that not folded properly cytoplasm peptides proteins to are a Translation ribosomal proteins (DRiPs). known significant mRNAs products up spliced the in mRNAs, These degradation translated include introns proteins, rapid by from tagged improperly of ubiquitin are which and proteasome. translations for improperly frameshifts, by folded peptides proteins. source proteins process abundant provides presentation self pathogens by peptides This and I ensures derived that MHC class generate both substrates proteins for and of from eventual another peptide wasteful seemingly

TAP class I by 6-3 are Peptides MHC the from the to cytosol into transported molecules.

other. the of reticulum, assemble chains proteins two of lumen the into The the synthesis for translocated cell with where such chains molecules, during chains endoplasmic two destined of each and fold surface, are the as MHC polypeptide correctly that the of class cytosol. This the the is MHC of lumen the formed is never peptide-binding and endoplasmic to the means reticulum in I exposed site molecule fragments that MHC antigen from however, to class cytosol. proteins in The I derived bind molecules, made typically the are the the able these cell How MHC delivered bind molecules peptides class are to and question, to surface? This raises to I be

presentation analysis mutant was class a of The defect molecules. in antigen by by that answer I had aided MHC cells of on in these fewer proteins molecules despite their normal class cytoplasm. the MHC synthesis I far surface These normal cells expressed than class medium, adding the MHC factor. in I the by culture to the the to supply endoplasmic molecules of could suggesting might the be defect synthetic This that peptides reticulum be peptides corrected limiting acids, proteins; in across of members of DNA ATP-binding be sugars, the cells mutant mediate the peptides Analysis the membranes. ions, identified problem to the the genes family amino of ATP-dependent responsible ABC proteins of this (ABC) the and phenotype transport for cassette for of

antigen associated and membrane. cells -2 associated and transporters were endoplasmic processing-1 with from with that reticulum TAP2), proteins, are two the (TAP1 normally the ABC mutant Missing called missing restored of presentation mutant of the molecules. cell’s cells Transfection by with the genes MHC peptides the the class I (Fig. two The a proteins in form the heterodimer TAP membrane gene I can either prevent and class 6.7), presentation TAP antigen by molecules. MHC mutations in β2, locus similar PSMB8 genes are to expression of Section proteasome. and 6-10), TAP2 and enhanced is subunits to near interferons produced the genes, level β1, viral the in MHC and the and of in MHC The by response PSMB9 TAP1 their and basal infection, β5 further (see I class located peptides induction increased reticulum. delivery endoplasmic of into the results cytosolic This in

that internalizing vesicles I molecules from mimic can peptides MHC present the in reticulum the by in in to assays class microsome lumen. Microsomal vitro, endoplasmic then non-mutant cells bind do up cells not TAP2-deficient peptides. contrast, from In TAP1or vesicles take microsomes TAP1:TAP2 ATP-dependent is an transporter. transport that requires normal confirming ATP the hydrolysis, complex peptide Peptide into the it carboxy at limited or TAP 16 that preferring in (see that of Section specificity transporting 4-15). for The hydrophobic peptides the bind have acids precise molecules and MHC of I will terminus—the peptides 8 peptides amino has complex residues peptides length transport, features between and class basic true amino-terminal a in but the in lacks peptide-sequence complex The residues, specificity. against TAP bias first proline three has any synthesized endoplasmic the MHC access proteins gain class are how I reticulum explained viral the to by bound and molecules. peptides the from of of lumen The TAP in cytosol discovery

complete as (TRiC), TCP-1 protected by from these cytosol MHC bound degradation peptides class produced molecules. the be can chaperones many the I such by cellular are are in of but longer than Peptides ring complex the the of that is cleavage proteasome. peptide in produced terminus antigens carboxy Evidence by indicates can too class are However, long antigen amino endoplasmic peptides of with bind terminus (ERAAP). molecules associated MHC trimmed the processing aminopeptidase an to be I the that by enzyme reticulum called ERAAP is antigen-processing IFN-γ increased expression pathway, Like by of other components stimulation. of the repertoire of MHC class onto have lacking altered I an ERAAP Mice the peptides enzyme molecules. loaded not the immunogenic Although the absence is found not peptides and MHC molecules affected surface. by of ERAAP, to loading are normally present many fail unstable and the bound of on other some load normally, cell to peptides peptides of immunogenic This is an wild-type repertoire. important ERAAP-deficient mice from to for peptide:MHC that from causes cells the ERAAP normal be mice, demonstrating T cells editor

class bind peptide. MHC the are reticulum 6-4 Newly I endoplasmic in retained synthesized a they molecules until

class is MHC the I assembly Binding an peptide stable a important molecule. of in a step supply the disrupted, I MHC peptides the reticulum synthesized TAP-mutant into When in newly is cells, endoplasmic of as class molecules

Fig. TAP2 membrane. form the 6.7 in a reticulum peptide and endoplasmic transporter TAP1 ATP-binding one Upper and polypeptide chains, and TAP2 are domain. one each hydrophobic with TAP1 panel: individual The transporter form four-domain the cassette two a of into typical a to (ABC) ATP-binding family. assemble heterodimer chains The domains shown transmembrane have here). (not transmembrane hydrophobic regions multiple pass. the can a the project through domains peptides domains (ER) the of form hydrophobic within lie lumen reticulum cytosol, to into through The which membrane ATP-binding whereas the the channel endoplasmic microscopic TAP1:TAP2 reconstruction the the Lower heterodimer. electron of structure of panel: in the the the the top the of a while view shows lateral heterodimer surface the the a of seen transmembrane ER, of of down membrane. plane transporter as the from shows TAP looking the TAP onto Panel b of lumen domains, panel view. back two transmembrane domains The lobes just these ATP-binding visible lobes of the domains; beneath of the edges form bottom are lateral at the the courtesy G. TAP of Velarde. structures

in reticulum in endoplasmic held the state. folded are partly a class as have why the have been I human This TAP1 I surfaces, their identified with immunodeficiency condition cell due molecules who class few and defects on to MHC TAP2 patients known in explains MHC a rare deficiency. and MHC of assembly I complete folding The Fig. a (see class molecule process accessory then β2-microglobulin on chain association with class with involves I the depends of of and proteins first the chaperone-like peptide, a number functions. 4.19) this and with MHC α transported to endoplasmic the is peptide has class released bound cell I surface. Only MHC molecule after the and from reticulum the

molecule a the folded MHC synthesized chaperone that MHC membranes bind in to general-purpose Newly class calnexin, the that protein class αchains I reticulum partly state (Fig. I a retains endoplasmic enter 6.8). well II immunological so role as central proteins. many Calnexin folded a non-immunological associates of with T-cell in molecules, receptors, partly assembly class as has also the and and MHC immunoglobulins, When the partly heterodimer called chain, to I assembly α:β2-microglobulin folded binds MHC to (PLC). β2-microglobulin proteins of and the peptide-loading α an calnexin binds dissociates class class complex MHC the from I ribosomal calnexin ribosome chaperone to via ubiquitinated Cytosolic TAP One and (>70%) class nucleus proteasome MHC MHC until class ERp57) I proteins ˛2-microglobulin ˜ tapasin is TAP I component defective by of to class tapasin calnexin I ER binds products complex peptide (DRiPs) ERp57calreticulin released binds are proteasome. fragments the normal protein fragments (<30%) of a Partly cytosol MHC complex to degraded peptide folded proteins (calreticulin, binds proteins calnexin, ERAAP˜2m DRiPs and bind chains ˜:˛2m from the peptides TAP ER to delivers

Fig. endoplasmic unless class the leave molecules 6.8 MHC bind I do peptides. reticulum they not chains synthesized the assemble Newly (ER) protein with I class endoplasmic the in calnexin. MHC reticulum membrane-bound α and to protein binds the (β2m), dimer this dissociates complex from I calnexin, class I the folded MHC the β2-microglobulin α:β2m binds then molecule TAP-associated When class tapasin. partly MHC dimer complexes time. MHC:tapasin at may the bind same with TAP the Two the class The I complex. tapasin, peptide-loading heterodimer to which ERp57, forms molecules bind form MHC a calreticulin also and chaperone with MHC folding I is the peptide, completes which by ER the of molecule. the class of until molecule within released a The binding the retained MHC the absence Even in

completes class MHC the molecule A folding. peptide its I binds and ER. a into TAP class infection, there cell The cytosol peptides flow of is the and exported the I MHC is released continual from membrane the complex to the from of molecule products degraded triangles) to Defective that in (yellow polyubiquitin cytoplasm generate the K48-linked transported by are ribosomal (DRiPs) lumen are marked proteins by destruction by reticulum the TAP. and of endoplasmic proteasome the into peptides the for will molecules. class of these bind MHC to I Some peptides molecules peptides ERAAP termini, the too increasing presentation. peptides MHC at for repertoire to amino the to that The thereby are class of long I their allowing and potential peptides aminopeptidase trims bind bound peptide to through has a molecule, apparatus leaves is cell the endoplasmic reticulum MHC to the finally the surface. and transported and Golgi the Once peptide:MHC complex the

the a calnexin general has and also PLC—calreticulin—is to probably similar

MOVIE like chaperone calnexin. 6.1 function, A tapasin, by TAP-associated the is a the within component gene complex encoded second protein of the MHC. of transport I the the TAP, folded molecules Tapasin from bridge between to a partly forms heterodimer peptide class the await α:β2-microglobulin and allowing suitable cytosol. a MHC thiol peptide bond chaperone class A in this breaking α2 in role and complex have component the the the a during ERp57, third oxidoreductase of may a MHC I re-forming loading domain disulfide (Fig. is 6.9). that heterodimer with disulfide-linked forms ERp57 a stable tapasin. that while be component of the to calnexin, part is a endoplasmic seem Tapasin PLC and various to in calreticulin cell’s the of general specific ERp57, control machinery. processing, seems other bind and glycoproteins the to be assembling reticulum antigen quality component peptides TAP of delivers I it final to folded the molecule. PLC, MHC the and partially is class itself the

the editing. exchange the low-affinity a binding The and mediates higher affinity, called to to the is peptide bound of a receptive of I for MHC PLC MHC in process peptides state peptides peptide that class molecule maintains molecule binding functions I. heterodimer in MHC to editing The peptides class ERp57:tapasin that and to molecules, assembly show class low-affinity of tapasin suboptimal, the the molecules reach cell I bound those are defects calreticulin surface lacking MHC in peptides. or Cells the the and leaves is peptide:MHC The reticulum MHC from the surface. of PLC, releases I it to folded transported the endoplasmic molecule to cell complex class the and a partly peptide binding transported these bind will Most out be the appear and from by molecules rapidly the not to an into peptides back by TAP Sec61, cytosol of transported endoplasmic transport of cleared are reticulum; MHC ATP-dependent the TAP. the complex to distinct

from peptide to released the be must class molecule MHC the mentioned above, a PLC. bind As in I order must I exit lacking endoplasmic molecules the the and TAP In class cells be so reticulum, fail MHC to functional genes, instead. degraded cytosol, the is degradation. molecules back terminally MHC cytoplasm these somehow Since for must the ubiquitin–proteasome misfolded into be in the system located transported system achieved of quality endoplasmic by pathways called (ERAD). is reticulum-associated degradation This control protein a comprises that cellular the and into recognition misfolded complex several the involve proteins the and endoplasmic reticulum cytosol. the translocates membrane the and retrotranslocation to unfolds of general delivery across a ERAD that of proteins pathways and degradation. this to ubiquitin– during so The proteasome process for system targeted ubiquitinated are are proteins (UPS) the eventual unique pathways the these details ERAD not here, are We MHC shall since deeply into to delve not of

Fig. and calreticulin, I MHC The complex includes chaperones the 6.9 tapasin. peptide-loading class ERp57, (b) This it of peptide-loading endoplasmic model reticulum. the the view luminal as complex top (a) oriented of surface from (PLC) the a side shows and extends clearly yellow β2-microglobulin I with synthesized helices peptide-binding The newly groove the the identifiable. MHC ribbons, are of as and shown MHC α class and by shown here. the not carboxy-terminal to The membrane (cyan) extensions tapasin tethered be the MHC of reticulum would endoplasmic groove; heterodimer with and by function the Tapasin a that empty the editing class of MHC tapasin MHC in contacts a ERp57 stabilize makes conformation disulfide peptide-binding binding and form the molecule. bond, the I linked molecule peptides to they (green) Fig. replaces the calnexin (see Calreticulin it (orange), like glycan the the 86 asparagine monoglucosylated at immature to of molecule. binds 6.8), N-linked MHC groove P contact with to molecule ERp57. of extends of long, make of the around MHC top flexible The the peptide-binding calreticulin the domain (not of PLC the (see transmembrane The shown) TAP region tapasin associates with Fig. bringing reticulum 6.8), the from with into the endoplasmic empty arriving peptides cytosol. proximity molecules MHC the into on and file Cresswell. provided Peter by based Reinisch PDB Karin Structure

assembly class or processing. antigen I ERAD pathways evade cells. Chapter pathogens see I CD8 of to many will we viral by 13 a the recognition co-opt MHC way to However, molecules block in class assembly T how as

to surface. and derived peptide-binding the the MHC molecules are uninfected of In peptides I mature carried cell the groove self proteins cells, fill from class MHC which of retained that in class some peptide. are excess for they reticulum normal are cells, I suggests the in In endoplasmic present molecules time, important to becomes peptides immunological viral transport must cell class This is be of to cell the which infected. available I molecules, surface immediately for function if the MHC the

class to T exogenous CD8 cross-presentation I Dendritic to 6-5 molecules present cells. use MHC proteins prime cells on

generate described displayed complexes with cell synthesized molecules the proteins explains become that as in on MHC surface. the pathway can I peptides class The how above cytosol destruction and by cytotoxic pathway is sufficient detection ensure cells. cells This to pathogen-infected T of how activated? But these cells do become T cytotoxic first that they so infected require as would the that so I cells naive CD8 needed far peptide:MHC dendritic explanation complex T well, express Our activate class become cells. to restricted different viruses a viruses infect dendritic cells types, not cells. exhibit for many and But will tropism all the T be recognize displayed that pathogens them by cells cytotoxic that might such dendritic antigens never activated. This cells, and from be might chance not creates that I within class generate As turns it to cytosol. from generated dendritic cells out, peptides not complexes able own that were are peptide:MHC certain their on MHC Peptides class on pathogens—can cells the molecules infected bacteria, process dendritic I extracellular by surface of of these cells cross-presentation. and cytosolic be the viruses, from as sources—such with phagocytosed presented dying

minor role before observed viruses its responses priming appreciated, was in to was studies of cross-presentation antigens. histocompatibility in Long T-cell between genetic products that mice strong are different non-MHC gene can These elicit backgrounds. of responses generated reactive were of MHC d MHC the express into of B10 cytotoxic B10 from When type types), against MHC mice T H-2b×d background. b mice minor BALB spleen cells antigens type injected cells and mice of (which BALB H-2b both antigens as of from minor direct one antigen-presenting cytotoxic presented for by might cells these B10 T immunization, expect T cells used priming H-2b the recognized B10 the cells of cells. by Some cells cytotoxic of type. other when presented B10 only cells by But the T MHC recognized minor H-2d antigens meant had these by minor B10 H-2d own presented antigens vivo CD8 activated the recognizing been molecules. that the cells host’s in BALB This by T antigens class must host’s minor cells and processed other words, MHC have In to from BALB transferred for cells I dendritic presentation. B10 the immunizing original the the become histocompatibility on molecules viral experiment now by grafts, cross-presentation not and tissue also in described MHC occurs but that antigens original or only for for above, I class cell know as the bacterial antigens. We

cross-presentation not equally cells. capacity that across antigen-presenting It is the for appears distributed all that cross-presentation of by present certain performed subsets mice. most cells that dendritic is and it both are area study, in efficiently an seems While humans active of still in these cell requires mice, BATF3 transcription in the its are species, strongly factor the cell subsets Dendritic by express dendritic for receptor one same both uniquely markers not subset and cross-presenting and but humans chemokine identified the development, cells XCR1. dendritic (CD103). surface, dendritic are lymph nodes spleen, cells lymphoid of the identified the molecule αE tissues in such expresses cells the integrin as on migratory expression capable of CD8α this of the lineage cross-presentation their and by In cell BATF3 to lacking and also gene herpes viruses, types these generate CD8 a T-cell simplex dendritic of functional lack responses cells unable are to many Mice including virus. normal

unclear, biochemical there still several and enabling The pathways work. be different mechanisms at may are cross-presentation into and cytosol not cross-presented. be to proteasome whether endosomes is degraded clear the receptors be by proteins It transported order to the need captured all into taken in by and phagocytic class (see transported Some synthesized in compartments, evidence PLC the the reticulum to direct molecules I newly which from is the a Fig. be loaded in allowing endoplasmic pathway supports endosomal onto exogenous to phagosomes antigens MHC 6.3). dendritic cells an of M immune-related interferon-γ-induced by 3). may for IRGM3 GTPase as (short GTPase cross-presentation involve family pathway known Another protein reticulum originate protein from generation are related ER the storage organelles lipid lipid adipose (ADRP) in with membranes. neutral which differentiation IRGM3 regulates bodies, to thought endoplasmic and the interacts of called process a in deficient normal Dendritic II mice antigens cells, lacking presenting IRGM3 to selectively of T from MHC are but class antigens cross-presentation CD8 molecules. cells have on for research. pathways and The between remains an active other relationship area this of

autophagy. complexes phagocytosis, and generated endocytosis, Peptide:MHC in II acidified class are 6-6

T CD4 bind vesicles present of and peptides cells. molecules dendritic intracellular peptides to generated II macrophages, is function class and of the to these The B immunological in cells, cells, to MHC pathway this different for is The type. purpose for each cell CD4 macrophages concerned these activating B concerned help and Dendritic while from with cells. T forms T are cells, CD4 cells with cells receiving of primarily are various including that types the pathogens, sites are intracellular protozoan cause For of macrophages replication Leishmania of the for mycobacteria parasite tuberculosis. and the vesicles example, several and the of leprosy pathogens membrane-enclosed usually proteasomes proteins cytosol. vesicles, the these not reside accessible are of the Because in these in pathogens to of are macrophage, proteases surface. the peptide after from way reticulum activation which degraded Instead, their this that intravesicular can class pass II activated on the to cell bind the pathogens by to endoplasmic into compartment molecules, through fragments MHC the are are and reticulum all the membrane then to reticulum molecules containing Like vesicles MHC delivered antigens. II endoplasmic vesicles of class part bud onward proteins, intracellular directed as first the endoplasmic that transported membrane, off and into internalized membrane-enclosed are Complexes are molecules T and cells. delivered formed there CD4 class then to by peptides the of surface, and be MHC where recognized II cell can are they

pathogens proteins extracellular for Antigen internalized (Fig. II class vesicles when are and molecules endocytic MHC begins into processing 6.10). are that by cells immunoglobulin bind pathway. this internalized endocytosis and are Proteins on B processed surface to receptor-mediated by macrophages by dead of as particularly such Larger and dendritic cells. fragments materials, by internalized particulate are cells, phagocytosis, toxins, macropinocytosis. taken by up are such as Soluble proteins, secreted through enter that Proteins endosomes, endocytosis to become cells delivered which are

to pH, space up vesicles endosomes early with into containing taken fragments the peptide proteases peptides II into inactive cytosol activates proteases is extracellular class from are intracellular of extracellular In Acidifcation containing space Vesicles endosomal vesicles vesicles MHC degrade of neutral Antigen fuse molecules antigen

Fig. Peptides molecules generated that acidified class bind II endocytic to are vesicles. in 6.10 MHC

extracellular foreign such a bacteria up or an by antigens, cell the antigen-presenting cell. antigens, or here, taken been dendritic as as immature bacterial case In an illustrated have such macrophage that have the vesicles. antigen intracellular may peptide be of replicate invaded or In other the cases, bacteria in the source cell parasites to both the is In the cases pathway same. antigen-processing of degrade progressively, the the engulfed proteases The within the pH the decreases engulfed containing endosomes to activating material. vesicles pathogens At the vesicles molecules MHC pathway cell some to synthesized fragments and bind their antigen, acidified to cell the point of peptides surface, such through on peptide the transporting newly the class surface. pass II

of with as the acidic fusing eventually increasingly into they the progress interior cell, lysosomes. in are and the pH activated protein endosomes that contain antigens contained The known acid degrade vesicles. lysosomes low and proteases, the eventually proteases, as at

less proteases of antigen. internalized responsible raise endosomes, presentation them processing acidic, as the antigens, pH the suggesting for that of are chloroquine making intravesicular such acid inhibit that Drugs S, B, which cysteine proteases they site—known their as because the catalytic These of cathepsins L, active. include use D, in most proteases—so the and cysteine L a called is in processing of acid Antigen vitro pH. to some these by enzymes can digestion be at proteins mimicked extent with the cathepsin B the vesicular cathepsin D process cross-presentation. and S normally, may the proteases with Cathepsins mice show in that cathepsin or whereas be some L in processing of predominant no antigens mice deficiencies, lack including antigens; S is is tetanus for required their endopeptidase (AEP), cleaving epitopes. important for processing all antigens, but antigen after contain asparagine class near residues not some cysteine such in II where as cases relevant protease Asparagine asparagines, MHC presentation, antigens a toxin the activities produced in that the vesicular many within peptides It of and proteases repertoire pathway overall the is the present of endosomes likely the lysosomes. reflects denaturation bonds, endosomes. disulfide bonds, Disulfide and proteolysis process intramolecular particularly in facilitate the in help the antigen-processing by and lysosomal (GILT) breaking is in The present in enzyme endosomes disulfide functions pathway. IFN-γ-induced bonds thiol re-forming and reductase to nonspecific manner accessible largely proteases proteolysis degradation. a denaturation steps The and in redundant have previous regions of and endosomal of digest the various become that act polypeptide by to endocytic II compartments. different throughout pathway, peptides abundance from sequence bind vary so present the that in peptides MHC molecules these many class and and generated can The

location, A molecules and in to MHC from common are that actin arise ubiquitin. as self-peptides bound cytosolic of such class proteins number the significant II way most II The damaged as in protein cytosolic to likely and delivered which natural presentation proteins degradation. autophagy, organelles in the for is for process proteins class of turnover which known are lysosomes processed by cytosolic MHC are membranes, be Fig. transported encounter lysosome peptide:MHC peptides molecules II via cell the MHC tubules (see Here class the the surface to class resulting in could and present complex endolysosomal their could II 6.4). energy. such starvation, cell obtain when it increased by intracellular but Autophagy to is catabolizes constitutive, the proteins stresses as is cellular invaginations, autophagosome which into by fuses macroautophagy, is in engulfs vesicular induced by internalized cytosol whereas the and a double-membraned with lysosomal microautophagy, starvation, In system cytosol lysosomes. is continuously pathway cognate A membrane lysosome-associated uses transport autophagic and the proteins (Hsc70) (LAMP-2) to heat-shock cytosolic lysosomes. 70 protein the to third protein-2 molecules. for processing II the antigen MHC Epstein–Barr virus nuclear the class in shown be (EBNA-1) of 1 been presentation to on has involved Autophagy B cells cells recognize and presentation T with virus. Epstein–Barr infected kill enables cytotoxic to CD4 Such

II chain 6-7 invariant newly acidified vesicles. class directs molecules MHC intracellular The to synthesized

translocation into the reticulum. MHC II their with endoplasmic for biosynthetic pathway molecules The begins class is to lumen prevent them it binding into transported newly important reticulum from own Here, to or cell’s synthesized the endoplasmic peptides prematurely polypeptides. to the the these in the to is full chains, general polypeptide so The needed and folded mechanism peptide-binding groove II prevent reticulum open-ended endoplasmic partly molecule. unfolded binding and MHC class from a is of of a by assembly MHC membrane chain II-associated known class (Ii, synthesized binding prevented invariant II as molecules MHC the class protein Premature newly is CD74). the peptide of with of (Fig. endoplasmic the Ii glycoprotein; reticulum transmembrane and is in resides the membrane a region cytosol terminus II its the amino its spans type membrane 6.11). terminus of carboxy the its The Ii reticulum. within and remainder reside endoplasmic of formation domain unique mediates a stable Ii Ii trimers. that has cylindrical class which (CLIP), the of class this an noncovalently each heterodimer. sequence, a trimer binds subunit invariant Ii chain MHC II-associated Near to domain, α:β peptide with II contains the Ii peptide an blocking to groove thus with proteins. within either Each the of binding II binds lying the partly peptides folded or preventing peptide-binding molecule groove, MHC the and class Ii subunit CLIP of an an to class MHC binding open the of MHC site site II binding The is relative molecule class molecule. I

a molecule MHC a is the domain CLIP short cytosol leave cleaved class to CLIP, to class trimerization II bound Invariant domainN leaves cleavage chain Further bound peptide to initially (Ii) and ER Ii II CLIP terminus fragment, of C the in membrane LIP10 II fragment groove class binds molecule the the molecule terminus transmembrane to Ii

Fig. to leave fragment, a 6.11 II to invariant cleaved molecule. chain peptide the MHC class bound CLIP, is The

the shown on the A model heterodimers class left. α:β trimeric bound invariant chain of II is MHC to of chain of molecules in rest green, panels). class MHC the in purple, is invariant The and in shown yellow CLIP shown II is leftmost (model, the the and are shown portion the three class groove. polypeptide reticulum, the the the peptide-binding In to II chain endoplasmic (Ii) CLIP invariant with its molecules along the of binds chain lying MHC section known the cleaved, one cysteine just then give (not vesicle, fragment is to first by MHC the the of acidified LIP10 LIP22 to After at proteases as shown. of peptide Ii portion protease a panel), (center and initially shown), remaining class by side Ii an leupeptin-induced II transport non-cysteine molecule into endosomal complexes and contain II transmembrane LIP10 segments retains that pathway. class target cytoplasmic the the tothe signals Ii:MHC that the (right cleavage by II short the a class this of molecule; still bound only leaves panel) LIP10 peptide fragment. peptide is Subsequent CLIP Cresswell. of Model courtesy structure P.

Fig. called a class with 6.12 MIIC. loaded MHC II late are in molecules compartment endosomal the peptide to the apparatus surface in intracellular micrograph the section transported MHC compartment called (MIIC). the from G class electron of of this a MHC cell) II class vesicles B (labeled are molecules ultrathin via an II Golgi cell complex vesicles sheets morphology, a of have These showing internal membrane. and are spots) with in of identify spots) dark class the as and class labeled II (large MHC particles molecules II Antibodies molecules dark Golgi, both small different-sized in presence only MIIC. chain MHC whereas the the gold (visible the detectable invariant cleaved occurs. loading 4.5–5) system endosome, invariant and peptide thought This to a chain compartment is in acidified late endocytic which of the the an be (pH is compartment H.J. (×135,000) courtesy Photograph of Geuze.

MHC the II class of binding easily allow molecules Ii region sites. This through more pass CLIP to their allows to are component complex in reticulum, While the being assembled with calnexin. parts endoplasmic is this its associated and endoplasmic of is transport Only a the been out β chains, complex—three when complex nine-chain for chains—has the from chains, Ii released assembled α calnexin three three reticulum. peptides MHC not bind complex, usually the present molecules. unfolded cannot MHC so in endoplasmic II are peptides class proteins, reticulum by the part presented molecules that II As of class the nine-chain or many in evidence misfolded II of class that reticulum the the MHC Ii are is complexes molecules endoplasmic proteins. in There absence as with retained

tags. by Trafficking membrane is controlled sorting proteins cytosolic of MHC this can low-pH second peptide class which where target regard, molecules a Ii a loading of the to has compartment endosomal occur. delivery function, In is II to Ii for II is compartment Fig. hours (see 2–4 with α:β of trimers heterodimers class in this MHC complex retained The 6.11). a 22-kDa domain, fragment proteases molecule called initial undergoes During the by Ii remove of acid generating LIP22. truncated an trimerization to time, Ii this cleavage the class called the proteases is further fragment by compartment. cysteine MHC within into cleaved the 10-kDa bound II to and retains This molecule which it remains proteolytic a LIP10, MHC the molecule subsequent class LIP10 releases to A Ii, the cleavage membrane-associated II the bound leaving the CLIP MHC fragment of molecule. from most in by but cleavage is II-positive This class S carried cathepsin cathepsin out epithelial by thymic cells cells. L in MHC associated II other the molecules class Being bind yet with peptides. MHC CLIP, cannot escape carry the surface. the not cell now CLIP to complex endocytic However, since MHC–CLIP the complex the Ii-encoded compartment, in is signals that does free retain to the

dissociate To molecule, the allow displaced. class either to MHC bind peptide another II or must to be CLIP in which some are incoming most cell Newly point with fuse vesicles, the II toward brought class at molecules MHC surface endosomes. synthesized of class may and However, cell MHC transported endosomes. into complexes first surface be reinternalized some the to II:Ii derived or peptides the case, either complexes self internalized proteins from endosomal pathogen encounter II:Ii enter bind where In pathway, proteins. class they either and MHC cells. compartments were to antigen-presenting endosomal specialized thought exist Initially, for the vesicle). CIIV cells dendritic compartment endosomal was (MHC class One that was in an II called early was a II compartment Ii compartment, class Another, MHC class II and the (Fig. molecules, MIIC or containing late MHC endosomal 6.12). of for peptides the molecules many The that II possible. compartments, lysosomes, including is use allow exchange as view common for to CLIP endocytic current MHC many as class MHC that degraded. from II unstable molecules after they fusion are in are rapidly acidic class the do after dissociation bind and lysosomes, pH with peptide not CLIP

molecules for regulate The CLIP HLA-DM and peptides. of II-like 6-8 exchange HLA-DO class other MHC

the peptide an be cells surface Because MHC complex possess other for peptides. facilitates unless that a released class of another cannot it, the CLIP efficient cell to replaces II:CLIP exchange antigen-presenting mechanism defect B-cell mutant was presentation. lines process human of with analysis antigen in by a This uncovered correctly in the molecules normal surface CLIP route, MHC to class seem II the arrive mutant and bind often cells bound. proteins with internalized with peptides Ii cell still the to vesicular fail and but these peptide from at follow assemble derived MHC defect II-like class in these (H-2DM in called lies HLA-DM The molecule cells in mice). an in humans (see class the the near and are genes Section genes HLA-DM (see II in 6-10) TAP MHC PSMB8/9 region Fig. The found encode α an they of resemble molecules. 6.16); that MHC closely a chain chain β other and II those class present Ii predominantly II however, in not that but class surface, endosomal molecule contains and molecules. The HLA-DM the is compartment MHC at cell found the is MHC II the and the empty release thus molecule molecules and II binds stabilizes of MHC allowing of empty peptides class other binding (Fig. CLIP, catalyzes HLA-DM the to class to 6.13). MHC other HLA-DM peptides. class bind does open and molecule it The II does the found in not not molecules, groove contain MHC of to peptide-binding the class (Fig. of floor α HLA-DM the molecule II near chain binds site region Instead, the the the of 6.14). in in molecule, II the induces Fig. part ‘open’ configuration (see the this holds This groove binding class changes a partially and of of the MHC structure binding peptide 6.14, panel). right peptides way, CLIP HLA-DM molecules. of catalyzes from class and unstably the II In release of bound this MHC other

weakly to allowing formed the them. peptide:MHC II to presence binds the complexes, continuously In peptides and replace capable binding of rebinds to bound of of II molecules, MHC other newly for for class peptides a class of dissociation mixture peptides and HLA-DM by cells may MHC to them. Antigens for the on before II cells T surface recognize days persist have able of presented some encountering molecules to class antigen-presenting cell the editing HLA-DM sometimes II unstably to class survive displayed antigen-presenting 6-4), of that long stimulate the remove peptide:MHC The peptides, cells. CD4 bound ability (see T ensures the the called on Section to of surface enough complexes peptide appropriate of number polypeptides During longer peptides are peptides undergo it as captured likely by further possible is that bound. that increasing amino-terminal some process, exopeptidases, the first that can trimming this be

A and in in cells. class cells, HLA-DO mice), second II (H-2O molecule, called humans atypical in produced cells, B epithelial MHC is dendritic thymic

6.2 MOVIE

blocks of the MHC short complex the the II but to is to and molecule, MHC forms peptides molecules the peptide class still CLIP an endosomes, (Ii) and fragment, a to the a degraded Invariant CLIP to II molecule peptides II binding MHC class other leaving acidifed class Ii proteins MHC CLIP, cleaved HLA-DM antigens allowing peptides in releasing in to bind. peptide with binds Endocytosed peptides chain are endosome, bound molecule, binding blocking II class of misfolded CLIP The Ii II surface MHC cell reticulum LIP10 endoplasmic molecule travels the then to class HLA-DM cytosol

Fig. MHC HLA-DM molecules. of class CLIP loading the to leaving peptides II bound the antigenic facilitates 6.13 panel: MHC class Third molecules. II onto II molecules and binding but that peptides in down binds proteins molecules into to peptides invariant and CLIP. First acidified MHC class (Ii) within pathogens the their MHC blocks from class newly occupied broken panel: II to endosomes, cannot II the bind peptides endoplasmic these molecules by chain are synthesized class are Fourth acidified and endosomes. to transport during panel: their reticulum class the binding peptides. the complexes, II:CLIP invariant late HLA-DM and catalyzing endosomes, panel: binds cleave chain, MHC proteases antigenic of the II-like in release to the of CLIP class Second molecule

Fig. II class MHC molecules. of regulate and 6.14 into loading HLA-DO HLA-DM peptides and chains, class β α to (side composed the binds First (turquoise) molecule view). (green) panel: HLA-DM the dimer, of HLA-DR II MHC amino contacts the where near groove reside. molecule the the MHC terminus HLA-DM peptide would peptide-binding HLA-DO binds as a in configuration thus activity. HLA-DR, blocking peptide-editing to Second similar HLA-DM panel: DM’s of the view HLA-DM. HLA-DR absence peptide Third bound panel: with top of in panel: of HLA-DR view HLA-DM bound. with top Fourth the devoid groove exchange. MHC is enabling peptide-binding peptide, end peptide The of amino-terminal and of open bound

This chain the heterodimer is HLA-DOβ a chain. of and HLA-DOα molecule the HLA-DO the surface, intracellular does present peptides. found to being not and not cell vesicles, only seem in it is at bind HLA-DM. regulator HLA-DO of as negative acts a manner to as MHC in HLA-DM II binds Fig. (see molecules HLA-DO same the class bound HLA-DM endoplasmic to and the it order to leave reticulum. in must be 6.14), MHC free class peptide molecules. slowly dimer When is for then appears from to reaches which II to an catalyze dissociate HLA-DO compartment, editing HLA-DM, acidified the DM–DO endocytic HLA-DOβ HLA-DM, Moreover, not increases IFN-γ the of chain. the but of expression so T the during expression HLA-DM, HLA-DO. inflammatory of can by overcome IFN-γ and cells effects increase inhibitory NK responses, of produced the cells Thus, and HLA-DO this Why way remains obscure. in expressed is but alter cause adaptive HLA-DO autoantibodies a does with production The dramatically of age. of in loss does not mice immunity, spontaneous CD4 encounter repertoire the at of that cells function stages, in T cells epithelial HLA-DO the thymic these as of in peptides selection influences further Chapter discussed cells, 8. T perhaps As developing different self

class molecules. MHC tapasin to peptide editing of of facilitating role II for in parallels MHC binding The in class molecules role HLA-DM I the peptide peptide peptides. driving exchange and high-affinity by this HLA-DM function carries mediating of association the out have that MHC the likely specialized mechanisms molecules of Thus, with seems peptides it delivering themselves. coevolved also presentation much that found viruses to II MHC ways molecules. antigen subverting of pathogens It likely onto the class of molecules, have evolved I through processing and is MHC the as inhibit class have strategies peptides loading in Chapter We 13 to these will discuss topics when mechanisms. immunoevasion pathogen we return

by peptide important conferred The safeguards. DM MHC molecules removing and editing provide unstable pathogen, an at the To must peptide:MHC the of surface. intracellular stable complex the cell be reveal presence cells acquired to mistakenly other were be might cell be detection, and could escape too for infected peptides if destruction. targeted could readily, an cells, easily then If too peptides dissociate from healthy peptides MHC these reduces to chance the outcomes. of binding Tight molecules of unwanted cytosolic that in site. from peptides molecule it peptide extracellular empty I does a not class derived dissociation bind proteins, a MHC from the MHC molecules peptides is important of peptide-binding allow display largely cell-surface so to an its and its of at peptide, and changes, a β2-microglobulin Fortunately, the dissociates, I α molecule degraded. loses class chain the when internalized MHC living surface the cell is conformation rapidly preventing class directly surface, empty MHC Thus, from lost cell surrounding are fluid. molecules from I from the most the quickly extracellular largely acquiring them peptides cells T that healthy This infected target primed while surrounding cells. ensure sparing cells helps

MHC II are removed class the molecules from surface. Empty also cell class for empty stable empty than at are MHC and II aggregates neutral they I aggregate may removal. such Although molecules, molecules more class account readily, pH, their internalization MHC of are molecules of normal loss is of peptide through class the when most recycling. likely cell-membrane as molecules from endosomes transiting the Moreover, part acidified II MHC process vesicles, that rapidly present class that are II bind the molecules peptides At able fail are are in acidic MHC to so those do degraded. but pH, to

surface living that in Some molecules T to the can addition at peptides chemically even recognized occur, generate cells the by or cells peptides. of complexes to as cell however, peptides for extracellular peptide:MHC MHC specific can of binding vitro those are fixed II peptides demonstrated MHC for class molecules. and readily that This I bind class has been many MHC is on Whether not of phenomenon due proteins the empty or presence this to clear. the cells exchange peptide to is technique and widely T cells. happen Nevertheless can to it peptides of a analyzing for used the load is synthetic specificity

Cessation antigen through MARCH-1 of their activation occurs processing cells of in reduced dendritic the after expression 6-9

ligase. E3

infection the of active activated location, soluble for by surveillance not been macropinocytosis carry have that their proteins. in Dendritic yet example, of antigens out through cells expression processed class cell molecules loaded the Peptides are from derived proteins continuously on surface. MHC for II and onto by in from and In proteasomal recycled are complexes surface degradation. addition, peptide:MHC cells being also ubiquitination and degraded the continuously lysine cells, cytoplasmic membrane a II MARCH-1, in contain or B 1, cells, class the residue residue of in an chain; ring MHC the lysine called of a β Section (see dendritic conserved tails (C3HC4) expressed associated finger is target molecules and macrophages. E3 this ligase 3-7) constitutively the IL-10 other by is cells in MARCH-1 B cytokine cells. and induced in expressed membrane regulating the class expression thereby endosomal it cytoplasmic in molecules, eventual degradation (Fig. ubiquitinates tail compartment, their leading II It their where of to the steady-state in lysosomes, of of recycling level resides a MHC 6.15).

stability The increase MARCH-1 to during of shut is infection complexes. the down peptide:MHC pathway to cells; antigens may many activate hours. take this order of T at lymph migrate first Dendritic nodes capture naive must in infection local sites cells that to peptide:MHC surface, peptide:MHC complexes of continuous Since the activation. migration, on pathogen-derived recycling could cell lifetime the this complexes preventing lost be T-cell during limits of off. situation, pathogens, by shut is cells To prevent dendritic when activated MARCH-1 expression this are cells mediated in innate may This directly for reduces since be TLR signaling dendritic the rapidly MARCH-1. pathogen of level sensors, by mRNA complexes 30 The minutes, accumulate on so cell that MARCH-1 soon pathogen. time of only is peptide:MHC around at cells produced their with half-life surface encounter dendritic protein activated the

like similarly of which regulates in dendritic co-stimulatory MHC cells, In molecule II (see MARCH-1 CD86 (or regulating 1-15) in class expression MHC class the II Section also dendritic molecules, expression B7-2), addition cells to is

time dendritic peptides the cell activation on MHC at presenting the surface, accumulate they of acquired molecules cell

Fig. of cells reduces 6.15 dendritic expression, MARCH-1 MHC thus Activation lifetime of increasing molecules. the the MARCH-1, molecules. attaches II the resides to innate the cells MHC activation dendritic endosomes chains ligase compartment, which recycling ubiquitin K-48-linked in chain pathogens, of it by express where class E3 β Before membrane-associated of recognition This to expression to causes endosomes reduced to from a be degraded, half-life on and eventually cell molecules recycling and overall MHC the surface. MHC the move of leading level TLR-4, to free mRNA, on the MHC sensors, as short, MARCH-1 such of level innate being cell with molecules the reduce half-life emanating of MARCH-1 Signals the and from now are surface. accumulate surface acidification innate the around caspases cells. activates antigen Because that the of the the compartments from innate of processing, and cell signaling triggers time of the with associated endocytic bear will on pathogens captured MHC accumulate activation dendritic peptides molecules also

ubiquitination. regulated by for dendritic CD4 levels CD86 provide pathogens peptides by that they cells the lymph have express and time means signals derived nodes, This that activation. the them greater arrive T-cell higher from activated that at advantage 13 of that we as adaptive immunity. means taken downregulate have this class will proteins MHC pathogens by see pathway II Chapter viral a MARCH-1-like to evading producing of in molecules However,

Summary.

to ligand The the is an bound by molecule. peptide MHC a receptor recognized T-cell cells, and T class intracellular II acquire and CD8 respectively. MHC at different I molecules activate sites peptides or CD4 either MHC class foreign are kill antigens. virus specialized cytosol thus cells recognized cytotoxic are peptides which CD8 in T any presenting derived to the Infected cells cells, displaying from replication by reticulum acquire I MHC class their at typically location. in this endoplasmic molecules and the synthesized peptides are the protein into loaded degraded heterodimeric further by the loaded processed endoplasmic are ERAAP onto molecules the proteins ATP-binding class transported the MHC the before onto I by from the and cytosol in derived proteasome, MHC TAP, reticulum by being molecules. peptides aminopeptidase The released binding be to is cell chaperones to Peptide in endoplasmic MHC to molecules travel reticulum to required I the them for class from and surface. the able proteins peptides produce are subsets class Certain I MHC from exogenous to dendritic load and them cells of molecules. onto cross-presentation CD8 antigen-presenting cells Such be T directly can antigens activated not infect of ensures that cells. that by pathogens may

their molecules II because the do not groove. class their into chain acquire peptide-binding ligands peptide first CLIP in MHC the invariant (Ii) endoplasmic inserts reticulum, acidic HLA-DM these cleave Ii, active of proteases and CLIP. Ii an dissociation molecules helps where targets to to with MHC Association endosomal catalyze compartment derived dendritic The or of with that cells. then can have cells, entered MHC associate compartments vesicular the from B macrophages, molecules proteins peptides vesicular molecules. The cytosolic by presentation deliver proteins class autophagy MHC to for system can II the of process The have II specialized variety recognize that of class activities. peptide:MHC complexes a effector T CD4 cells molecules, kill of intravesicular pathogens to T against regulate secrete help CD4 cells macrophages immunoglobulins they activate foreign to cells harbor, and responses. the immune B Subsets

and its major function. complex histocompatibility The

fragments MHC them peptide the to on from display of pathogens by surface recognition appropriate bind cells. cell derived the T The molecules and for is function produce killed, cells pathogen—virus-infected to eliminate pathogens. kill are to activated almost The are bacteria cells are and activated deleterious that macrophages their the living antibodies in are neutralize vesicles, to or consequences always B extracellular intracellular any selective is molecule. it such Thus, strong a by MHC of an has way in pathogen in that escapes favor presentation that there mutated pressure

Two for it major pathogens (MHC) in difficult properties responses way. the evade immune to make this complex separate of histocompatibility I polygenic: so it is the of different class and First, set MHC contains a with ranges possesses molecules of individual MHC several that genes, different MHC every peptide-binding II MHC specificities. class is, are gene polymorphic; alleles, the or each is variants, population the there multiple highly within MHC Second, whole. as of a that polymorphic most known. MHC fact, The in genes are, the genes the the MHC organization and this the discuss variation in MHC of In how in we the molecules describe genes arises. section system be multitude of polymorphism rapidly the peptides ability of different respond polygeny and bound pathogens. consider We immune to and to how that of evolving can also contributes the the on effect range the to of the

6-10 proteins genes processing antigen within involved by and in encoded the MHC. presentation are Many

4 the in in 17 over 6 MHC The chromosome extends pairs. mouse least base at located is and chromosome and humans on million contains humans genes. it more than In 200 to 7 now many around million the thought continues MHC, base it establish becomes region, precise which genes difficult work is As within boundaries this span as the as pairs. for to genetic and define to α molecules encoding of MHC in the 18 MHC on 2 the αand different chromosomes chromosomes genes the chain class 15 genes respectively, and I in the and for The are and the invariant complex; II and molecules β2-microglobulin mouse). within are (chromosomes the of 5, humans, βchains class chains linked and in of II Figure and human MHC and mouse. the 6.16 I class general organization shows the genes blood differences genes. In H-2 in different are through are discovered individuals; called humans or genes antigenic genes, were first because human these the between white they as antigen from the they HLA mouse cells leukocyte known controlled a The made mouse that response) given fact in an genes genes. response II immune to genes whether Ir called originally class (immune first identified were were as was MHC and antigen longer Because it is past this, with I could as I-E, MHC used. class this no I-A and genes in of but the to the and A and genes were confused be E MHC referred terminology II mouse class

Fig. complex humans major and the mice. organization of (MHC) in genetic The 6.16 histocompatibility shown. is genes organization the of The MHC is antigen) human histocompatibility) on called the for leukocyte and humans, is is mice, cluster 17. called chromosome on is HLA (short chromosome it (for and and in 6, In H-2 MHC I (yellow). and species, genes in II is clusters of similar class separate genes class MHC (red) organization The both with I been to translocated relative mice, class region in I has class two. H-2K In the splitting gene MHC, the human the MHC and are H2-L have called class which HLA-A, in genes, H2-D, mouse. and three humans, main Both HLA-B, HLA-C in and I H2-K, species the These and HLA-A, on. respective encode class chain the of I so α the HLA-B, proteins, MHC mouse. gene the in MHC a an chromosome—chromosome a of The is different class chromosome 15 encoded and molecule, β2-microglobulin, on humans located 2 I in subunit other by the (H-2A II β class B) MHC and The HLA-DR, the the -DP, α genes molecules and mouse). the and and of -E class II in includes (designated for -DQ chains A region for the genes gene encode genes the and the are chains (DMA peptide genes β region in MHC DO DOB, the the DMβ (or and the respectively), of proteasome (DOA the DMα that and DMB), molecule subunits, α transporter, the (TAPBP). PSMB Also and encoding the chains LMP) encoding encoding class and tapasin II the TAP1:TAP2 genes proteins III The functions Fig. class immunity in with various so-called other encode genes (see 6.17).

-B, in pairs I also three There MHC α-chain HLA-A, of and class α-and class and genes are called are called HLA-DR, -DQ. -DP, II -C. β-chain humans, genes, three There the can people, however, In chain. cluster whose contains gene product an many β-chain DRα with the extra HLA-DR pair three of II of sets This the can MHC that four genes class give rise to means types molecules. All binds cells, to the Sections peptides (see 4-14 T can each class but molecules a 4-15). different MHC present II I protein and of and range peptides class of equipped any a if Thus, of is one several of molecule each only at class class means peptides present to for one genes than different that range MHC the each expressed broader MHC the surface. much cell presence individual were

human 6.17 a more MHC map region. detailed shows the Figure of related presentation, innate antigen processing in within have response. this antigen to immune or genes adaptive participate locus or or the other Many functions genes in centromere. the the PSMB9 TAP genes, gene tapasin region whereas lies class the the II The lie near nearest of encoding the the PSMB8 at edge and (TAPBP) two MHC MHC has reticulum) I during MHC to that cytosolic (whose and of the and evolution into (whose the (PSMB antigen products peptides proteasome LMP) presentation. processing deliver products class for MHC genetic entire surface) cytosolic TAP, or genes the cell with The deliver the tapasin, linkage endoplasmic genes been suggests the selected peptides

the When -γ, and I increase the are genes. and tapasin, α-chain -β, TAP β2-microglobulin transcription MHC proteasome, the treated marked a class and interferons in of with IFN-α, or cells genes is of there early innate 3. infections Chapter part the in produced of in as as viral are immune Interferons response, described proteins produce and blood red for all helps (except to on resulting their increase viral expression MHC they the cells). process in peptides present surface virus-derived cells The the immune cells helps virus. cells, to and appropriate to dendritic On the response initiate T this the activate adaptive them by of coordinated facilitated these be regulation may genes linkage components the many in the The of the MHC. of encoding

genes, the DOB DOA MHC subunits related molecules DMB class genes binding II the to the clearly of as are II that catalyzes regulatory molecule. the encoding genes encode HLA-DO of to and that the are MHC DMA peptide molecule class and The subunits HLA-DM the expression class DOα, cells. MHC invariant-chain, along IFN-γ, and produced the not but and CD8 DMβ, cells, of cells, which activated T with II by coordinately is Gene TH1 the DMα, is DOβ, NK proteins, increased classical by This processing intravesicular T regulation and form molecules NK when macrophages cells cells. presenting of cells in upregulate to and involved antigens allows of dendritic to antigens genes. co-activator these MHC by Expression -β), production of a is MHC acts by known a of II as which (CIITA), class via IFN-αor not positive induced protein as transcriptional (but of the II all transactivator IFN-γ molecules class CIITA deficiency. MHC the causes of nonproduction immunodeficiency due of II class severe II absence to An molecules—MHC class T do Finally, MHC genes, resemble products structure, while conventional so-called presenting not function ‘non-classical’ peptides MHC cells. in many contains their because to genes they MHC α:β in the of are describe to genes. a of MHC as we referred Many protein our which these different MHC variety genes, of discussion conventional will products have class , Ib 6-16 following in functions, Section genes now and their the

Fig. 6.17 MHC. Detailed map human the of distances and human regions approximate class II, MHC of is the The with shown, of class base in pairs. of given I, organization the class III thousands genetic in text. mentioned the genes are class the regions and of Most in II I class the genes The the G) the class encoding II indicated F, are region (for Ib example, class class genes E, genes I-like I molecules; are in additional pseudogenes. class additional and factor-α genes cytokines as The complement as genes shown C4A proteins class tumor encode shown LTB). (TNF) as the and (shown (LTA, and the necrosis lymphotoxin C2, C4B), factor that Bf), C4 as encode genes, the and III B (two well in region C4 an encoding is in genes 21B), the biosynthesis. the enzyme CYP involved as 21-hydroxylase (shown to Closely gene steroid linked in blue; are other from genes protein-coding except for color genes, which genes different mentioned the these distinct control. shown under shown I coded, I-like MIC the with genes important red, and the are are functional in are MHC in transcriptional text the being Immunologically class class yellow. MHC II shown class are The important in immunologically genes are the in MHC in genes class related II that not the functions purple. but immune have are I class and region shown to Genes MHC related immune-function Genes are to genes. dark pseudogenes in gray genes function in light are Unnamed to gray. immune shown unrelated

Fig. Human 6.18 are polymorphic. highly MHC genes which each of has DRα gene notable With functionally is exception alleles. monomorphic, locus many the locus, the of number the encoded proteins total of than less is The functional alleles. number Nomenclature System this in the of as assigned WHO heights the Factors bars Shown figure the the are of as HLA the January by different of 2010. for Committee of proteins HLA number

protein MHC genes highly The class class polymorphic. I and 6-11 of products II are

polygeny different the cells. of on MHC four) least at II MHC I the three MHC, his expresses molecules or and class person (or every class Because three of molecules sometimes her is different MHC by of greater MHC In because the of fact, of the expressed number molecules extreme people most the polymorphism (Fig. 6.18).

shape and meaning The comes poly, Greek structure. the many, term from polymorphism or morphe, meaning the variant are gene’s genes protein occupy and here, means variation thus that termed within-species locus the a can alleles. used the at in product; locus, gene As it the alleles human are MHC For the region. than there population, far genes found of 1000 class I and other MHC more more several in within for II class the alleles than genes, number II MHC will of II have a in molecules. chance frequent homologous there class for will relatively corresponding genes and both gene only the chromosomes allele; so is the encoding individual on Each the MHC class same most population, class I small that is the I be heterozygous and individuals an loci class allele combination an of known on as MHC a particular chromosome found single alleles haplotype. The MHC is products can the and expressed antigens the equally of meaning Expression in of cell, the MHC is gene both alleles a to are present cells. locus T that protein of products both at codominant, alleles that is protein alleles code MHC a discovered not for number functional remarkably of The small. do different already has through thus the The to extensive of the an (Fig. the expressed increase molecules MHC thereby locus diversity polygeny each polymorphism double individual in at available and number potential 6.19).

Because individuals MHC heterozygous, parental of of possible receive most four haplotypes. combinations matings that will one are offspring the most produce siblings alleles will one that four MHC an share Thus also both likely with are differ a in being individual sibling. they haplotypes there express, chance in the to tissue One difficulty finding of siblings. even for transplantation, donors this suitable is the of among consequence

greater All and the MHC extent, to with the polymorphic a its DRα Eα. or and proteins homolog II lesser I are mouse exception class chain of between chains monomorphic. be and to sequence vary are said do different in not These individuals but been Eα might special a in DRαand has such the constraint This function functional no found. proteins, prevents indicate that variation

Fig. and diversity of polygeny the by Polymorphism contribute an MHC individual. both molecules 6.19 to expressed

synthesis wild, in gene Many a mice, Eα prevents have both domestic that and of protein. the mutation the Eα to does is H-2E H2-E function special molecules, essential. They cell-surface unlikely be it thus so lack have if a

to polymorphisms at evolutionary MHC have seem strongly pressures. by been selected genes MHC individual alleles. generation Several of contribute new mechanisms to the genetic in sequences others a by different gene from in is mutations one replaced, a which conversion, a gene part, (Fig. alleles gene by arise new in and process by point Some sequence 6.20). The the favor selective mutations in of polymorphism point of the effects in pressure pattern in MHC clearly of be seen can genes. the simply mutations amino substitutions, an the be which acid codon acid, or amino which substitutions, Point but change same. replacement silent the as change classified leave can relative providing that occur been selected evolution substitutions expected, polymorphism frequency a the in MHC. than within for actively at Replacement MHC would has evidence to be higher substitutions silent the the of

influencing the binding contacts between both and peptide

and molecule. T-cell MHC receptor

benefit selection large sections polymorphisms how for MHC describe immune next MHC how few alleles. account pathogen-driven of can the response The number and the quite making differ amino as of acids, isoforms, up 20 alleles, The to one protein protein from by products MHC individual another known can variant distinct. often each of to the localized the groove are and particular extracellular to the Most from membrane, furthest (Fig. surfaces in of differences domain the peptide-binding exposed 6.21). class the to 4-16). peptide-binding class in have peptide-binding II MHC that interaction I 4-15 and with and (see pockets the residues specific molecules We bind anchor through of seen groove peptides Sections line change MHC of the these that and in thus acids alter pockets the amino molecules polymorphisms Many

Fig. one by conversion gene create from 6.20 sequences new copying another. alleles MHC can to Gene time Multiple MHC genetic unknown genes by over derived MHC divergence. by generally were duplication (gray) of similar ancestral an structure gene of followed evolutionary between gene a from occur gene. a by part process similar of genes known as in to conversion, which be can these transferred Further gene one sequences can interchange two during to For the apposed this must happen, become genes meiosis. two buttoning like genes consequence misalignment paired of are wrong a can the in tandem—somewhat when many occur in buttonhole. the as arrayed This similar there of copies homologous the chromosomes of a process DNA original copied sequence chromosome the sometimes During is other, to and replacing sequence. one of recombination, crossing-over DNA from the the the amino way, a into changes be In can gene gene cause can acid several in simultaneous changes nucleotide at and all this once several inserted product. in the has conversion of many Because each of gene the close alleles. of times occurred MHC genes to MHC their similarity other the linkage, evolution and

population a expression genes The high the of classical gene ensures MHC in in as polymorphism whole. diversity the MHC single a can how two more However, than no locus. gene no polymorphic at alleles matter individual a gene express is, each Polygeny, genes MHC with a individual of different ensures molecules. related presence of several functions, that number produces the similar different combination the and of an large. polygeny MHC at within seen both produces polymorphism in the of The diversity molecules and individual population

Fig. clustered region. predominantly variation Allelic variability molecules specific in MHC within occurs the Moreover, in is allelic peptide-binding sites the within 6.21 amino-terminal MHC arising amino genetic lying Variability in variation or floor the the show acid the either that of on from inward peptide-plots sequences of polymorphism is domains, the that binding of groove, molecules to the groove restricted line positions walls. from the and class domains HLA-DR II domains (α1 shown. is amino-terminal the alleles the the molecule, variability of I MHC the MHC α2 For of class molecules, β1 and HLA-DR, species, II other class For homologs the in and α1 and of molecules). MHC domains its groove. chain invariant are is essentially β and chain peptide-binding the the form that significant α domains only These the shows polymorphism.

pockets’ specificities. binding the MHC residues bind isoform. This to can anchor changes each peptides turn that the in of used variant and binding that The peptides MHC anchor (Fig. within motif, of of sequence this II a that set that isoform I allows residues can to predict called a molecule a protein is class to class an or might given be bind 6.22). we immunotherapy. we progress peptide Chapter will discuss important see predictions vaccines, in designing may recent 16, very be in where cancer in Such as

an protein by a rare binding to MHC molecules for generate any a with individual. of peptides of motif In the sequence suitable processing expressed does not any cases, individual to antigen. fails This to the respond and responsiveness defects. gene inbred antigens Such simple in response in first reported immune animals called (Ir) to were failures were MHC genes they structure molecules function defects MHC long and MHC the antigen-presenting clue understood, before molecules. the was function were first of to the of These mapped or within were to the inbred homozygous gene understand in the peptides common to because are all mice now at We strains cells. range limits gene can the mice of MHC that which of their loci, Ir present are defects they T MHC number Ordinarily, to even molecules make of simple of toxins. as unlikely, such small individual type sufficient antigens single MHC to in a guarantees relatively nonresponsiveness this a different polymorphism

a could mice antigen, defects genetic— antibody a Initially, linking one but not. of to whereas gene of the different make was in to otherwise MHC particular the only MHC MHC mice could identical, evidence genotype response genotype, Ir genetically controlling genotype the The somehow was ability MHC

Fig. molecule variants MHC an class Different allelic peptides. different of I bind 6.22 class bound I and (b) cutaway bound nucleoprotein Shown ovalbumin influenza H2-Kd peptide MHC (a) molecule (NP) to the are peptide molecule. H2-Kb to MHC views I mouse class of the surface of dotted as is molecules surface. the solvent-accessible blue MHC shown The a MHC are the I peptide-binding molecules conventionally have groove, typically which A–F. in pockets Class called six peptides, bound chains from to the pockets. as extending The fit the residues groove, peptide-binding models, side the shown into with anchor fill space-filling of and of SIINFEKL ovalbumin, is residues binding influenza nine peptide is TYQRTRALV, acid binding H2-Kd (NP). (P1–8) code), residues from from (single-letter amino H2-Kb (P1–9) a a the nucleoprotein eight peptide yellow) Anchor influence in in residues secondary may their be primary or binding. on (shown peptide pocket (L), [a the valine hydrophobic chain the anchors, chain and the F non-aromatic side H2-Kb, by two a P8; the determined For methionine the (M), pocket C [a or primary residue binds (V)]. of and side P5 P8 or P5 (F)], leucine motif (I), binds phenylalanine tyrosine is the sequence from isoleucine peptide (Y) H-2Kb. P2, binds pocket B secondary a residue The in anchor sequence is two H2-Kd, primary motif anchors, by P2 the primarily and the P9. For determined side accommodates chain. pocket tyrosine B The a F valine. isoleucine, pocket leucine, The or binds peptides molecule. are to known the are structures the to shown MHC bind Beneath sequence that from motifs P. 1; LCMV, P. VSV, antigen; CSP, Plasmodium Janus-associated virus. choriomeningitis hepatitis extracellular NS2, Plasmodium antigen; HBV, JAK1, yoelii; yoelii, 4; kinase modified berghei; virus; kinase berghei, ERK4, tumor-cell lymphocytic B virus; circumsporozoite NS2 protein; vesicular P198, signal-related stomatitis at of found http://www. collection An extensive can be motifs syfpeithi.de. courtesy Structures of V.E. Fremont. and Mitaksov D.

involved. of was not the molecules MHC time it direct to at clear the of respond or but immune recognition specific detect that system to was antigens,

the specificity was T-cell showed recognition antigen Later molecules. experiments of that by MHC controlled known experiments led genes ascertain responses. by The to Ir on in responses series to to cells, the how this and a polymorphism mice T-cell T depend affected were of MHC immune control might originated. activated in shared or B The with that which the MHC experiments cells T cells showed be earliest these alleles could macrophages of that only cells mouse the by T know now specific recognition first evidence that of antigen-presenting cells cell—the phenomenon T by the This antigen restriction. on depends was the MHC MHC the as we molecules presence in

Fig. is MHC-restricted. of T-cell recognition 6.23 antigens complex antigenic molecule. a receptor antigen-specific an T-cell of consisting self peptide The MHC and a (TCR) recognizes allele, or peptide that of x One usually (left recognize (center bound MHCa MHCb for peptide the specific will a complex product, different panel). peptide, product of particular to is a of not a MHC x this y, MHC peptide an bound T is MHC (right the panel), molecule and cell to panel), consequence different allele MHCa complex a the that of molecule an foreign of ability MHC to is product The the because T restrict allele peptide restriction as to particular the recognize said MHC known is and co-recognition the MHC cell of antigen. a result conformation. peptides indirect be or of bind MHC effect the on bound direct the molecule between MHC from an that This T-cell may contact polymorphism restriction either receptor on their and or

the MHC 4-17 We peptide:MHC in the the first T-cell Section receptor complexes. crystal structure context bound to of mentioned of restriction in of much out the T Nobel and was by Prize But Rolf phenomenon they the which Zinkernagel, studies received the in virus-specific 1996. restriction Peter MHC discovered earlier by and cytotoxic carried is illustrated for cells Doherty of generate they cells infected cytotoxic When while unrelated that virus-infected virus, both uninfected viruses. the a kill with cells cells infected with and are T mice cells sparing The cells thus cytotoxic are virus-specific. T The cells affected to MHC the experiments of outcome was cells T also of by kill virus-infected these demonstration the and ability polymorphism additional of that cytotoxic the molecules. was striking that T (MHCa) with viral a of mice Cytotoxic MHCa infected infection induced kill virus. MHC in any genotype by would cells cell cells b, and But they on, virus. even the so T kill would MHC these same infected same c, were genotype if of or not with cells same if cells infected words, cells cytotoxic MHC T only In primed. kill the T virus cells express the were cells by other by which those Because specificity MHC effect the MHC the cells, antigen restriction. T the this was of called genotype ‘restricts’ showed that cells. cells Together work feature of is with macrophages, earlier and on recognition a antigen critical functional restriction T all the of MHC this by B classes studies both

specificity We is not 4-17. antigen MHC peptide the for now that discussed complex for an know as molecule, due alone is to of binding of its individual but peptide that receptor fact Section the in T-cell restriction and the MHC is in molecules that part fact MHC different bind peptides. MHC by restriction the explained different peptide:MHC of directly MHC receptor Figs. have side groove complex some amino oriented α located but the in acids the chains flank can of polymorphic that surface the in T-cell the peptide-binding helices In are the exposed contact the that addition, toward molecules (see 6.21 4.24). and is MHCa that same In surprising T it a and peptide distinguish cells peptide to can not MHCb. retrospect, therefore the bound bound to between be conformation in direct by imposed MHC acids recognition bound the peptide sometimes molecules by itself. polymorphic the This of of restricted the MHC caused in molecule both recognition by may different the and differences amino the T-cell is the it bound (Fig. a to Thus, both defined by receptor MHC peptide by the recognizes it of molecule and specificity 6.23).

recognizing abundant. Alloreactive molecules 6-13 are T very cells MHC nonself

recognition tissues to restriction and the of of discovery transplanted MHC the MHC otherwise of species. organs also in same the members of helped rejection nonself explain of phenomenon The puzzling between organs or Transplanted presence in bearing the nonself, allogeneic, little any T MHC react as owing molecules. from recipient—even differ that acid—are the large numbers of MHC of that molecules to one donors as those amino by individual rapidly from of to cells rejected the from reaction, used mixed second Early a lymphocyte to are which one MHC T in mixed molecules lymphocytes allogeneic cells responses T-cell individual from studies on individual. with other this cells and MHC as the will molecules T the recognize individual’s proliferate. ‘foreign,’ of T cells If the individual divide the individual T stimulation same that the dividing to from are by another, by of roughly C. unrelated, prevented or irradiation respond studies shown have second member from cytostatic with from lymphocytes The mitomycin usually treatment an cells 1–10% in of all drug Such cells will species. individual the alloreaction represents type alloreactivity, the it an of is polymorphisms because recognition This response molecules. or allelic MHC in called T-cell of

tissue recognize the a system understood, was so should should there the molecules, was T many a Before MHC of antigen presentation why MHC molecules as immune role the nonself transplants. is mystery defense cells it that reason evolved no have against in alloreactivity explain. combination realized in receptors T-cell was polymorphic to became that it MHC easier peptides have with foreign Once to recognize evolved molecules, the of least alloreactive contribute can cells. that frequency high now T to at two know We of processes is the positive selection. The of process first self cells developing so with receptors the whose When and interact representation receive survival favored peripheral the molecules repertoire. in in MHC the for signals, T-cell thymus, T weakly are that molecule are MHC is interact T-cell MHC that It cross-react more with other one receptors to type (nonself ) with of variants. thought likely in We discuss detail selection 8. in greater positive Chapter

basis is positive selection not for alloreactivity. But the only which in driven alloreactivity. I lacking occur, animals artificially conclusion cannot MHC cells in observations selection thymus positive to by T the frequent mature This was implied that still display in class II, class and encode the to It recognize genes appears receptor T-cell that molecules. inherent MHC ability MHC receptors basis binding of bound X-ray for to molecules a provide structural studies (Fig. inherent crystallographic an interaction T-cell 6.24). MHC of genes acid features affinity. interact germline-encoded implying with certain conserved molecule, germlineencoded residues Specific amino within of a type TCRβ the the of region the T-cell receptor molecules idiosyncratic T-cell receptors, its regions large way each may number regions. bind and Given in in variable own germline-encoded of sequences using MHC both variable-region

reactivity peptide-independent been called either and recognizing a antigen principle, it for against allorecognition. options depend their to In peptide have nonself nonself is T which or cells these MHC the MHC; might peptide-dependent molecule on alloreactive bound foreign individual peptide that individual foreign is, only respond T-cell it as clones the clones most that both; alloreactive when is number recognize But particular to cells MHC a seems alloreactive alloreactive of most T molecule actually T-cell it. increased, to studied bound a has quite both In with and may peptide basis molecule sense, structural dependent of recognition (see this MHC on MHC-restricted peptide to normal the Fig. contacts and similar be be allorecognition foreign but a left case panel), this molecule. in MHC 6.23, a transplanted against organ likely the practice, alloreactive responses to In are combined represent

Fig. 6.24 genes and in of V-region an CDR2 for residues affinity Germline-encoded on T-cell receptors MHC molecules. CDR1 inherent confer the to is T-cell class II for bound molecule. a several receptors structure MHC Shown within located nonpolymorphic and extended the the CDR2 gene, network regions in residues and residues (Asn31) (Glu56, Tyr50) make Gln61) 8.2 respectively. the of an CDR1 with of (Lys39, α1 hydrogen-bonded Gln57, MHC germline-encoded the and Vβ helix (green) Conserved receptor T-cell different contacts affinity and CDR2 germline CDR1 is MHC. of very similar bias of for structures, the configuration an confers The these implying for sequence that the inherent between of Courtesy K.C. Garcia.

might to donor and by peptides determine the many alloreactive recognition involved of cells. what cells, T it not is the be from possible activity T in alloreactive in more return discuss we when in transplantation to organ will Chapter We detail 15. alloreactivity

6-14 to superantigens. respond T Many cells

molecules. stimulate allogeneic are similar primary antigens distinct to a of class that T-cell in MHC to response response magnitude Superantigens a a first distinct. that lymphocytes were responses Such genetically in mixed strains mice of but reactions MHC-identical from lymphocyte observed otherwise were using this to themselves. reaction to suppose be seemed minor designated were stimulating and the functionally as originally that similar antigens, they lymphocyte molecules provoking (Mls) The antigens reasonable might it MHC that now We this not is know true. tumor retroviruses, mouse stably virus, various such the sites become the in as are at chromosomes. mammary mouse antigens encoded that integrated by in have these mouse Mls The strains pathogen and including to the they pathogens, host. provoke the responses produced helpful and bacteria, rather mycoplasmas, the are are many than viruses, different Superantigens by

as mode of stimulate proteins them MHC distinctive Mls because binding superantigens to have to T-cell molecules they receptor large T a very of act and enables cells. that both numbers protein by other they Superantigens peptides cells are molecules. captured being into that that without in processed are antigens, are recognized unlike T MHC by of the outside that which biological bound destroys on an already an MHC a depends II class surface protein binding has molecule as superantigen of Indeed, peptide. fragmentation to intact activity, its class the II (Fig. of T-cell addition are molecules, MHC receptors superantigens region to able bind to binding In Vβ many 6.25). superantigens hypervariable loop, loop to and loop called additional extent, HV4 CDR1 the Bacterial an 4 to or Vβ and, Vβ smaller loop. to mainly bind the a the CDR2 the binding site for antigens by least viruses. the endogenous The the at superantigens, Mls loop encoded tumor viral predominant mouse for HV4 is mammary

Fig. T-cell molecules. directly and 6.25 bind receptors Superantigens MHC to to

molecules class T-cell to and MHC bind independently can Superantigens II receptors. to bind of outside molecule, bars) (red shown top complementarity-determining of the the in (TCR), Vβ to As to faces the the MHC peptide-binding II can site. regions, panels, and class the receptor the T-cell superantigens away the the domain from outer of of MHC is panel, enterotoxin separate the a a the receptor, bottom (SE) complex. a staphylococcal T-cell enterotoxin:T-cell II superantigen II enterotoxin:MHC onto an and reconstruction between complex class receptor an by shown an In superimposing interaction class structures molecule, for The the shown and SEC3 turquoise molecule the the and blue, enterotoxin T-cell and chain in are the of to the Cβ α and (colored (actually (yellow) MHC SEB) molecules domain). the receptor β binding domain Vβ II gray chain pink class to two of for of courtesy model Molecular

Li, H.M. B.A. R.A. Fields, Mariuzza. and

and by largely the expressed region germline-encoded determined T-cell the gene the chain. Vβ segments superantigen recognition, CDR3 chain V which that have effect is the the the on receptor encode V little of of β Thus, α-chain for cells. 2–20% are mice and superantigen specific 20–50 gene which in a there Each one can stimulate is of few of a or different the of thus Vβ all humans; T superantigen products,

does of This the not for an specific prime pathogen. stimulation adaptive response immune mode by Instead, responding massive T population causes predominant cells, T it CD4 a of cytokines the production of cells. immune the effects toxicity of host: response. These suppression on two cytokines have and adaptive the systemic to contribute Both effects pathogenicity. these microbial bacterium. bacterial syndrome and food toxic by (TSST-1) caused of principle which etiologic infection toxin-producing the shock the poisoning, Among enterotoxins are staphylococcal be the in with the aureus, syndrome, strains cause of the which toxin-1 toxic Staphylococcus a (SEs), shock can localized superantigens role of clear. superantigens viral The disease less human is in

the can of antigens range the to system respond. polymorphism 6-15 extends MHC immune which

by the other MHC proteins vary to variants from one polymorphic genes differ each by whereas or encode a acids, of proteins that amino only Most acids. allelic up 20 amino few the of The evolved MHC proteins the of to almost certainly has outflank extensive polymorphism evasive pathogens. strategies ways two to pathogens which evade MHC an must by detection. could that evolve possible pathogen in The antigens molecule provides requirement be presented proteins is molecules. eliminate pathogen’s One peptides bind MHC able mutations through that the to from all an Epstein–Barr provides virus example. The in southeast which in New people Papua 60% isolated HLA-A11 Guinea populations There are about the of carry China allele. small the and in HLA-A11-restricted these dominant to and HLA-A11 by from be cells. have a T the normally of peptide Epstein–Barr no cannot presented mutant obtained by peptides mutations the Many virus bind epitope recognized longer HLA-A11; populations isolates may there molecules, less have of This is are different the response. if MHC evolved much clearly and successful strategy the polygeny in many MHC

addition, heterozygotes. individuals populations, potentially outbred different can at be in by most as the individual, polymorphism each molecules In an will large of double MHC expressed locus number individuals therefore that will in each they peptides from different differ combinations of Polymorphism a the MHC express additional molecules will of that in population present the has pathogen. advantage and sets susceptible will a population individuals makes that therefore This it be a will limited. its all and equally in spread unlikely be pathogen, given to an to MHC lethal form strong allele malaria. the with can that is recovery HLA-B53 evolutionary association over a alleles of The select fact timescale particular potentially exposure by of indicated from pathogens for the malaria very allele common malaria elsewhere, is This Africa, West people rare from where uncommon. endemic, in where is and lethal is

Similar second could evade apply by recognition. a pathogens arguments to which strategy adaptive can avoid peptides of block the can presentation response. by that MHC Pathogens molecules their immune the CD8 the T and thus that peptides a Adenoviruses the class cytotoxic protein surface, the endoplasmic cells. reticulum to by binds encode MHC I of in preventing recognition to transport cell viral prevents their molecules MHC not. in with others are molecule, This adenoviral I a allelic whereas class variants the of protein reticulum MHC-binding viral by interacts endoplasmic protein, the polymorphic the are as region retained some variety an pathogen all immune of by likelihood be Increasing reduces the able response. will block expressed them a presentation and that of MHC the molecules evade completely to

question: MHC I not arguments a raise better why class far These than loci are if three one, there more? having is having can removed to molecule each respond maintain to a The repertoire, probable peptides MHC that time that must MHC tolerance. explanation is bound that molecule added distinct cells to is be the self all self T to about the repertoire. range humans the present to losing optimal the an in balance genes of disadvantages MHC number advantages foreign that It from of seems presenting mice the with is of cells and T peptides increased of

Summary.

of genetic and proteins many MHC linked the to consists MHC cells, complex receptor. of loci class that (MHC) of of The presentation II histocompatibility set notably the (the antigen present encoding I molecules) major peptides in glycoproteins involved the a genes T to most T-cell class feature the polymorphism. The molecules outstanding their is of MHC extensive cells. importance critical by polymorphism in recognition antigen T of is This and to peptide by T molecules. MHC same as variant not a a MHC other recognizes peptide an recognize will of A antigen molecule, bound cell bound allelic particular the behavior MHC T is called cells of This restriction. and T-cell regions contact on direct Most and make MHC with are focused that from the receptor. differences acid multiple substitutions, another the differ surface-exposed these alleles peptide-binding one the site by amino conformation MHC three bound least with properties the are MHC interaction polymorphism: affected the and by molecules the T-cell of direct range molecule receptor. At bound; of the peptide; the peptides of the of MHC response. of selection consequences, and MHC that the immune functional has polymorphic of the the suggests in Thus, polymorphism to it this the is for role critical highly nature the the evolutionary MHC molecules is compelling wide of a agents. molecules Powerful in alleles, that pressure variety and the generate the be maintain MHC population that infectious comes variation can seen among from MHC mechanisms made genetic to selective a argument a antigen. individualized—each highly responds immune differently a system As the given is consequence, individual to

T-cell Generation for subsets. ligands unconventional of

peptide:MHC on far how cells—are we for So focused complexes—the generated. have α:β T ligands recognize We of their the how these to now cells other types ligands are turn T of ligands and how generated. question cells, suggests apparent an of ligands is the this Our γ:δT and area area knowledge pattern γ:δ recognition. of individual innate-like perhaps incomplete, in a T list for growing still of most is in where current cells (see long-standing associated when the this microbial metabolite discovery subset. it Section by T of regarding class the I-like presented (MAIT) is solved cells a invariant molecule 4-18) nonpolymorphic MHC recognize a that The T-cell a mystery function particular recent mucosal subset, responding provides to lipid system antigens. cells, invariant a Another peptide than detecting rather for NKT the and invariant between cells that These immunity. adaptive somewhere findings invariant these and unconventional innate T operate and suggest ligands they expressed. and chapter, the the or what are generated part In discuss about of we recognize how they this is will known

immunity of are in in functions also encoded genes variety A MHC. 6-16 specialized the with

class ‘classical’ MHC encoded In ‘nonclassical’ highly genes, and are many II in genes, MHC there many class the region. addition polymorphic encoded the to others outside this MHC but I comparatively I-type molecules little function. many these assigned of show polymorphism; be a have MHC yet to The class number same MHC, are I exact linked even class among region to the the members species. of varies the their and among of and species greatly They expressed all, class cell but like surface. many, with β2-microglobulin Ib class on genes, These when MHC termed I not have been genes; the MHC genes associate in on Their and the surface cell amount is in at both present distribution. expression tissue cells variable, the characteristics products in several The shown of MHC gene Ib class Fig. are 6.26.

all initiate protein which termini, class with interest N-formylated is synthesis Ib of bacteria H2-M3, present peptides can mouse MHC with N-formylmethionine. molecule, amino because One infected bacteria H2-M3. bound with killed to N-formylated that T be by bacterial can cytosolic recognize cells Cells CD8 peptides equivalent known. an Ib not molecule humans Whether class MHC exists in is

subset T10, are related by lymphocytes Ib MHC other class are and T22 mouse recognized by γ:δT and expressed Two of activated genes, cells. closely a T and precise T10 regulate has these interaction T22 to lymphocytes remains been that expressing allows proposed this it the cells γ:δ unclear, purpose Although proteins. activated

example, C2, tumor the factor factor-α components have that functions other that C4, include map in that MHC (for cytokines—for and necrosis encode complement and and (TNF-α) all The immunity. example, B) lymphotoxin— encode which within some some of important genes (see lie genes so-called These ‘MHC class Fig. the in III’ region misleading region molecules at a genes MHC since 6.17), name, this all. not in somewhat are

alleles or how can class affect and genes Chapter and class the Many certain have have susceptibility. established I associations insight studies between in particular into MHC to classical disease (see MHC diseases genes now 15), polymorphism we and of considerable susceptibility II resistance or or all to this residing but function. have suspected MHC-influenced is immunological Most known within them: cause, suspected so for not the have MHC immunological diseases an traits genes or no are of known some vomeronasal in M10 For pheromone chaperone to surface. encodes a example, a Ib that the class gene organ the receptors of protein types as certain the to functions cell escort mating M10 that rodents. been preference, region potentially trait has in could the influence a MHC to linked

pairs million gene, HFE protein, 4 lies the HLA-A. some base hemochromatosis from encoding The expressed in Section protein Its the (see of product intestinal text cells 3-24). is the and cells a to to in receptors NK-cell presenting molecule of KIR peptides NK-cell in with interact here the T-cell is isoforms addition HLA-C function innate immune to included because, class which all Ia), MHC regulate is (class response. HLA-C, receptors, the classical CTL, lymphocyte. T cytotoxic

of into in metabolism uptake body. acts dietary iron regulating tract the and iron the by affinity and seems to for It interact receptor’s decrease iron-loaded the the transferrin with transferrin. receptor is and defective hemochromatosis, retained other in this hereditary iron have an iron-storage for level which in of disease, liver abnormally organs. gene an Individuals high the show overload. thus all molecules of defective a expression iron Mice also similar and class lacking I β2-microglobulin have which, MHC cases, Another and, enzyme when congenital adrenal encodes hyperplasia in with nonimmune salt-wasting severe gene syndrome. a causes the function 21-hydroxylase, deficient, is Even as the genes, a clearly may gene immune-related. disease disease-related homologous mechanism be with HFE, where is not to the case immune-system associations to the Disease its must of of be therefore its with of in genetic detailed MHC mapping the structure individual light and interpreted functions the caution, genes. understanding a be significance MHC. remains variation genetic the of the about learned within Much the all to localized and of genomes, products versions, not different variable instance, complement component convertase C4B, of well C4 the confused with genetic C4A the the not comes C4a gene to adaptive and two understood. this in variability significance each C4 human and for cleavage individuals C4b, numbers have type the but be For in their is

inhibition ligands as and cells unconventional act activation MHC NK of Specialized for molecules I 6-17 class and the

T-cell subsets.

members 3-24 In by cells MIC discussed gene NK family. to 3-27, and the activation Sections we their briefly of introduced Ib a in cellular are I stress induced These regulatory heat genes and different MHC class genes class the than (such control under are are MHC to as shock). that response classical only Fig. genes, but MICB—are products and There protein (see seven are and expressed MIC produce two—MICA 6.26). in and induction produced. in responses in are role the cells, particularly cells, which epithelial immunity fibroblasts or innate not They and in of expressed circumstances immune interferons in epithelial intestinal a in are have recognized MICB MICA the are cells. and by The by proteins receptor NKG2D expressed NK CD8 cells kill and to and is cells, expressed activate T can by But NKG2D it in MIC-expressing cells some also these γ:δ T targets. addition, an of NK-cell (see is of the family NKG2D receptors ‘activating’ member NKG2 Fig. found as Section the in cytoplasmic domain other family, 3.42); motif members this receptors which of 3-26). inhibitory its lacks (see act sequence inhibitory into NKG2D protein activating with cell 3-kinase. the phosphatidylinositol which of signal adaptor and to the intracellular by coupled interior the transmits is DAP10, the interacting

distantly (ULBPs) or related a (see known MHC small as RAET1 the Even the proteins is I genes proteins proteins in UL16-binding family Fig. class of humans more to (retinoic proteins early as and in acid inducible known mice H60. homologous Rae1 6.26); 1) are the 3-27). These Section also proteins NKG2D (see bind human expressed is cells cytomegalovirus cellular cells. conditions are under of or protein) stress, as transformation when such infected to a tumor be seem to have pathogens (UL16 They undergone with cytotoxic expressed γ:δ T T NKG2D By expressing cells, NK on can and and cells be cells, CD8 so bind recognized α:β ULBPs, infected eliminated. activate or and stressed cells, and molecules

counterpart HLA-E human Ib Qa-1 Fig. and The its (see mouse MHC molecule class cells. unusual T role cell cells 6.26) CD8 NK and by and in an have recognition somewhat puzzling called of I the are peptides, from Qa-1 Qa-1 HLA-E modifiers class determinant and HLA other bind peptides subset restricted (Qdm), a leader of very nonpolymorphic derived that molecules. These NK cytotoxic cells. to the of receptor can and activity bind peptide:HLA-E should on cells, complexes so the NKG2A:CD94 expressed inhibitory inhibit NK activation I Section MHC class function redundant, by of This molecules NK-cell cells since should 3-25). seem (see prevent expression might other Qa-1 it from protection expression has may with by CD4 and shown NK Nonetheless, expression T by killed other protects by activated NK additional cells cells from them them provide Qa-1 cells. by being that host lysis cells so been protein HLA-E identified T and have shock from in Qa-1 can specific mice and the Hsp60sp, bind been also and CD8 humans. for heat cells are peptides that complexes these leader self-tolerance evidence suppressing Some may T recent autoreactive suggests restricted killing potentially by or maintain HLA-E/Qa-1 CD8 T cells cells. that by help

expressed cell immunoglobulin-like Section the we (KIRs) In cells. killer 3-26, receptors by introduced NK a molecules Ia the of to and which HLA-A, T the -C, cells. Members classical class -B, MHC diverse peptides KIRs CD8 repertoire present of recognize whole molecule the receptors, MHC the T-cell of over one with I same bind face do KIRs as class end, area receptor. recognized not the the KIRs and by only Although T-cell at the interact polymorphic, themselves Like rapid in undergone highly and are MHC they evolution KIRs have molecules, humans. indicating a of a that for proteins HLA-C for KIRs, all bind regulating few alleles specialization alleles proteins bind cells HLA-B and NK humans. code KIRs, HLA-C but that Only express in HLA-A

Ib (see class and other Fig. HLA-G HLA-F Two molecules, MHC inhibit also cell can 6.26), by NK killing cells. migrate on wall. expressed cells the uterine HLA-G fetus-derived that into placental is class These are lacking be by NK by other killed not proteins, classical molecules recognized cells but, they and cells I unlike cannot cells. MHC express such CD8 T no cells because immunoglobulin-like NK to member be cells, B cell HLA-G recognized This LIR-1, which seems the leukocyte is the subfamily from receptor receptor NK placental also or the (LILRB1), by cells. called inhibitory 1 on killing prevents ILT-2 another example, the in except, although it cell cells. of surface some not expressed HLA-F detected monocyte or at is lymphoid lines variety for virus-transformed on on tissues, a cell is usually also HLA-F thought to interact with is LILRB1.

to of of cells. lipids family class I-like CD1 invariant 6-18 MHC the present Members microbial NKT molecules

MHC map the genes MHC region. Some outside class I-like on small and expressed such genes family thymocytes. is One of monocytes, dendritic called CD1 cells, some and is and only CD1a five CD1 through CD1d2. Humans CD1d1 express mice highly have whereas genes, of two e, homologous CD1d, namely, versions distinguish classical two features I proteins molecules. CD1 class present but can cells, to from T they that antigens have MHC them CD1, MHC The similar and its class MHC an organization molecule subunit β2-microglobulin, although to behaves first molecule. class association like with in II is an I that ligand. the the endoplasmic targeted it It but by is TAP within where association binds complex vesicles, not retained with to is reticulum its is a feature that, unusual have The I, class second chains. alkyl hydrocarbon is unlike binding molecules for hydrophobic specialized channel that MHC CD1 and of to This ability confers variety present CD1 glycolipids. molecules an bind on a

only group considered are intermediate. CD1e 2, group classified CD1 containing into molecules CD1a, CD1d; CD1c, comprising and 1, CD1b, and is such membrane glucose mycobacterial mannosides, glycolipids, phospholipids, and molecules bind acid, the Group and components 1 lipoarabinomannan monomycolate, mycolic various phosphoinositol lipopeptide antigens, (Fig. microbial as 6.27). to molecules thought CD1 2 bind mainly self are Group

Fig. cells. CD1c binds 6.27 presentation for iNKT lipids to microbial avium the mannosyl-β1-phosphomycoketides (MPMs) = Mycobacterium panel: and of C5H11). structure (R C7H15) from of = M. (Mtb) Top cell the tuberculosis walls (R facing CD1c. viewed cell as (purple) CD1c MPM Middle from the (stick surface of panel: to the the figure) bound top, bearing panel: view side to CD1c. bound of Bottom MPM general with resemblance complexes apparent. is The peptide:MHC groove helical α1 the of to long the CD1c, domain. beneath of into Note: chain deep acyl extends MPM binding the Courtesy E. of Adams.

antigens sphingolipids such as diacylglycerols. lipid and (Fig. CD1 groove that show deep bind into has which binding the the antigens studies a Structural glycolipid molecule 6.28). peptide their binding groove, CD1-restricted in molecules) Unlike in a protrude T-cell alkyl of by the MHC, T molecules headgroups the that of linear, variable groove, antigens chains peptide on by from hydrophobic the recognition carbohydrate so of CD1 parts to the which allowing binding extended takes hydrophilic the the receptors which the they anchoring these (or the orients bind end cells. other on conformation,

CD4. although some for cells CD4 T lipids that molecules largely and CD1 The recognize negative express presented expression, by CD8 are and recognizing by lipids to respond lipids have group of CD1 CD1c. receptors, Most T the α:β 1 CD1a, presented and of presented molecules cells CD1b, by a these repertoire diverse also the diverse, cells T CD1d-restricted they receptors. TCRα using chain express same NK-cell are less many In contrast, humans), in (Vα24–Jα18 but These invariant called are T (iNKT) NKT cells CD1-restricted cells.

of One recognized for was marine CD1d α-galactoceramide molecules an extract from is sponge. ligand (α-GalCer), isolated which human glycosphingolipids present Bacteroides Related the is normal produced various including bacteria, fragilis, in are which microbiota. by by α-galactoceramide structure forms When recognized cells. is CD1d, to bound is iNKT that it a many despite of an category, by ability constituents receptor, their a from them iNKT CD1d them ‘innate’ in glycolipid places to makes The T-cell cells microorganisms relatively molecules limited fully its presented of ‘adaptive.’ while different rearranged repertoire, possession recognize

able to separate T CD1 lipids glycolipids evolved a proteins of have microbial to lineage present molecules cells. as and antigen-presenting locations, endocytic cellular classical are at this compartments; as transported through endoplasmic antigens. different CD1 to proteins and various reticulum peptides Just loaded proteins provides onto differently are MHC the lipid various access the domain interaction (AP) adaptor-protein the terminus sequence the at regulated is an with CD1 motif cytoplasmic Transport acid of amino through protein complexes. the by of compartment. motif is only this the it and transported where to endocytic surface, moves CD1a through early the lacks binding cell with endosomes; CD1d interact early have and that AP-2 late to lysosomes. transported is are and and through targeted CD1c adaptor motifs also CD1d the and CD1b AP-3 AP-2 and through bind CD1d and endosomes, and be transported MIIC. late mouse the can lysosomes, by of thus of and mediated internalization pathway, by CD1 the lipids within or the processed ingestion can mannose such mycobacterial as proteins lipoarabinomannans receptors. delivered bind the mycobacteria into endocytic

to the genes evolved vertebrates. and early, to that from before in of From line, cartilaginous the is fishes interesting it all homologs evolutionary an the divergence vertebrate have seem have perspective Ib some are likely class example, mammals). within vertebrate have nonclassical genes into fishes, class and the Other lobe-finned lineages independently (for that and fishes, evolved I amphibians, fishes, studied have cartilaginous loci ray-finned classical been jawed and MHC-I virtually the and revealed data all including birds. gene have Sequence of in fishes, also MHC-II bony families vertebrates sharks, mammalian homologs reptiles, contrast, as genes as be CD1 old not may In

Lymphocytes 6: Presentation Chapter to T Antigen

Fig. lipid antigen. to Structure a of CD1 binding 6.28 CD1d synthetic that side top the C8PhF, of mouse is of to views a analog α-GalCer. an are structure Shown lipid of bound and binding the II chains The molecules. to helical of (blue) CD1d shape generally that binding and pockets form a MHC pocket in similar class side is of I CD1 from distinctly to different the a conformation (red) in binds C8PhF However, ligand peptides. that molecules of The make where they two side deep inside groove view), contacts chains hydrophobic with binding the side long alkyl residues. (see extend by α-GalCer the to component chains the be This outer T-cell side carbohydrate surface the places where recognized can orientation of the of alkyl CD1, receptor. of it CD1 binds large an from derived adjacent In within collapsing. a distinct cellular groove lipid region region pocket the a (yellow) to contains to the addition, molecule from prevents that endogenous and the sources molecule α-GalCer-binding additional glycosphingolipids a the microorganisms. ligands into accommodating may groove binding provide exogenous of in ability flexibility from to to incorporate CD1d The variety I.A. of Courtesy Wilson.

other class genes. MHC Ib and missing only animal in of fish. groups these have in been found subset to be appear a They species of an of living the terrestrial vertebrate. This of CD1 emergence CD1 early pattern the genomes in suggests occurrence in

MHC nonclassical I to MAIT metabolites 6-19 MR1 The molecule presents folate cells. class microbial

Another is class MHC MR1 (MHC-related 1). molecule Ib nonclassical protein a relation to cells T conserved known is T as associates cells associated with population outside (MAIT the encoded β2-microglobulin cells). in function originally mucosal MR1 known MHC, invariant only and α:β of was but its we In population but an the T-cell receptor, Vα7.2J2–Jα33 cells as introduced (or 4-18, T uniquely of Vα19) Section invariant MAIT specifically of . are chain α characterized in one expressing by human cells the mouse, homodimer, expressing they CD8α with Vβ chain or Vβ13. α number of pairs typically chains, a This Vβ2 limited lymphocytes and of peripheral can such very tissues MAIT 10% humans the up the are in comprise as and in cells to abundant the liver. blood also lymph the intestine. present and mesenteric They in of mucosa nodes the are development the MR1, cells. of of further, a microbes, activate wide including spectrum and and requires that Studies expression diverse revealed that yeast, bacteria MAIT can their MAIT cells of was unclear when if were any, recognized identified they what, being However, these decade around cells. is it originally ligand a ago, by

of studies uncovered clue. an Structural MR1 important typical was unstable vitro The conditions. MR1 grown in culture produced in cell when lines tissue by protein (vitamin media It containing was discovered vitamins acid folic stabilized B or B9). it was when was protein in the that refolded folate a as (6-FP)—was pterin molecule—identified a analysis stabilized derivative, revealed that the bound MR1. Chemical to small 6-formyl the studies explain might folate X-ray MR1. the showed groove how bound was 6-FP stabilize molecule; of helped in MR1 this derivatives that central crystallographic complex, by to be suggesting cells. activate the not cells physiological 6-FP:MR1 activated molecules the expressing other However, cells might MAIT ligands were MAIT of proteins in eventually MR1 of metabolites biosynthetic several bacteria supernatants from yeast. refolded that are by most Analysis the the formed to of and typhimurium pathways identification cultures riboflavin led of Salmonella in that were presence bind metabolites but MR1, These only also cells. MAIT activate not to by cells by specific response are to Thus, their infection these to products activated in folate metabolism. MAIT detecting organisms by use the that of innate such, receptor a to they the assembled recognize PAMP. immunity, cells MAIT gene that rearrangement, spectrum antigen of in falls an in within a and but place definition adaptive structure somatic intermediate iNKT an cells, appear As hold to molecular similar

γ:δ a recognize 6-20 diverse variety can T cells ligands. of

receptor lineages T genes been since distinct T the γ:δ developmental T-cell have be almost α:β and known were to identified. cells cells due primarily But the function ligands unlike somewhat the has to identifying recognize. cells, cells obscure, they remained difficulty of T γ:δ in α:βT the abundance γ:δ immunity. their cytokine T lymphocytes important and of abundant across infections, more 50% during production all species, cells of role blood their to vertebrate rapid form Yet in the argue expansion than an for (Fig. have identified ligands been many γ:δ clones recognized by T-cell time, Over different position hold iNKT and they in diversity their transitional, and spectrum intermediate, adaptive an immunity. like of cells, versus MAIT suggests or innate the that, 6.29),

one class we Section receptor γ:δ molecule T22. MHC non-classical the binds I how 4-20, discussed to T-cell In MHC molecule. binding groove, one side an interacts the the the centrally from T-cell obliquely γ:δ of similar over receptor, receptor T22 of to binding Instead α:β T-cell However, cells fewer 1% recognize T ligand. this than of γ:δ herpes the a cells of virus, and recognized (PE) from the from glycoprotein peptide are lipid protein cardiolipin, murine algae, hormone membrane inner simplex γ:δT antigens mitochondrial derived insulin. by phycoerythrin I Other the receptor MICA is cells. endothelial MHC proteins activate (EPCR), protein ULBP4 class Among nonclassical cells the which I that are the human antigens can and by γ:δ and endothelial expressed C T an in upon stress, that of nonclassical of cytomegalovirus, cells MHC during infection cells ULBPs, be γ:δ could such class cells NK activated by innate to as induced that T MICA Like suggesting by serve and EPCR Ib similar appears to capacity molecules. stress-induced reactive Several cells T activate other human can antigens Fig. (see γ:δ whether interaction there the limited reservations their and structural even is still about with receptor, T-cell always 6.29), about such interaction is although an information

activation. for Antigen Chapter to basis 6: T the Presentation Lymphocytes is immunoglobulin superfamily keratinocytes. by Skint-1 expressed member activating (selection that is cells an upkeep T epithelial thymic antigens Among intraepithelial 1), these and cells by and of Skint-1 ‘dendritic the required T for a become develop Vγ5:Vδ1 epidermal subset and cells’ seems thymus T to generation skin the of of to in home (DETCs). be the cells to that T-cell interaction direct available. Some Skint-1 yet evidence the and a structural studies between not γ:δ suggests although receptor, are to localize Skint-1 DETCs keratinocytes. receptor expressed recognition T-cell Conceivably, skin by due their by of the to are of infections. they through activated immune innate during triggered There, mode that provide ‘transitional’ might a becoming defense, receptors locally

Summary.

γ:δT of does nonconventional presentation not peptide:MHC Antigen cells the various T-cell generally complexes. subsets and to involve generation or stress, proteins, intracellular presented folate molecules. ULBPs Instead, antigens, these that infection, as CD1 such recognize metabolites cellular such and surface nonpeptide may or or as RAET-1 microbial by indicate cells proteins, transformation, glycolipids the so-called or structure is region whose MHC contains related The genes MHC non-classical, closely class I Ib, class molecules—the to many MHC. purposes are are but to involved cells. genes NK in expressed many recognition by serve and receptors T the unrelated cells, immune cells, and T α:β inhibitory system, γ:δ of Some that these by activating called MHC are Ib the encoded outside molecules MHC proteins class region. CD1 can iNKT CD1d for and antigens to cells lipids and expressing presentation CD1c glycolipid bind T-cell invariant receptors. suggesting abundant ‘transitional’ between cells presented in that population T-cell MAIT humans, MHC B9 the vitamin adaptive metabolites MAIT and by role are called have molecule, the innate MR1 The class recognize cells, Ib which a immunity. infection, pathways. cytokines γ:δ antigens able to activate that amplify defense be many generate Likewise, of immune indicators or are stress cells may cells that these T and

Chapter to 6. Summary

conventional T T-cell recognize α:β molecules. to receptors MHC on bound peptides cells tolerance provoke self normally do a molecules occupied various mechanisms. In are response, not T-cell peptides, because the infection, absence by of of MHC which recognized displayed infections, they become for molecules previously during activated can to that cells the and bound peptide:MHC specific be surface, have armed peptides the MHC are But on by been pathogen-derived cell and where complex. T cells. when cells encounter their on Naive activated T specific become activated antigen presented dendritic they bind in I from and cytosol. MHC the peptides cells then derived synthesized proteins degraded to that most been in molecules have class cells antigens class them present obtain process can I dendritic exogenous molecules. MHC Some on and and T important cells CD8 viral cross-presentation priming for many infections. to process This is of

with bind can invariant from acquire Through the II degraded endocytic proteins through autophagy. assembly but they self MHC (Ii), vesicles, antigens chain class molecules in peptides derived also HLA-DM and the endocytic Stable peptide editing process peptides are compartment HLA-DO. in a of after involving bound such to displaying peptides peptide:MHC pathogens, as viruses. from and I foreign recognize derived activated cells complexes T kill cytosolic class cells CD8 are to pathogens foreign to that macrophages, for cells immune B act taken recognize are the against or and example, activate or CD4 antigens II peptide:MHC cells, T cells up. class they specialized effector have complexes other

histocompatibility major each (MHC). there arranged known complex class several region within are genes MHC molecule, in For clusters a larger of the as involved complexes the the to transport peptide of into of molecules MHC Within genes are cell the degradation genes peptides, linked these of and the the molecule, complex in the proteins of for formation and closely to surface. the the MHC, MHC are and II class molecules. genes number different a different and Because I each expressed polymorphic class several and highly MHC individual are II of molecules I codominant class the for expresses the class fashion, in a MHC and of peptide different of Each bind MHC to repertoire range different thus can recognize molecule peptides, each can MHC antigens. many different the bind stably and a individual T peptide the cells T-cell Because bound show given a a peptide:MHC ligand, combined particular specific particular antigen molecule. T MHC for cell recognition, a such a MHC-restricted receptor is binds that to

and nonpeptide cells, various γ:δ cells, Unconventional of iNKT ligands T-cell which include recognize subsets MAIT types. cells, T Some molecules bind and lipids CD1 them and present cells. lipid iNKT to pathogen-derived molecules self specific cells that MR1. vitamin are recognize and are yeast and metabolites MAIT bacteria presented that to by of induced Ib by that MHC molecules cells T diverse cellular including are and are by class a γ:δ infection EPCR, stress. ligands, array or activated PAMPs recognized and by transitional T-cell rearrangement other between gene function but innate of recognizing manner in a fully These produced in the by somewhat innate and are relying TLRs to subsets area receptors ligands repertoire way similar on immunity, a adaptive the somatic receptors.

Questions.

antigens T I cells efficiently to from class these 6.1 Dendritic exogenous of and sources them on cells capable are Short MHC Answer: presenting molecules. acquiring why other from in and is every different this the How important? cell body it is

6.2 terms the following description: the appropriate Match with Matching:

a A. chamber the subunits to of Proteasome interferons i. as β the response catalytic Displace constitutive

B. 20S core ii. caps core of Composed and catalytic two 19S regulatory one

LMP7, C. LMP2, iii. in D. iv. complex cylindrical subunits four 28 MECL-1 of PA28 Large arranged stacked rings degradation protein Targets for

ubiquitin surface capacity and protein into the by of is MHC Binds release increases 6.3 v. class 48 the I rate peptides endoplasmic not False: E. proteasome the cell’s transport the affected reticulum. to or proteasome expression from True Lysine the

polypeptides I of are ________. the lumen reticulum, Cell MHC in are peptides the because intriguing membrane-destined is class 6.4 the the to translocated Fill-in-the-Blanks: which endoplasmic found presented the to research revealed presentation of is family mediate transporters, possible ABC of ______, transport the that peptides of peptides a _______. the into ATP-dependent of due Further that cytosolic lumen transporter favor residues. and This residues amino the amino-terminal Defective of against residues are example, in _______ the peptides ________ in peptides; for first Multiple has carboxy which of terminus function complex limited specificities transported transport in for 6.9 length and biased is the of generally _________ ________ the acids within Choice:

6.5 CD8 strongly of cells uniquely dendritic capable antigens. cross-presenting are Multiple Choice: marker expressed dendritic transcription a of development cell cells? uniquely surface Which by CD8 following matches factor and correctly a essential options these the for

Match with terms appropriate 6.6 B. BATF3, CD4 D. CIITA, CD94 Matching: CIITA, C. description: A. CD74 XCR1 the following the BATF3,

TRiC A. i. the partly in α I a molecule class chain MHC folded state Retains

B. ERAAP ii. Protects cytosol peptides in complete the degradation produced from

C. iii. Calnexin class I and a MHC the bridge the between molecule TAP Forms complex

ERp57 iv. D. that the amino terminus of MHC for long peptides are binding too Trims

in the Tapasin and peptide False: or molecules. 6.7 bonds II presented re-forms class v. I disulfide during MHC domain class Cytosolic Breaks through not loading α E. antigens MHC are True

____The in cleaved. following sequence cell: the an Order domain II in MHC antigen-presenting trimerization 6.8 which processing in events Matching: is the CD74 happens class

translocated into endoplasmic is reticulum. class ____MHC II the

MHC and S fragment LIP22 the on cleaves ____Cathepsin CLIP leaves the molecule.

II to ____CD74 non-covalently MHC heterodimers. α:β bind class trimers

editing. ____HLA-DM and of catalyzes CLIP the peptide release promotes released ____MHC endosomal transport class a from to for are II heterodimers low-pH compartment. calnexin

references. General

Germain, R.N. T presentation: lymphocyte processing antigen MHC-dependent peptide for and providing ligands : activation. Cell 1994, 76:287–299.

Complex. Histocompatibility J.: Natural Major History of Klein, the Wiley, 1986. New York:

Moller, G. (ed. of complex diversity. major ): Origin histocompatibility Immunol. Rev. 1995, 143:5–292.

vitro in processing E.S., vivo. Cell in of antigen I.: biology Trombetta, and Mellman, and Annu. Rev. Immunol. 23:975–1028. 2005,

result CD8 in proteins T-cell priming? failed will following

A. HLA-DM

decreased 6.10 the presentation result MHC will Defective D. B. CD74 in class which function Multiple cytosolic following TAP1/2 II? on peptide of C. of proteins Cathepsin Choice: S

interactions. C. peptide-specific MHC–TCR and an not response False: of B. independent 6.11 do IRGM3 D. Superantigens True are TAP1/2 MARCH-1 induce adaptive BATF3 or A. immune

statements 6.12 is Choice: the of false? following Multiple Which

by each locus at can potentially expressed molecules individual. double of number the different an MHC Polymorphisms A.

specific which results in mutating loss can system the MHC the affinity for by immunodominant the epitope, B. Pathogens of evade immune allele.

not confer select them. evolutionary C. do cause that alleles protection to MHC against Pathogens pressure

its monomorphic. Eα, mouse The D. DRα chain homolog, are and

I 6.13 which class Ib, to True polymorphic, opposed are highly are or MHC oligomorphic. MHC molecules Classical as False: class

following with MHC appropriate class Ib Matching: genes Match the 6.14 description: their

Section references.

their Antigen triggering attack pathogen-infected arming cells in T effector both and functions 6-1 cells. to effector presentation in functions

by P., presentation cells. stimulation S.: Théry, and Amigorena, and Valladeau, dendritic L., cell C., J., T Guermonprez, Zitvogel, Antigen Annu. Rev. Immunol. 20:621–667. 2002,

by S., antigen L.M., A.: Mizushima, Iwasaki, presentation N., B.E., Grinstein, in P., Lee, H.K., Steinberg, Mattei, and Y.H., A., dendritic Atg5 for Alberts, requirement cells. Lee, Chervonsky, In vivo 32:227–239. 2010, Immunity

Segura, J.A. Villadangos, and E., vivo. Antigen by : in presentation cells dendritic Curr. Opin. Immunol. 21:105–110. 2009,

and Ploegh, Veen, Vyas, Van J.M., H.L. A.G., der antigen presentation. processing The known and unknowns : of Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2008, 8:607–618.

by are from Peptides ubiquitinated in proteins cytosol 6-2 generated the proteasome. the

M., Basler, Kirk. processing Groettrup, antigen in other and C.J., M.: immunological immunoproteasome functions. The and Curr. Opin. Immunol. 25:74–80. 2013,

Hammerling, Momburg, P., Brocke, and Garbi, N., G.J. F., and : functional HLA-DM, tapasin: and similarities differences. HLA-DO Curr. Opin. Immunol. 14:22–29. 2002,

Walz, Cascio, A.L. and T., Petre, P., Call, Goldberg, M., B.M., form PA28 complexes. both of the proteasome containing Properties : and 26S of hybrid 19S the EMBO J. 21:2636–2645. 2002,

Antigen or pathways. M., presentation class by Gromme, molecules degradation and J.: and non-classical MHC via I classical Neefjes, Mol. Immunol. 39:181–202. 2002,

Rock, T., P., Saric, A.L., and Cascio, K.L. Goldberg, proteolytic generation the antigenic importance in The of the peptides. and proteasome : of subsequent steps Mol. Immunol. 39:147–164. 2002,

F., and major Cado, Champsaur, Shastri, repertoire The displayed histocompatibility N.: peptide by M., aminopeptidase Gonzalez, ERAAP I shapes D., molecules. complex G.E., Hammer, class the Nat. Immunol. 2006, 7:103–112.

class ERAAP, many unstable present Shastri, F., H., James, N.: the In of E., highly peptides. immunogenic and and molecules absence Nolla, aminopeptidase MHC Hammer, I G.E., Gonzalez, Nat. Immunol. 8:101–108. 2007,

proteasomes. by thymus-specific Murata, Hayashi, T of H., Takahama, T., S., S., K.: development Sasaki, cell CD8+ Niwa, and Kishimoto, Tanaka, Regulation K., Y., 316:1349–1353. Science 2007,

J.W., proteins and of U., newly J.R.: Norbury, synthesized degradation Schubert, fraction by L.C., C.C., Anton, proteasomes. Bennink, Yewdell, Rapid J., of Gibbs, large a 2000, 404:770–774. Nature

the Serwold, class endoplasmic J., F., R., T., I and peptides in Gonzalez, MHC customizes molecules N.: Jacob, for Kim, reticulum. Shastri, ERAAP Nature 419:480–483. 2002,

class I S., Shastri, for nature’s Schwab, by T.: of generation molecules. the Serwold, peptides N., MHC and Producing display gene-chips: Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2002, 20:463–493.

A., Y., Sijts, Kral, Paschen, A., antigen the in processing. S., Sun, proteasome MHC role Schadendorf, Janek, D., class K., I The P.M.: activator of and PA28 Kloetzel, Mol. Immunol. 2002, 39:165–169.

Bruggen, Morel, den N., Ooms, van der G., Chapiro, Degiovanni, V., P., B.J. T., A., J., Van Stroobant, Boon, Eynde, Vigneron, and S., proteasome. : splicing peptide antigenic the in peptide produced An by Science 2004, 304:587–590.

Villadangos, J.A. antigens II : out getting of MHC most of class the molecules: them. Presentation by Mol. Immunol. 38:329–346. 2001,

Williams, C.A., antigen presentation. and biology of Elliott, I class cell The A., Peh, T.: MHC 2002, Tissue 59:3–17. Antigens

I are the into to the before and reticulum class molecules. binding TAP processed Peptides by transported MHC 6-3 further from endoplasmic cytosol

and Gorbulev, of TAP. crosstalk and Abele, ABC transport, pep-tide-binding, S., ATP between the Tampe, Allosteric R.: transporter R., hydrolysis Proc. Acad. Natl Sci. 2001, USA 98:3732–3737.

Townsend, the A.: J., L.A., Trowsdale, transporter and Uchanska-Ziegler, S.H., in major encoded human Assembly A., function Elliott, two complex. J., Ziegler, A., histocompatibility proteins Powis, Kerr, the I., and ABC Mockridge, B., Kelly, Bastin, T., of 355:641–644. 1992, Nature

and processing: R.: function B., and human in associated transporter Lankat-Buttgereit, diseases. antigen The Tampe, implications with Physiol. Rev. 2002, 82:187–204.

J., line A.R., J.C.: Powis, antigen transporter. by cell of E.V., mutant G.W., an Restoration Deverson, Butcher, S.J., and RMA-S MHC-linked to the Bastin, Howard, presentation Townsend, 354:528–531. Nature 1991,

Karre, which peptides. A., heavy A of induced class is C., association L., K.: by mutant Ohlen, cell Lunggren, J., and and I chains Bastin, in Foster, Townsend, H.G., viral light Harbor Cold Symp. Spring Quant. Biol. 1989, 54:299–308.

in Newly until retained peptide. the they 6-4 reticulum a molecules are I MHC endoplasmic bind synthesized class

Bouvier, and molecular Accessory assembly the and of structural human a proteins I perspective. M.: MHC class molecules: Mol. Immunol. 2003, 39:697–706.

the Nakamura, R., R., calreticulin. molecules lacking MHC in Knee, of cells B., T.: M., ER Elliott, and A.B., antigen-presenting M., K., Michalak, Adhikari, Assembly Howarth, function and M.C., chaperone class Gold, I Gao, Hill, 16:99–109. 2002, Immunity

ER Van peptide. assembly L.: I an controls Tapasin: with III, chaperone MHC class Kaer, A.G. Grandea, that and Immunol. Trends 2001, 22:194–199.

L.: MHC Kaer, control proteins with Van peptides. of assembly the that molecules Accessory Immunol. Res. 23:205–214. 2001,

MHC of I T.: presentation. antigen class C.A., The cell biology and Elliott, Peh, A., Williams, Tissue 2002, 59:3–17. Antigens

is J., class cargo Purcell, McCluskey, dependent I Optimization C.A., Williams, Elliott, MHC on the T.: tapasin. A.W., and A.P., peptide of Peh, Immunity 16:509–520. 2002,

R.M., role UDP-glucose I Cresswell MHC of molecules. quality Zhu, P.A., for class control expression glycoprotein glucosyltransferase in Wearsch, Y., P.: and Zhang, and A Leonhardt, W., Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 108:4956–4961. 2011,

6-5 on cells. molecules to cells I use MHC T CD8 cross-presentation class to exogenous proteins present prime Dendritic

cross-presentation A.L., of Cellular exogenous Ackerman, antigens. governing P.: and mechanisms Cresswell, Nat. Immunol. 2004, 5:678–684.

cytotoxic priming. cells H level Minor different during introduced M.J.: antigens cell Bevan, H-2 stimulating the T in cross-react vivo on at Immunol. J. 117:2233–2238. 1976,

Bevan, CD8+ cell T response. the Helping M.J.: Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2004, 4:595–602.

M.S., W.E., Edelson, Schraml, Purtha, M., Hildner, B.U., Unanue, B.T., et Calderon, B., Diamond, al. Matsushita, E.R., H., Kohyama, K., Diamond, M., T in reveals Batf3 CD8α+ a cytotoxic immunity. for : role deficiency dendritic cells critical cell Science 322:1097–1100. 2008,

E., and Villadangos, Segura, J.A. antigen cross-presentation cells. modular pathway A in the dendritic and : combinatorial view of 12:1677–1685. Traffic 2011,

in are o.btained Peptide:MHC generated proteins autophagy. and vesicles 6-6 from phagocytosis, II complexes class endocytic endocytosis, through acidified

Reich, al. Dengjel, M., K., R., Kraus, Altenberend, J., Kalbacher, Schoor, O., Müller, M., J., Brandenburg, Kreymborg, H., M., F., et Fischer, from intracellular Autophagy proteins. presentation class promotes source peptides of : MHC II Proc. Acad. Natl Sci. 102:7922–7927. USA 2005,

immunity. inflammation and Saitoh, infection, T., in Akira, V., and Autophagy S.: Deretic, Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2013, 13:722–737.

J., A., Smith, A.V. T., Hill, Tejada-Simon, Willis, Zhang, Godkin, M.V., A.J., Elliott, and K.J., processed sequence peptides reveal region flanking class processing antigen interactions. II rather peptide–MHC Naturally than conserved preferences highly immunogenic that : reflect HLA Immunol. J. 166:6720–6727. 2001,

E.M., P.A. Hiltbold, Roche, and class Trafficking II late MHC of : in secretory pathway. molecules the Curr. Opin. Immunol. 2002, 14:30–35.

C., K., Beers, Honey, Hsieh, A.Y. deRoos, Rudensky, and P., C.S., and class MHC L cathepsin A : cathepsin generation role presentation. in II peptide for for S Immunol. J. 2002, 168:2618–2625.

and proteolysis C.: MHC-class-II– closer Lennon-Duménil, restricted and A.M., antigen presentation. H.L., at Wolf-Bryant, Ploegh, Bakker, Lagaudrière-Gesbert, P., A.H., look A Curr. Opin. Immunol. 2002, 14:15–21.

P., Li, J.L., P., V.L. Wang, Zhou, and J.S., Gregg, D., Blum, O’Donnell, N., Crotzer, contribution antigen class : of of II Compartmentalization endosomal cytoplasmic and processing. presentation: Immunol. Rev. 207:206–217. 2005,

W.S., K.S., U.T., Dong, Defective Arunachalam, L., processing P.: and Flavell, GILT-free Cresswell, B., R.A., Cannon, Alfonso, in C., Karlsson, Garrett, Maric, mice. antigen M., C., Phan, 294:1361–1365. 2001, Science

Münz, Enhancing through C.: immunity autophagy. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 27:423–449. 2009,

the cathepsin Boes, H., and M., vivo. for C., H.L., Kalbacher, C.J., in generation antigenic Driessen, Ploegh, peptides S role E.B., Alfonso, Specific in C.: of Schroter, Pluger, Eur. J. Immunol. 32:467–476. 2002,

MHC molecules class The vesicles. intracellular synthesized 6-7 chain directs acidified II invariant newly to

presentation. cytoplasmic and invariant H.C., T.F., modulates Gregers, The I., antigen Birkeland, Nordeng, Sandlie, processing tail and chain T.W., of Bakke, O.: Eur. J. Immunol. 2003, 33:277–286.

P.A. E.M., and Roche, Hiltbold, Trafficking class II molecules of : the secretory late in pathway. MHC Curr. Opin. Immunol. 14:30–35. 2002,

et W., J., Schuurhuis, Ramm, al. Ricciardi-Castagnoli, Kleijmeer, D., Griffith, A.Y., G., M., Ossendorp, Rudensky, P., F., Rescigno, C.J., Melief, M., Stoorvogel, multivesicular II cells. MHC dendritic : by regulates bodies Reorganization class of presentation antigen J. Biol. Cell 155:53–63. 2001,

M., class recycling II Pastoors, multivesicular L., Ham, Verwoerd, of A., Regulation H., within van and van of Neefjes, HLA-DM/DO Calafat, body. J., sorting the Lith, presentation Reits, by E., D., class M., J.: Griekspoor, II antigen Janssen, Tjin, E., MHC and J. Immunol. 167:884–892. 2001,

class regulate for and HLA-DO 6-8 MHC HLA-DM of molecules CLIP peptides. II-like other The exchange

MHC Alfonso, L.: C., II class and Karlsson, molecules. Nonclassical Annu. Rev. Immunol. 18:113–142. 2000,

I.A. V., I.F., and Wilson, McKenzie, Apostolopoulos, and class into features Getting : MHC in I molecules of implications peptide vaccine to groove: the binding unusual design. Front. Biosci. 6:D1311–D1320. 2001,

E., R., D., and Collins, Donnini, D., Saad, Loftus, J., E.J. Zhao, M., Appella, Buslepp, histocompatibility peptide-major T correlates on binding T surface. cell activity with cell : oligomeric complex Biol. J. Chem. 2001, 276:47320–47328.

in Immunodeficiency mice. autoimmunity and H2-O-deficient X.: P.E., Y., Chen, and Jensen, Gu, Immunol. J. 2013, 190:126–137.

Wang, Cairns, and J.A., Jevnikar, D.A. Hill, D., Bell, E., A.M., predicted T-cell a : HLADRβ1*0401 between and activation mouse model. transgenic relationship in II peptide-MHC class affinity The Res. Arthritis Ther. 5:R40–R48. 2003,

L.J. Stern, E.D., and Mellins, MHC-II and presentation. and : HLA-DO, HLA-DM regulators of key processing Curr. Opin. Immunol. 2014, 26:115–122.

Gross, Viner, E.R. C.A., Unanue, and Vidavsky, M.L., Nelson, N.J., I., complex on trimming Amino-terminal histocompatibility for class molecules. presentation major peptides of : II Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 94:628–633. 1997,

and S.S., J.D., Pathak, Blum, J.S. Lich, edge: HLA-DM. complexes editing II:peptide class by Cutting : recycling of J. Immunol. 167:632–635. 2001,

Wucherpfennig, Anders, D.K., M.J., Pos, A.K., M.S., Call, Sethi, J., K.W. Schulze, Pyrdol, and W., complex rapid the peptide of structure selection. for : defines HLA-DM-HLA-DR1 Crystal mechanisms 2012, 151:1557–1568. Cell

of but L., presentation superantigens, Ostrand-Rosenberg, not and endogenous self inhibits antigens. Qi, H2-O S.: bacterial Immunol. J. 2001, 167:1371–1378.

Su, and Miller, R.C., R.G. H-2Db, : H-2Kb on and of H-2Kb, splenocytes. peptide-receptive Stability surface J. Immunol. 2001, 167:4869–4877.

Busch, Zavala-Ruiz, L.J. R., M., Zarutskie, E.D., and Z., Mellins, Stern, Rushe, J.A., HLA-DM. by catalysis peptide The of kinetic basis : exchange Proc. Acad. Natl Sci. 98:12450–12455. 2001, USA

in of Cessation antigen E3 occurs 6-9 activation the processing MARCH-1 dendritic expression after reduced of ligase. through their cells

Baravalle, Matsuki, S., Park, G., Shin, H., McSweeney, M., Ishido, M., and J.S. Y., Ohmura-Hoshino, mechanism CD86 cells. antigen key of in a presentation is regulating : Ubiquitination dendritic by J. Immunol. 2011, 187:2966–2973.

Thibodeau, stabilization surface Catalan, MARCH N., Gassart, at E.: of is the Ceppi, dendritic the P., of cells Camosseto, and I A., down-regulation. M., MHC J., result human class Gatti, maturation-dependent II V., Pierre, De Proc. Acad. Natl Sci. USA 2008, 105:3491–3496.

and Chen, Z.J. Jiang, X., The : immune and evasion. in pathogen of defence role ubiquitylation Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2012, 12:35–48.

Eastham-Anderson, and ubiquitin B class distribution dendritic cells cells determined in length. Ma, MHC J.K., Platt, and chain Mellman, I.: is M.Y., Shin, J., J.S., by II Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 109:8820–8827. 2012,

dendritic edge: maintenance MARCH-Imediated Nakayama, Matsuki,Y., ubiquitination MHC requirement S.: Aoki-Kawasumi, II M., M., Ohmura-Hoshino, Cutting of Ohara, Ishido, cells. E., Goto, M., of for Mito-Yoshida, the M., O., conventional and Immunol. J. 183:6893–6897. 2009,

K.A., O., Weih, Walseng, Bakke, S., Ishido, B., Matsuki, Bosch, Roche, Y., P.A. and E., K., Furuta, retention in degradation Ubiquitination cells. regulates and II-peptide MHC dendritic class complex : Proc. Acad. Natl Sci. 107:20465–20470. 2010, USA

Many by antigen presentation genes processing the and MHC. encoded proteins are 6-10 within in involved

Guillaudeux, S.A., B., Geraghty, L., R.D., T., Bahram, Aguado, S., Beck, al. et Hood, D., Campbell, Horton, Inoko, R., Forbes, H., S., complex. a and (the histocompatibility human map major of Complete Consortium): Sequencing gene sequence MHC 1999, Nature 401:921–923.

Sisk, system. II and regulation the C.H., T.J.: T.S., of transactivator Function Gourley, and immune class Chang, in Immunol. Res. 2002, 25:131–142.

Kumnovics, Takada, T., A., and K.F. Lindahl, of mammalian the organization MHC. : Genomic Annu. Rev. Immunol. 21:629–657. 2003,

M.P. Lefranc, ImMunoGeneTics : IMGT, database. the international Nucleic Res. Acids 2003, 31:307–310.

MHC II genes are class and highly class products The 6-11 polymorphic. I protein of

Gaur, Nepom, L.K., and G.T. patterns Ancestral DRB of complex major conserved : histocompatibility genes beget polymorphisms. localized Proc. Acad. Natl Sci. USA 1996, 93:5380–5383.

factors the S.G.: for December of 2002. update HLA Marsh, system, Nomenclature Eur. Immunogenet. J. 2003, 30:167–169.

S.G.: J., Robinson, HLA and Marsh, informatics. databases. sequence Accessing HLA sequences from Methods Mol. Biol. 2003, 210:3–21.

between receptor T-cell influencing molecule. both MHC peptide binding and and contacts the

Rammensee, Rotzschke, Falk, H.G. Jung, K., and O., S., Stevanovic, G., self-peptides sequencing molecules. from revealed MHC Allele-specific of by motifs eluted : Nature 351:290–296. 1991,

Degano, M., K.C., Garcia, and Wilson, J.A., Speir, I.A. T immunity. of for recognition principles cellular in cell antigen receptor Emerging : Rev. Immunogenet. 1999, 1:75–90.

Cell and T., B and P.H., Benacerraf, B.: Dorf, between histoincompatible lymphocytes. Hamaoka, T Katz, D.H., Maurer, interactions M.E., IV. interaction gene immune response by (Ir) of Involvement control controlled lymphocyte gene. of the J. Exp. Med. 1973, 138:734–739.

Purcell, A.W., complexed L., immunodominant to Rossjohn, an conformational of Clements, C.S., changes of peptide-induced HLA-B8 viral class structure The J., MHC McCluskey, mode Kjer-Nielsen, a and and M.R., I determinant: A.G., J.: Brooks, dimerization. Fontes, J. Immunol. 2002, 169:5153–5160.

Structural recognition of E.L.: and peptides basis to cell T bound Reinherz, Wang, molecules. of J.H., MHC Mol. Immunol. 38:1039–1049. 2002,

P.C. R.M., Doherty, Zinkernagel, and system. syngeneic cytotoxicity Restriction in in a : choriomeningitis vivo or T-cell lymphocytic within mediated of semiallogeneic 248:701–702. 1974, Nature

recognizing Alloreactive abundant. very 6-13 MHC molecules are cells T nonself

of P.M.: Allen, T-cell N.J., Felix, alloreactivity. and Specificity Nat. Rev. Immunol. 7:942–953. 2007,

Garcia, D., L.K., K.C. and Maynard, Bond, C.J., J., Feng, Ely, receptor–major evidence germline-encoded for complex histocompatibility a ‘codon.’ Nat. : T Structural cell interaction Immunol. 8:975–993. 2007,

II Structure J., HLA-DR4 a Hennecke, of TCR influenza hemagglutinin and (DRA*0101 receptor Wiley, cross-restriction HA1.7, class D.C.: peptide, into complex and the histocompatibility cell and insight complex (TCR) alloreactivity. human of and molecule, α/βT major DRB1*0401): J. Exp. Med. 2002, 195:571–581.

K., cell and implications recognition engineered Nikolich-Zugich, Jankovic, Molano, molecule: peptide-independent class an I for alloreactivity. V., of T A., J.: MHC Remus, Immunol. J. 169:1887–1892. 2002,

allorecognition. the M., D., Vukmanovic, Factors Nesic, Maric, lymphocyte Santori, of influencing patterns and F.R., T S.: 73:797–803. 2002, Transplantation

and Malissen, receptor C., B., Mazza, Guimezanes, cell an T., MHC allogeneic C., J.C., D., Housset, A., molecule. A.M., Fontecilla-Camps, structure J.B., Mosser, a G.: Crystal to T bound Reiser, Schmitt-Verhulst, Gregoire, of Darnault, Nat. Immunol. 2000, 1:291–297.

Falk, Rötzschke, H.G. Rammensee, S., O., K., Faath, On the cell alloreactivity. of peptides nature in T involved : Exp. J. Med. 1991, 174:1059–1071.

I.A. Peterson, Garcia, Degano, J.A., K.C., Teyton, and Speir, Brunmark, P.A., Wilson, A., L., M., complexes. Structural : 2C basis H-2Ld TCR of allorecognition of peptide Immunity 1998, 8:553–562.

T respond 6-14 superantigens. cells Many to

Acha-Orbea, N., Attinger, Schmid, Vacheron, D., S., et K.M., H., L., A., MacLennan, S., I., Finke, al. Toellner, Scarpellino, Wehrli, Xenarios, I.C., between immune virus response. mammary tumor humoral : and and Interplays mouse cellular the Immunol. Rev. 1999, 168:287–303.

Staerz, of Mls-modified P.: which U., J., histocompatibility T J.W., complex. the Vb White, products recognize Marrack, Kappler, cell receptor elements major and 332:35–40. 1988, Nature

lymphocytes T with and Vβ6+ Frangoulis, Rammensee, R., immunizing H.G., B.: expressing Mls-1a on mature cells. Clonal Mls-1b anergy induced mice in Kroschewski, Nature 339:541–544. 1989,

and streptococcal W., P.L., Kohler, P.M.: Horswill, superantigen and Leung, Salgado-Pabón, A.R., A.R., exotoxins. Spaulding, Schlievert, Staphylococcal D.Y., Clin. Microbiol. Rev. 26:422–447. 2013,

of McCormick, P.M., of streptococcal Structures reveal A.S., Li, to K., signaling β Sundberg, the Llera, and in J.K., Tormo, architecture Mariuzza, Karjalainen, two cell chains T diversity R.A.: J., Schlievert, TCR H., superantigens E.J., complexes. bound 10:687–699. Structure 2002,

Torres, G.Q., and A.K., Anderson, Perrin, Subramaniam, Mujtaba, P.S., B.A., M.G.,

H.M.: pathways. signaling of Johnson, enhancement Superantigen and immunity: antibody production specific J. Immunol. 169:2907–2914. 2002,

Marrack, mice. Pullen, B: mature and super R., Herman, P.: A.M., A., T Kappler, enterotoxin Vβ-specific Kubo, J., The J.W., White, neonatal stimulation cells of clonal staphylococcal and antigen in deletion Cell 56:27–35. 1989,

can the which range antigens MHC to 6-15 of system extends immune the respond. polymorphism

Allsopp, J., A.C., Greenwood, F.M., A.V., Willis, M., B.M., Gotch, Gao, A.R.M., Townsend, M., et Aidoo, C.E.M., al. Takiguchi, Elvin, X.M., Hill, resistance of analysis severe malaria. Molecular and of : the association B53 to 1992, Nature 360:435–440.

viral and infections. M.: Martin, of Carrington, M.P., Immunogenetics Curr. Opin. Immunol. 17:510–516. 2005,

R., in link LeMaoult, T between mhc I., Patino, Direct J.A., immune and J., cell diversity and avidity, Nikolich-Zugich, Messaoudi, defense. J.: polymorphism, Guevara Dyall, 298:1797–1800. Science 2002,

Potts, and W.K., P.R. Slev, Pathogen-based : MHC favouring diversity. genetic models Immunol. Rev. 1995, 143:181–197.

MHC. genes of encoded functions are specialized in variety also immunity in A with the 6-16

Karlsson, Alfonso, and molecules. II class MHC Nonclassical L.: C., Annu. Rev. Immunol. 18:113–142. 2000,

molecules: of host and Brooks, roles non-diverse and in MHC A.R., Sullivan, Hofstetter, Lukacher, defense A.E., Ib molecules autoimmunity. Diverse L.C., class of A.G..: control Curr. Opin. Immunol. 23:104–110. 2011,

J., V2R Jones, T., C.: E.P., Fischer murine Lindahl, M10 F., Stowers, Loconto, and Ib class selective Dulac, Chang, L., K., M1 receptors involves of and with families pheromone Kumánovics, the Papes, Functional E., molecules. Takada, MHC expression A., association of 112:607–118. Cell 2003,

and T.R. L.W., Subramaniam, Yapp, Powell, V.N., millennium. the in Haemochromatosis : new Hepatol. J. 32:48–62. 2000,

subsets. of molecules I Specialized T-cell the cells and MHC ligands as inhibition activation for unconventional NK class 6-17 and act

J., J., Coligan, Maasho, D.K., R., K., Pena, Borrego, Lieto, F., J.E. Kim, and Solana, L., Kabat, I : class expressed specific human natural histocompatibility on Structure (MHC) (NK) killer major and receptors complex function of cells. Mol. Immunol. 2002, 38:637–660.

Patamawenu, A., Brooks, A.N., J.C., P.D. Boyington, A.G., Riaz, J.E., Sun, Coligan, and : C-type of NK novel fold: reveals implications the a lectin CD94/NKG2 Structure for cell-associated CD94 receptors. 1999, Immunity 10:75–82.

D.S., Söderström, Ogg, et K., J.H., V.M., C.A., G.S., O’Callaghan, N.T., Young, Bell, al. J.I., Braud, Phillips, Lazetic, A., S., D’Andrea, Allan, natural cell CD94/NKG2A, to : C. Nature 391:795–799. binds killer and B HLA-E receptors 1998,

A.J. Braud, and V.M., McMichael, interaction cell the NK functions molecule with receptors the I : HLA-E. CD94/NKG2 nonclassical through class of of Curr. Regulation Top. Microbiol. Immunol. 1999, 244:85–95.

of diabetes. involved CD8(+) and Zheng, human control Jiang, T autoimmune in S.M., H.H., and Canfield, Chess, HLA-E-restricted regulatory Jiang, M.P., type Gallagher, are cells 1 development Y., Z., H., L.: Jiang, J. Clin. Invest. 120:3641–3650. 2010,

Lanier, L.L. recognition. : cell NK Annu. Rev. Immunol. 23:225–274. 2005,

Curr. and M., cell T.: for by Natural Bellon, inhibition killer receptors MHC and Lopez-Botet, class I. activation Opin. Immunol. 11:301–307. 1999,

de molecules. T., cell Miguel, HLA Lopez-Botet, I and Navarro, Garcia, NK and M., Paired inhibitory class Llano, P., M.: triggering for M., receptors Bellon, F., Hum. Immunol. 61:7–17. 2000,

T.: Lopez-Botet, non-classical F., Navarro, cell I Llano, M., HLA recognition Bellon, molecules. of and class M., NK Semin. Immunol. 2000, 12:109–119.

K., and D., Hu, H.: Ikizawa, K.W., Werneck, Wucherpfennig, Lu, Cantor, M.B., L.,

cells by cells Regulation Qa-1-NKG2A inhibitory the T via of CD4+ NK pathway. activated Immunity 26:593–604. 2007,

G., M.C. and Mingari, Pietra, Romagnani, C., Moretta, L., peptides: HLA-Ebound cells. subsets by and recognition HLA-E : NK T of and Curr. Pharm. Des. 2009, 15:3336–3344.

and Rodgers, Cook, R.G. J.R., MHC Ib and : bridge acquired immunity. molecules innate class Nat. Rev. Immunol. 5:459–471. 2005,

6-18 NKT lipids of MHC microbial family molecules class of the cells. to Members I-like present invariant CD1

in HLA Parham, and Z., L., ligands. KIR2DL3 Moesta, diversity of Co-evolution of Abi-Rached, KIR with A.K., HLA-C Graef, Norman, class T., retaining a population minimal Layrisse, Gendzekhadze, P.J., I and K., essential human P.: Proc. Acad. Natl Sci. USA 2009, 106:18692–18697.

cell Stankovic, Baxter, the Godfrey, D.I., NKT and Raising A.G.: S., family. Nat. Immunol. 11:197–206. 2010,

Brenner, D.M., D.L., and Elzen, M., Brigl, Zajonc, I.A., den P., Hava, Wilson, M.B. van complexes. and : formation CD1 CD1-antigen the assembly of Curr. Opin. Immunol. 17:88–94. 2005,

G.S. and Besra, Moody, D.B., of T-cell Glycolipid targets CD1-mediated responses. : Immunology 2001, 104:243–251.

CD1 a Porcelli, the gives twist trafficking: Moody, and D.B., chain new invariant tale. S.A.: to Immunity 15:861–865. 2001,

Intracellular pathways and CD1 Porcelli, S.A.: D.B., antigen Moody, presentation. of Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2003, 3:11–22.

S., Haddadian, D., A.J., T., Shah, L.M., Garzón, Gumperz, A.R., Hawk, Kazen, N.S., E.J., J.E., Zhang, et Fox, Li, al. Scharf, L., CD1c 2.5Å open suited The diverse complex an antigen a ideally groove with presentation. in for structure reveals lipid mycobacterial : of Immunity 2010, 33:853–862.

C.H., Wilson, Wu, Fujio, and D., I.A. A., Schiefner, M., Wong, Structural ligands. NKT potent implications design of of stimulatory agonists: for cell novel : evaluation Mol. J. Biol. 2009, 394:71–82.

MR1 class presents molecule MHC nonclassical I metabolites MAIT folate to The microbial cells. 6-19

S.B., metabolites. Birkinshaw, McCluskey, and MR1 J.: Rossjohn, L., Kjer-Nielsen, J., Eckle, B R.W., and vitamin MAITs, Curr. Opin. Immunol. 26:7–13. 2014,

O., M., B., Liu, Chen, et Kostenko, Reantragoon, R., Nours, L., Meehan, Corbett, Patel, Bhati, Z., al. Le L., Kjer-Nielsen, A.J., J., L., presents metabolites B : cells. MR1 to MAIT microbial vitamin 491:717–723. 2012, Nature

A., Rhijn, I., Dulberger, Luoma, C.D., A., McFedries, C.L., A.M., Parks, López-Sagaseta, E.J. Crooks, and Van Saghatelian, Adams, J., J.E., : Invariant molecular The for cell basis Mucosal-Associated T MR1 recognition proteins. of Proc. Acad. Natl Sci. 110:E1771–1778. 2013, USA

γ:δ of diverse can ligands. T 6-20 recognize cells variety a

and Y.H., of Chien, defense beyond. γδ C., line first T Meyer, cells: Bonneville, and M.: Annu. Rev. Immunol. 32:121–155. 2014,

interferon-γ-secreting development molecular mechanism cells. γδ the Skint-1 A.C.: for interleukin-17-secreting and Hayday, identifies versus Turchinovich, common T G., of a 2011, 35:59–68. Immunity

Lim, J., Rossjohn, Patel, Beddoe, S., Uldrich, Gherardin, O., D.G., T., J., K.G., McPherson, A.P., et Gras, Nours, al. R.T., Le N.A., Pellicci, the CD1d-lipid antigen by γδ recognition : TCR. Nat. Immunol. 2013, 14:1137–1145.

human Salim, Moreau, cell Netzer, stress surveillance A.C., C.R., J.: antigen Silberzahn, Pitard, Willcox, γδ J.F., B.E., protein L., endothelial receptor. a receptor to V., Willcox, binding S., Hayday, C of by Déchanet-Merville, T T., and tumor and Cytomegalovirus Couzi, M., Nat. Immunol. 2012, 13:872–879.

a immune lymphocytes expresses the are T which each of unique receptor. B antigen and cells adaptive system, of blood, between cells organs, where for and, the lymph, the survey These most secondary lymphoid circulate the antigen. specific their cells importantly, they antigen-presenting that and into the actin several activate synthesizing antigen antigen reorganizing are downstream receptor signals is new their quiescent that active convert proteins. from that factors, naive lymphocytes of a activating transcription pathways wide encountered, cytoskeleton, Once cells range metabolically differentiate rapid and and result cells, a events, the effector thus an cells cells during these response B with cell into these equipping populations machinery division As of expanding naive armed undergo lymphocyte to infections. immune combat and T

general pathways of discussing signaling, intracellular naive principles some the then a antigen. outline lymphocyte its specific activated begin encounters by and when We signaling is cases, the discuss in co-stimulatory and, to that naive necessary cells cells. activate Next, most we T B naive briefly we cells. chapter focus in of on and receptors, and their T the in down-regulating inhibitory In part roles the pathways B signaling last

signal of propagation. transduction principles and General

common many we principles and of to In are general some receptor transduction the here. pathways signal briefly action of part this review discussed the that of chapter transmembrane the interior cell. receptors complexes that link are a of All of cell-surface signaling parts themselves exterior either or have protein form function and the that proteins classes signals of of receptors a trans-duce Different ways. variety in extracellular binding in covered results in of ligand the an common enzymatic activation theme receptors A that activity. is this intracellular chapter the among

principles propagation. General signal and transduction of

signaling activation. antigen lymphocyte receptor and

in co-stimulatory antigen T receptor and and modulate receptors inhibitory signaling lymphocytes. B

7-1 into events. intracellular receptors convert biochemical Transmembrane extracellular signals

commonly activation with associated receptor the The protein are kinases. most enzymes reversible phosphate a a protein, This covalent attachment group to the enzymes catalyzes group of large phosphorylation. process called of a that allows to its the signal. the ‘active’—that For of is, ligand protein become of the binding use to part the the to thus propagate to intracellular kinases, substrate—and kinase receptors receptor-associated protein receptor phosphorylate extracellular access shall become that localization intrinsic in the to see, changes its efficiency various ways, activated modifications can undergoing subcellular by kinase kinases to such catalytic receptor-associated that alter substrates. its biochemical itself as As by in we or increase

proteins threonine. protein three phosphorylate on amino animals, In kinases tyrosine, serine, acids— or enzyme-linked this protein kinases. receptors of discuss in we detail Most activate chapter the in tyrosine their tyrosine kinases phosphorylate are serine/threonine and threonine and Tyrosine less serine specific for phosphorylate tyrosine that dual-specificity kinases serine/threonine both residues, common in residues residues; are substrates. whereas kinases phosphorylation signaling pathways. is less in than mainly employed general, and much is Protein common phosphorylation tyrosine in serine/threonine receptor (Fig. carry One tyrosine receptors—the activity so-called kinases— receptor group kinase itself a of large of region within the cytoplasmic the top panel). 7.1, expressed FLT3, other are for receptors cells this on include hematopoietic in 8. and addition receptors contains lymphocytes This in lymphocyte many Kit and group which discussed progenitor to type growth Chapter developing factors; of are receptor serine/threonine an important produced The receptor a cells, (TGF-β), by for growth factor-β cytokine kinase. is regulatory many transforming

receptors to no kinases. function enzymatic lymphocytes the are mature that intracellular but associate more activity of intrinsic themselves important tyrosine have with Even this B types receptors of The receptors some lymphocytes type, and for the cytokines. on of antigen as are lymphocytes are T such domains (see binding in cytoplasmic amino by causes particular to of become the acid specific Fig. to receptors cytoplasmic kinases tyrosine their residues Ligand phosphorylated domain extracellular 7.1, panel). bottom can may These bind associated receptors, their ligands, when become with as they associated cytokine or case receptors the kinases the nonreceptor the be with receptors. receptors, the of either the with for constitutively many domains antigen as cytoplasmic is

binding them phosphorylate ligand of to molecules, cytoplasmic causes intracellular together kinases the For many associated clustering tail enabling of bringing the or receptors, adjacent thus signal. an initiating cytokine individual receptor receptors— and dimerization is the lymphocyte the antigen unlikely case association be tyrosine occurs due simple mechanism. of binding a cytoplasmic receptors, to clustering In to but ligand kinases with after kinases receptor, the a are with antigen cytoplasmic complex actions the that process co-receptors Instead, regions bring the required: we later. tyrosine these of cytoplasmic proximity into describe will of

not switch. usually simple off’ Signaling or ‘on is a ligand, the intracellular downstream exceeded. receptor minimum network occur Depending abundance negative-feedback when all of pathways, by and activation factors of and signaling the concentrations complex a the these is positiveand of threshold a receptor the for on ligand, of signaling of the components, determined affinity the into term often are simple the features These ‘signal merged

to a a the protein activate receptors extracellular the to cytoplasmic that on portion. side membrane ligand These of information kinase has the convey their bound the (top kinase panels) kinases itself. receptor activity of contain tyrosine Receptor part the as and catalytic by and clustering signal consequent receptor (denoted binding transmitting the of tails substrates, in the receptor, onward. activation other activity, results the dots) the phosphorylation of red Ligand of panels). kinases activity with kinase Receptors (bottom associate nonreceptor intrinsic that lack dimerization activates Receptor associated the clustering ligand or binding after enzyme. these the types of in this enzyme tyrosine kinase. chapter, encountered is receptors a in all

the strength strength determine signaling signal the increases. as cellular to responses—some important keep of in mind increase will be will others that variations in of will whereas strength.’ It is magnitude all-or-nothing,

cell many of different signaling The at role not kinases pathways. intracellular in stages signaling activation, as confined protein is act to in they receptor the of proteins. of activity factors, the because kinases Protein largely removal phosphorylation figure transcription phosphate group—are in means enzymes, other of regulating and and dephosphorylation—the a signaling cell many proteins workings generates important Equally bind. other of which pathways on fact sites the that to proteins the signaling to is signaling phosphorylation can

by enzymes are called removed large class protein from proteins Phosphate a phosphatases. groups of or of phosphatases). or in from dual-specificity Different groups (as both from protein classes phosphotyrosine phosphatases remove phosphoserine/ phosphothreonine, phosphate Specific by one to dephosphorylation thus regulating original phosphatases pathways of resetting its signaling means state switching off. signaling protein important is a by and inhibit always a does activity. Dephosphorylation protein’s not is group enzyme. by many a instances to an of needed a In the activate phosphatase particular specific removal phosphate of kinases phosphatases. phosphorylation and In its represents determines a of balance enzyme between the an the of cases, extent other activity, activity and

Fig. Signaling molecules other lipid proteins domains. protein interact with each and signaling via 7.2 modular with ligand listed, domains with domain. contain them the most proteins common some protein of by proteins immune-system the by class together bound interaction the are and general of a few that used signaling the The column single-letter lists examples or, acid the a specific motif code) phosphoinositide right-hand for protein of particular amino bind. that they domains, (in phosphoinositide-binding many in other used pathways signaling as all well. nonimmune these are domains

Intracellular complexes. large multiprotein propagation 7-2 signaling is by mediated signal

of learned receptor 3, sequentially Chapter events information that to a onward. intracellular of signaling cascade we a binding ligand its initiate proteins convey can in As involving signal a determine and the The particular multiprotein components assembled complex generates. other it enzymes of into receptor unique will the character several to may allowing relatively be they or a receptor limited receptor may exclusive These number signaling components. one distinct thus of pathway, by components built pathways, shared from to up be be pathways specific interactions of of The modules, number signaling proteininteraction distinct of a types multisubunit assembly domains, involves complexes or carried protein-interaction by the signaling proteins. of examples Figure such of few a gives domains. 7.2 in at many domains. contain but least domain, proteins Signaling such general one multiple contain protein-interaction proteins protein correct enable protein for the to modules other, organize between into example, localizations, binding subcellular cooperate specific to each modify and to with activity. These enzymatic signaling partners,

For signaling the important complexes phosphorylation underlying of pathways protein chapter, residues. the formation mechanism most this in considered is the of the tyrosine homology including binding SH2 protein-interaction a of domains, (Src sites Fig. number are 2) (see Phosphotyrosines domain for the 7.2). approximately signaling or from proteins, intracellular types linked frequently they of many amino acids, 100 enzymatic are functional to domains, present SH2 other where built other domains. in are and, in (pY) SH2 where X amino acid away tyrosine the amino different combinations domains and recognize (pYXXZ, a bind amino phosphorylated is with typically, positions acids. SH2 acid domains sequence-specific any they preferring fashion, amino is different Z acid); of a specific three the containing acid a In sequence. inducible a SH2 amino the pY-containing act way, the appropriate association protein molecule as can with that allows this specific and signaling of unique domain a ‘key’

called and multiprotein scaffolds by signaling receptors proteins complexes Tyrosine can kinase-associated using adaptors. assemble so Scaffolds into signaling by proteins function activity, other take among enzymatic adaptors lack a they place. complex can interactions these that proteins recruiting and and

proteins to can, many recruit phosphorylated different large in become sites are multiple for order proteins example, tyrosine on that Scaffolds relatively (Fig. top 7.3, panel). are character the of recruited, signaling particular response. define which By proteins a specifying can scaffolds several accomplished by This is mechanisms. scaffolds enzyme’s of specificity one the a the by enzyme example, substrates. regulate For can of recruiting recruited Binding phosphorylation change of recruited a conformation for protein–protein thereby scaffold protein interactions. modifications, can such the revealing sites or for protein, a ubiquitination, or to also as to Finally, can the membrane scaffolds function promote of signaling localization complex.

are cytoplasmic containing together. to modules more or signaling proteins two Adaptors serve several membrane-anchored or link that proteins SH2 contain for and of proteins Grb2 The adaptor SH3 each and example, Gads, domain two (see another an copies module the Fig. called domain 7.2). stage of molecules modules next to of can acting arrangement a receptor tyrosine in phosphorylation of signaling. This the used be link to residue phosphotyrosine protein, a to the domain receptor of scaffold motifs on For or SH2 while two SH3 bind domains Grb2 a binds (see proteins proline-rich on signaling Fig. example, a its to other next in bottom section. Sos, the 7.3, which such discuss as we panel),

Fig. of and Assembly scaffold complexes mediated is proteins. adaptor signaling by 7.3 of an signal important signaling of assembly is transduction. complexes aspect proteins. is often This and achieved through adaptor scaffold together in to many that function signaling panel). different scaffolds proteins general, of sites bring numerous have phosphorylation (top proteins membrane in to their proximity changes induce and substrates, with bring functions. localization, regulate promote Scaffolds their enzymes may conformational function close into to also that to adaptor together an different bring (bottom protein to two proteins panel). functions of dots) associated domain Sh2 binds the kinases sites protein. an its to cytoplasmic adaptor receptor, on (epo) generating (red the sites When tyrosine phosphorylate binding receptor erythropoietin epo for domain, shown to adaptor Sh2 Sh3 domain. here protein two (green) The addition contains domains in an bind signaling the can, for on (yellow). molecule it domains Sh3 sites intracellular an proline-rich With example,

time, are of small G a G to Ras exchange increase which process GDP:Ras small GEF proteins active accelerated GDP:Ras exchange G resting are GTP is and inactive small the bound such that effector active rate GAPs GDP for the activates GTP (GEFs) Over protein Signaling the GTP:Ras GDP guanine-nucleotide molecule the to factors the of GTP inactive, hydrolyzes state, protein In is by as GTP-bound The becomes Sos, GDP and

Fig. active G are to and by factors the proteins 7.4 inactive states of exchange binding GTP. Small from switched (GEFs) guanine-nucleotide is protein a Ras GTp-binding small activity. GTpase intrinsic with is bound resting Ras its state, to in Gdp. to exchange as panels). and proteins such such signaling G (Gefs), small for rate increase GTp activates exchange of factors the Gdp as (center which can Sos, Receptor of Ras bind guanine-nucleotide The a to GTp-bound membrane. number large form effectors, them then of Ras to bind recruiting the can of result Gdp. will of intrinsic activity GTpase time, Ras the to over in GTp the of hydrolysis shutting hydrolysis off signal the Gdp, the thus of to (Gaps) GTp GTpase-activating more accelerate proteins can rapidly.

Small G act molecular as switches pathways. in many different signaling 7-3 proteins

the proteins receptors. known signaling many pathways tyrosine kinase-associated G from or small GTPases leading small GTP-binding in Monomeric are important as proteins distinct larger the from discussed 3. as with G-protein-coupled heterotrimeric Chapter the associated small GTPases such in chemokine receptors proteins receptors are G The than 100 important more GTPases superfamily proteins, are lymphocyte small in and many of comprises different signaling. The One leading pathways proliferation. Ras, in to many involved these, cell is of signals actin and B-cell the include receptor. receptor received Rac, in Cdc42, by T-cell control GTPases through which or Rho, changes Other the caused cytoskeleton small in their actions 7-19. will in more We describe Section detail

to or whether states, they GDP. bound GTP depending are in two Small on GTPases exist to for inactive is exchange The the into is GTP. by GDP GDP-bound active form of but the converted form 7.4). which bind as GEFs, the release This to to known mediated is GTP abundant GDP (Fig. reaction proteins GTPase and exchange guanine-nucleotide the cause by more or factors, Ras. signaling 7-2), Section is GEFs adaptor Sos, the of recruited to the pathways by is for (see which one Grb2 that to and GTP of variety small enables change bind it conformational to activity effector induce in proteins. the target in The a GTPase of a induces binding as GTPases. for small on/off functions an switch GTP binding Thus,

eventually bound from into removes not form does group a the remain GDP-bound the form is active G This GTP-bound permanently GTP. which protein, but the inactive the phosphate converted by intrinsic GTPase activity in GTPase. GTP to accelerate the the of thus small proteins conversion rapidly activity (GAPs) known GDP, downregulating cofactors the Regulatory as GTPase-activating of inactive in response signal GDP-bound only state activated the from to a small activated in are Because an receptor. activity, present and GAP of transiently usually GTPases are frequently in Ras to to state. protein is thought and is mutated significant the be the contributor a cells, mutated cancerous RAS cancer intrinsic activity by prolonging the mutations GAPs for Ras enhancing in preventing duration of which in GTP-bound in exists is the Ras active that indicated the thus signaling fact from importance in GTPase cancer the state. some by The regulation Ras, act of found GAP

produced activation are by the binding at metabolites to receptor cell are site or GEFs activation. to and receptor membrane lipid the G-protein of to proteins by activation key recruited the to adaptor protein or to are are post-translationally. plasma the to surface of small activate attached the to Ras they the membrane that localized proteins, inner G other Once fatty are able which recruited, acids G via when and becoming a on act proteins Thus, off. G switched is switched then switches, receptor being cell-surface activated as molecular own to help Each G has the which its specific GEFs protein confer specificity on pathway. GAPs, and

to mechanisms. a of variety 7-4 Signaling membrane the by proteins are recruited

plasma associated intracellular We can signaling recruitment scaffold, phosphorylation as itself signaling receptors through proteins of tyrosine the have by followed or receptor to how membrane seen the or of adaptors, proteins an SH2-domain-containing such of recruit (Fig. Grb2 7.5). such of mechanism GTPases, proteins A via to recruitment following is their second binding for small as Ras, signaling membrane activation. Section are fatty small cytoplasmic surface bound the their plasma 7-3, membrane due to GTPases described of constitutively to acid modifications. the As in GTP, by GDP activated the proteins Sos, of plasma for such membrane activated relocalizing GTPases Fig. signaling to bind bound (see Once as the the to proteins exchange 7.5).

by is Another recruit can modified receptors plasma which the in local membrane molecules to lipids. of signaling way the membrane production These produced phospholipid phosphatidylinositol which phosphatidylinositol by known signaling. membrane activated the are as of enzymes lipids of result kinases, are phosphorylation as a by receptor headgroup wide The ring that phosphatidylinositol of derivatives. variety be or inositol of carbohydrate phosphorylated more a positions to generate one is can at a 3,4,5-trisphosphate and are 3-kinase focus latter this phosphatidylinositol on phosphatidylinositol the the PIP2 in of chapter (PI will (PIP2) The 3-kinase) enzyme ones is (see from (PIP3), 4,5-bisphosphate generated phosphatidylinositol we Fig. which that by 7.5). its subunit into in of phosphotyrosines inositol of its subunit SH2 catalytic membrane. phospholipid regulatory by receptor tail, is a PI with bringing the recruited domain substrates binding to 3-kinase the often in proximity this are phosphoinositides PIP3 rapidly produced membrane such activation. In as receptor after way, them molecules. short span, ideal signaling with combined life This, their makes is proteins domain PIP3 by domain Fig. (PH) containing commonly, specifically or, (see recognized homology a less PX a pleckstrin one is enzyme in membrane of functions the its 7.2), proteins recruit cases contribute to activation. to to such and some and

inhibit activate both can and responses. 7-5 modifications proteins of signaling Post-translational

transducing is Protein common signals to for mechanism a cellular pathways. downstream receptors from phosphorylation intermediates signals These terminated phosphatases, dephosphorylate action signaling the of protein are by (Fig. which 7.6). deficient is diseases, which such of result or protein from phosphatase The importance in existence cancer, terminating as protein activity. autoimmunity by phosphatases the may of signaling and absent underscored mechanism also dephosphorylation activation. function protein can a of as However, downstream protein regulate events. nucleic binding, or thereby interactions, Dephosphorylation subcellular localization, can acid protein–protein promoting signaling

ubiquitin. the mechanism protein of Another protein modification of small molecules or regulation attachment covalent post-translational one is of by the more general termination, to signal of as a is potent protein means it leads degradation. Ubiquitination often multi-step glycine its by target of attached in carboxyterminal to is residues a Ubiquitin proteins process. lysine

Fig. of proteins be recruited variety a to can ways. membrane the in 7.5 Signaling usually to signal propagation signaling important this plasma because is Recruitment where receptors membrane located. of is proteins the are in scaffold as proteins. panel: LaT, phosphorylation proteins, of such recruits Left the phosphotyrosine-binding membrane-associated tyrosine inhibit from This the phosphatases, protect also scaffold can signaling. which tyrosine by dephosphorylation the G proteins as small Second panel: Ras modifications associate such (shown by in membrane having with can lipid red). proteins. bind of When a activated, variety they signaling can to from activation modifications membrane signaling result proteins. recruit receptor the panels: two that Right can itself by the this phosphorylation inner the of pip2 produced pi membrane by of the example in membrane in been leaflet 3-kinase. lipid plasma the pip3 has such ph signaling is by recognized proteins as itk. of the pip3 akt and protein domains the kinases

Fig. 7.6 turned be as well Signaling as on. must off turned to in terminate serious cancer. inability result as The can pathway autoimmunity such signaling a or diseases important on as protein protein Shp, signaling in (left such events signaling depend have shutting part as pathways down phosphatases, an proportion phosphorylation, a of significant panel). right (center terminating another panels). and protein for regulated mechanism common signaling degradation is thus to recruit ligases, such that ubiquitin small protein phosphorylated targeting add as proteins, proteins ubiquitin degradation. for them the cbl, through (center lysine of linked proteins ubiquitin targeted polyubiquitin 48 destruction by the addition chains, in the of are proteasome for (K48) cytoplasmic panel). (right the for internalized di-ubiquitin are lysosome receptors that ubiquitinated destruction ubiquitin or become transported individual panel). to membrane and molecules by

attachment E1 enzyme ubiquitin of ubiquitin-activating to ubiquitin-conjugating an First, an E2 enzyme. promotes known E3 is to an ubiquitin as by an protein substrate ligase. The the then ubiquitin transferred enzyme add Ubiquitin ubiquitin can polyubiquitin. form to continue molecules to ligases the (K48) to lysine add 48 ubiquitin, or lysine different the one typically Importantly, different terminus either carboxy 63 (K63). of ubiquitin ligases residues ubiquitin molecule of conjugated lysine These outcomes divergent forms pathways. polyubiquitin for produce of signaling different

degradation the K48 the outcome by to Fig formed 7.6). proteasome When target the polyubiquitin is for chains using (see protein are linkages, lymphocytes is which kind this via ubiquitin SH2 An domain. in ligase its selects targets its Cbl, important of Cbl bind ubiquitinated to can specific K48 targets, become causing to via linkages. them thus tyrosine-phosphorylated the that proteins polyubiquitin form via to then this proteasome. recognize the ubiquitinated of degradative pathways target Proteins di-ubiquitin. by or receptors tagged proteins molecules such by single as Membrane can be ubiquitin but are These proteins by recognized are ubiquitin-binding Fig. (see recognized the proteasome, lysosomes target for in by degradation not instead, proteins that specific 7.6). of can signaling. inhibit ubiquitination proteins Thus, degradation is by the phosphatases, signaling. is Unlike inhibition of terminating inhibition of permanent more ubiquitin-mediated protein reversible, where a means mechanism

signaling also to used be activate can Ubiquitination pathways. the this We TLRs. discussed aspect signaling in pathway Section connection NFκB from in already have 3-7 with produces the ligase K63-linked There, polyubiquitin NEMO. chains on TRAF-6 and ubiquitin TRAF-6 K63-linked signaling tumor (TNF) necrosis lymphocytes, In Section step will polyubiquitination key discussed as in factor family is receptor Fig. in 7-23 members, (and be 7.31). a through recognized signaling molecules domains specific form that of the additional pathway (see to signaling recruit in proteins by is polyubiquitin This Fig. 3.15).

small-molecule some activation The messengers. receptors second generates 7-6 of

many cases, involves messengers small-molecule mediators as biochemical that the known second enzymes (Fig. signaling intracellular In produce activation of 7.7). proteins. cell, target signal diffuse the of These throughout enabling variety the to mediators can a activate dual also achieving the of signaling messengers cascade. of the stage The pathway production amplifying of serves purpose second them and enzymatic activate of of to the sufficient concentrations next the lipids variety and kinases second include by tyrosine (Ca2+) signal a derivatives. The soluble ions of membrane messengers their receptors generated and via that calcium of to them. are some membranes, move they within lipid messengers these Although confined can the be typically target messenger to A second activated. induces that to its protein conformational a change protein allows binding

Summary.

with sense they for Cell-surface them signals as into interaction serve events the line environment; convert of a the cell’s and front biochemical its extracellular receptors cell. in interior membrane, in in the recruitment membrane sit the extracellular and the the changes is signals of plasma most cell a membrane receptors step of intracellular transduction composition of surrounding of proteins the the receptor. to critical the to the As immune onward, their to adaptors form tyrosine receptors signaling to kinases often complexes. operate activating scaffolds Many large and by signals multiprotein using transmit that quantitative qualitative and the signaling place outcomes. of in changes the the take character of determine composition the complexes Both response these and biological the in found SH3, is variety PH or domains Formation signaling proteins. by protein-interaction including wide domains, SH2, mediated of a of modules, and complexes messengers called signaling cases, increase the signaling cascade. in the enzymatically regulates In small-molecule intermediates second many amplifies and produced protein well of as degradation. Termination signaling dephosphorylation involves as protein ubiquitin-mediated

lymphocyte signaling Antigen activation. receptor and

Fig. pathways the initial amplify 7.7 Signaling signal. initial of transduction most element signal the an amplification pathways. important is of signal successively in phosphorylate (left which a each activate other. cascade kinases of protein and panel), amplification is one means kinase from example, cascade (see used fig. kinase in commonly this a taken kinase, activation kinase, results a the second phosphorylation kinase activation the phosphorylates and mek, in 7.19), of yet that erk. Raf another of initial at huge signal different step, molecules, each amplification each can phosphorylate the the is a kinase amplified signal. many as of substrate resulting in second messengers signal panels). the of is another generation of amplification right (center and method calcium from in into from in cytosol or influx stores its extracellular this second the signaling (ca2+) environment. results intracellular messenger the of the example, the release endoplasmic is (eR) shown release the here. ca2+ from reticulum as in downstream potentially ca2+ many the can The sharp cytoplasm such the protein signaling calmodulin. increase free molecules, in calcium-binding activate a and it in to calcium induces variety binding bind proteins. of regulate calmodulin, effector which a allows change to conformational

of to T to antigen recognize B The to their cells ability central adaptive respond cells is and and specific immunity. receptor up the antigen-binding receptor of in 4 antigen heavy described and T-cell are and (BCR) the As 5, immunoglobulin light antigen chains—the (TCR) and B-cell chains Chapters made

Fig. T-cell invariant variable complex proteins. and made receptor up of signaling antigen-recognition proteins is The 7.8 the complex of assembly ζ. functional T-cell expression the collectively heterodimer the called and of panel: requires chains: δ, and with composed is upper TcRα:β subunits. cell-surface one two a γ (TcR) one of signaling six of cd3, receptor TcRα:β ε, antigen-binding signaling homodimer with antigen-binding chains associated the three. shown immunoreceptor has one as motif whereas tyrosine-based a activation cd3 chain ζ each (iTam), segment, chain yellow each has as shown. The chain transmembrane have each regions unusual residues or of basic acidic various panel: in the the cross-section. regions represented subunits of TcR transmembrane are Lower cd3δ:ε acid is acids positive two interacts (d) the a it aspartic interacts with aspartic of ζ positive with homodimer. that charge, of chain, thought the of (R), of (K) negative lysine the the arginine dimer, α of one charges charges, the the other of while from of β interacts acid with acid The dimer. the glutamic charges in charge of and positive chain (e) negative the aspartic the arginine cd3γ:ε (K)

receptor, in the B-cell TCRα chains TCRβ T-cell the in receptor. and the and allowing detect exquisite of type one These for chains pathogen. of to antigen, presence each variable have lymphocyte specificity the compartment intracellular the into antigen engagement needs for However, respond— information also sufficient is of the transduced lymphocyte of a has binding to to receptor that occurred antigen the the receptor antigen be lymphocyte. not to signal a transduce plasma can include the receptor complex functional antigen fully proteins Thus, the across must membrane. that receptors mediated receptor, T-cell For when proteins invariant antigen signaling and antigen by is this antigen. the the the that B-cell accessory bind receptor initiate function of surface. with transport the is Assembly proteins accessory also to these essential for receptor cell the of the from describe signaling chapter T part B In antigen and on that receptor cells the structure this cells, them. we pathways the complexes lead the and of

consist with signaling the out receptor. carry function chains of of Antigen the 7-7 antigen-binding associated variable invariant chains receptors that

heterodimer 5) antigen a (see TCRα:β up variable make receptor. on to sufficient complete own is In the T highly not its cells, cell-surface Chapter on chains, the formed heterodimers the cells and degraded with and appear cDNAs When encoding were were the TCRβ surface. did cell TCRα transfected not cell that for be receptor the the are on expressed T-cell This other surface. required to implied molecules and T-cell required CD3ε CD3 receptor, together disulfide-linked 7.8). and other is present chain, CD3γ, (Fig. ζ which the homodimer chains, as complex; which CD3δ, the In a the molecules the the form are have a ζ extracellular whereas The an the immunoglobulin-like short extracellular chain CD3 domain, proteins domain. contains only to T-cell receptor use receptor these subunits. the will the T-cell chapter, term refer we to entire complex, Throughout the including signaling the associated of remainder

(see chain CD3δ:CD3εdimer one interacts while and exact CD3γ:CD3ε dimer, is Fig. not α of stoichiometry it established, the one receptor one definitively that receptor β dimer receptor complete the T-cell interacts thought is the the chain Although with with ζ 7.8). receptor These mediated and charge reciprocal the intramembrane by subunits. amino basic interactions acids between of acidic are interactions TCRα in There TCRβ one positive the in domain. transmembrane two are transmembrane the region charges and with positive in the Negative ζ β. interact transmembrane CD3 and domains the charges αand charges in the transported β stabilizes α:β αand to the production complex a and during plasma Assembly to CD3 of the the and in the with endoplasmic reticulum dimer heterodimer be ζ allows dimer its membrane. assembled. receptors properly all the plasma on membrane These ensure present are that associations T-cell

by phosphorylation cytoplasmic is ζ tyrosine-based activation receptor regions in (ITAMs) Signaling immunoreceptor CD3ε, T-cell chains. the called motifs δ, within and the γ, from initiated tyrosine one each and the chain CD3γ, a each total 10 contain and ITAMs. δ, ITAM, of receptor ε contains three, ζ T-cell giving (Fc the signaling and and in motif the cells well NK receptors in 7-11 neutrophils, the This as in in described region are immunoglobulin as macrophages, receptors) below). the receptors cells, NK-cell that Chapter constant mast (see present also for is B-cell receptor 3, the of Section monocytes, present on chains

SH2 that the ITAM the residues receptor of contains ligand, of signaling by protein described two tyrosine become earlier sites tyrosine kinases as phosphorylated chapter. Each its domains for when the binds recruitment proteins in specific the providing X leucine, tyrosine, canonical amino six X6–9YXX[L/I]…, motifs is isoleucine, is YXXL/I L acids sequence ITAM, amino any is each the by so are within Y …YXX[L/I] I where represents and ITAM nine is about Two acid. to separated SH2 tandem proteins particularly ITAM The recruiting tyrosines the efficient of in signaling it contain make two domains (Fig. that two 7.9). recruited. SH2 are both tandem or are Syk such proteins tyrosines as ZAP-70 domain-containing the of ITAM phosphorylated, When leads the these of discussed Syk ZAP-70, be 7-10). step or (see the below kinases, as This to further Section will activation essential of an phosphorylation in

chains The surface antigen-binding on signaling. that protein mediate the invariant immunoglobulin also B-cell associated is with required the These and to surface polypeptides, the receptor are receptor Igβ, signaling Igαand (Fig. for of B-cell two called transport for 7.10). Igα to by connected a and a of are domain extracellular domain tail. transmembrane composed Igβ immunoglobulin-like cytoplasmic proteins single-chain an enables their They cell immunoglobulin disulfide-linked and heavy form that transport becomes to surface. chains with associated heterodimer the a rather B-cell The Igα:Igβdimer through the their associates interactions than with hydrophilic receptor charge transmembrane regions. between be Igα a of and heavy light of receptor B-cell to identical complex Igβ. chains—two two one chains, chains, thought associated six heterodimer and The complete is identical ITAMs, and but for of the one receptor, just Igβ chains and receptor have CD3 B-cell are the the these to ζ Igα of each, T-cell ability signal. and essential the Like

across signaling. Antigen the co-receptors a 7-8 its T-cell transduces signal receptor membrane initiate recognition to and plasma the by

to B it when and effective response, is cells levels. an low To immune respond extremely even at make T be able specific antigen their must present to cells a as likely proteins, on low. to specific T is and very many cells, for be will an antigen-presenting and foreign This for peptides is important its of complexes peptide:MHC number cell the especially different receptor surface T-cell display particular both self from T a suggest Some estimates that CD4 naive

Fig. complex one made B-cell of up is 7.10 Igβ. and invariant proteins each receptor The with immunoglobulin of signaling Igα the cell-surface and but binds antigen immunoglobulin generate signal. The a recognizes cannot itself associated it is and with signaling antigen-nonspecific igβ. molecules—igα when is antigen. the have These (yellow iTam ligated enables that them cytosolic to single each receptor B-cell their in a segment) tails with signal that heterodimer with heavy and a associated igα igβ non-covalently chains. is the form disulfide-linked

Fig. recruit signaling tandem 7.9 ITAMs have proteins SH2 that domains. B-cell (BcR) (TcR) the within residues and receptor tyrosine the X6–9yXX[L/i]…. of iTams contain receptor The T-cell motif`…yXX[L/i] in is Sh2-containing binding tyrosines proteins between The Syk tandem such Zap-70. the important and spacing as to prior as in are an to these conformation, known inactive Left stimulation, or panel: BcR kinases conformation. TcR the autoinhibited domain-kinase The and state. the conformation between the region a stabilized that kinase the hold interactions catalytically autoinhibited Sh2 is in tandem domain by enzyme linker domain inactive as iTam amino Zap-70 can (here Sh2 of for Syk after Right one as 9-12 tyrosines here tyrosines or tandem to shown of by domains the depicted phosphorylation phosphotyrosines, cooperatively both within separated two acids), dock Zap-70. both panel: the can that kinase be phosphorylate its active into By it phosphorylated, becomes so an active can recruited then Zap-70 itself complex, signaling substrates. being that step tyrosine a site with domain, and catalytic the kinase activation the two region domains domain. the of the tyrosines phosphorylation kinase on requires Zap-70 final This together of the linker in between in of phosphorylation Sh2 tandem

Fig. of the enhances ITAMs. receptor T-cell co-receptors the of 7.11 Engagement phosphorylation with upper the panel: co-receptor (TcR), cd4 mhc differ engaging may receptor arrangement. as T-cell we molecule for receptor this signaling simplicity, within the same microclusters the although show from recruitment are to co-receptor-associated an surface and to the iTams cd3γ, by of co-receptors leads and ε, phosphorylation Lck brought binding kinase cell, on T-cell in peptide:mhc When in ζ δ, receptors chains. the together and of of complexes antigen-presenting the Zap-70 domains, Zap-70 enabling panel: through iTams Lower be binds activated by Lck. to tyrosine and phosphorylated Sh2 kinase its the to phosphorylated other signaling phosphorylates Zap-70 intracellular molecules. then

even complexes 50 than cytotoxic and by fewer cell an more become antigenic T CD8 cell, peptide:MHC displayed by effector may cells antigen-presenting sensitive. be can activated B-cell about B engaged. cells receptors are activated become when 20 is vivo, B and cells not precise T in clear confer studies be cells based to vitro that antigen These may remarkable on but in cells the on antigen. estimates for receptors it sensitivity

cells, activate to peptide:MHC For T a directly bind to (Fig. must it the T-cell receptor complex upper Fig. and 7.11, see panel, 4.22). remains across this recognition precisely transmitted unclear is to initiate T-cell it event membrane the However, signaling. extracellular how the physical stoichiometry signaling Questions complexes and initiate cascade. arrangement remain as receptors T-cell of and to to the required peptide:MHC events recognition. will area before antigen to discuss that this active on intracellular of moving research briefly well-understood occur only after explain We

one peptide:MHC is containing receptor is on molecule the dimerization peptide:MHC molecule formation One one signaling antigen by the cell. surface through antigen-presenting peptide:MHC of complexes suggestion ‘pseudo-dimeric’ that initiated self of and T-cell or would T-cell by low by densities CD8 signaling explain the stabilized interaction CD4 of model between on peptide:MHC peptides. the with co-receptor and complexes, the self antigenic This but induced self receptor relies weak interactions it a complexes, occurring peptide:MHC or associated possibility ζ antigenic CD3 evidence still in An direct conformational the structural peptide:MHC however, receptor, that its receptor a model promotes supporting T-cell phosphorylation; chains, is that change complex induces additional and the this is lacking.

or clustering, has can involve been suggested oligomerization, activate as cells. receptor that to T-cell and receptors that T It might antibodies also signaling bind cross-link Since vastly of amounts is that other antigen peptides conventional of peptides outnumbered the antibodies. observed unlikely on physiologic the cell, oligomerization displayed antigenic by surface it with are as induce antigen-presenting numbers contact receptors small between have cell of been of antigen-presenting microclusters and called T observed However, in zone of assemblies T-cell the the cell. the merge These following scaffolds stimulation, TCR microclusters containing form microclusters adaptors. rapidly and components, downstream signaling quickly as such with and signaling indicates in initiated Current these microclusters. evidence that is are inhibitory excluded One when proposes signaling signal popular place proteins takes that complexes. these from initiation model is when is perturbed this enzymes this a initiation A activating in activating favor balanced modifications. in and of of of component model to equilibrium that occurs TCR the equilibrium; signaling, the prior are signaling key inhibitory

and its first co-receptors Antigen by intracellular 7-9 Src-family of phosphorylation ITAMs cascade. kinases, by the recognition generating receptor to signaling leads a the T-cell in signal

The ITAMs detected specific of signal the generated phosphorylation its the is has receptor. first cell the tyrosines T-cell in intracellular of after T both antigen the II respectively, and with CD4 nonreceptor 4-18), molecules to associate (see This domains via intracellular class via signal initiated kinases their extracellular which MHC their the of bind and class and help domains. I molecules, co-receptors, with is CD8 the Section associated phosphorylation the The is kinase (see ITAMs of constitutively with Fig. to and be of CD4 cytoplasmic thought is the kinase of T-cell the for receptor primarily Lck responsible Src-family and CD8 the domains 7.11). binds that leading ITAMs. the the to that peptide:MHC the engaged the more receptor co-receptor T-cell T-cell T-cell Lck of receptor, of enhances the complex the phosphorylation efficient to suggests receptor binding Evidence recruitment to of T-cell The of by in this mice. event Lck-deficient profound development in demonstrated is importance reduction the in 8). Chapter essential the during role Lck receptor T selection of T-cell signaling in indicates This thymus (discussed the in developing the of cells their of cells T T-cell the specific cells by in is for important naive receptor memory maintenance cells, activation CD8 for antigen. Lck important signaling but effector T and T less or is weakly have may associated role the signaling. A kinase, the is Fyn, in tyrosine and receptor T-cell related some of ITAMs with of alone. lacking mice CD4 fashion T to mice lacking antigen, CD8 that lacking T-cell normal both Fyn loss than develop and show development Lck Fyn a respond and essentially normal in more complete Lck mice cells Whereas

between peptide:MHC interactions of in receptor co-receptors signaling receptor be complex. the the and role to Another stabilize may T-cell the than in that second peptide:MHC T-cell for the micromolar half-lives means receptors specific complexes the rapidly. individual less complexes of which receptor:peptide:MHC have 1 and range, their Affinities dissociate of are to MHC generated. the binding The co-receptor stabilize of thereby time providing signal be is to a its additional to thought an molecule increasing interaction for by duration, intracellular the

substrate binds CD8 when the (see the cytoplasmic the or The brought ITAMs is Fig. its the in bound co-receptor recep-tor:peptide:MHC near of T-cell receptor to tails Lck complex CD4 7.11). tyrosine Lck’s carboxy its C-terminal in terminus kinase phosphorylation allosterically of also is the Src (Csk). activity regulated a by by a with The SH2 in helps closed and resulting Lck interacts maintain state conformation, catalytically in phosphotyrosine a (Fig. domain resulting Lck’s inactive 7.12). development as a to bind TCR in thymus The Csk in peptide:MHC, of of mature Csk-deficient absence T autonomously by cells signaling causes T-cell during of the presumably thymocytes. Lck result abnormal needing hyperactive without to activation normally reduce This to acts Csk activity suggests TCR that to Lck signaling. and attenuate fully kinase primed, of or but in (see Fig. domains ligands tyrosine SH2 conformation, Dephosphorylation its their a the inactive releases not Lck by of SH3 or the from Lck engagement active, resulting 7.12). Full also Lck tyrosine requires a in its of kinase catalytic of activation autophosphorylation activity domain. can phosphorylation phosphatase of In which both is phosphorylation tyrosine Lck the CD45, tyrosine counteracted sites. of the dephosphorylate by nonstimulated lymphocytes, Lck receptor found but activated phosphorylation. stimulation, multiple Prior phosphorylated ITAM required to stabilize T antigen lead TCR of form species to Lck in of stimulation is and to are the cells, Lck

Fig. by Lck activity phosphorylation tyrosine dephosphorylation. 7.12 regulated is and domain as (blue) (green). Src (orange) preceding Sh3 Lck such domains the kinase and kinases contain Sh2 contains motif amino-terminal with Lck bind is unique cytoplasmic residues cd4 a that cysteine a the also (yellow) a also in motif two domain that to of cd8. bound Zn or ion similar are upper constrained the kinase by domain interactions the lobes and domains. with of panel: Sh3 Sh2 in Lck, inactive both the two (red) carboxy-terminal end of the domain. with phosphorylated tyrosine at domain interacts kinase the Sh2 The a between domain proline-rich interacts the the Sh2 and domain. The linker kinase sequence a the with in Sh3 domain panel: domain. cd45 (not releases the dephosphorylation carboxyterminal middle Sh2 tyrosine phosphatase of the the by shown) other shown). release ligands region Sh3 of of linker facilitate can Binding to the region (not the considered state, activated. is this in not but fully primed, Lck in full loop requires domain. activation kinase Lck panel: activation the the activity Lower catalytic autophosphorylation on of iTams Lck signaling active the receptor. of nearby then chains in the can phosphorylate T-cell of the of carboxy-terminal to state. loss Sh3 (csk) Src c-terminal the ligand or the Rephosphorylation kinase tyrosine by returns Lck inactive the

Fig. of Structure the ZAP-70 7.13 autoinhibited kinase. the domain conformation is region the inactive red the bottom; of of autoinhibited Zap-70 that the map with analysis. according dashed the at domains shown protein in the line indicates was the structural to shown color-coded of protein detected not The structure a line) domain in Zap-70 is the the region conformation, stimulation, Sh2 and based interactions tandem receptor kinase T-cell to domain. the domain-kinase on prior this kinase linker (thick red between inactive referred the domain kinase state, conformation. inactive autoinhibited locking as an catalytically stabilizes a form by in in inactive interaction Zap-70, of This Zap-70 the to two T-cell following this and phosphorylates in stimulation, shown y319, linker in tyrosine residues receptor y315 Lck yellow. region, in residue (kinase) domain. also a the catalytic Lck tyrosine phosphorylates linker kinase the phosphorylated When domain, and allowing the region the an to no y315 domain active kinase phosphorylated, binds longer are to y319 conformation. adopt Weiss. arthur of courtesy

receptors NK that Mast ZAP-70. antigen D, signals 7-10 cells ITAMs cells than Neutrophils cells tyrosine Fc˜RIII and other recruit Fc˜RIV chains activate Basophils Macrophages (CD16) DAP12or NK associate ˜˛˜˝˙NKG2C, activating E also with kinase deliver Receptors (CD94) Phosphorylated ITAM-containing the Fc°RI

two two a an for the the ITAM motifs of precise protein signaling site binding YXXL/I in suggests a that The spacing domains. SH2 ITAM is with the the kinase which the case tyrosine activation In (ζ-chainassociated the onward. T-cell is protein), carries signal of ZAP-70 this protein receptor, two engaged by in Fig. tyrosines phosphorylated simultaneously an domains SH2 has tandem two can the (see be that ZAP-70 ITAM 7.9). a YXXL to is phosphorylated confers ZAP-70 The is ITAM of affinity single domains sequence the SH2 low; specificity for and binding. of significantly on both binding the stronger SH2 domain in ITAM Lck ZAP-70 has Thus, T-cell sufficiently the receptor, it. an binds when phosphorylated to region linker the residue the between is Lck kinase two the in third in at domain, and domain. catalytic domains phosphorylated SH2 by three tandem residues, the a tyrosine Once and bound, ZAP-70 phosphorylations ZAP-70 disrupting (Fig. allowing of activate domain adopt ZAP-70, these form the active the ZAP-70 conformation the autoinhibited Together inactive by to kinase 7.13). activated be can autophosphorylation. ZAP-70 by also

also that in signal found activation. for 7-11 on other are receptors leukocytes ITAMs cell

each of and for B-cell ITAMs, which receptor and B-cell subunits receptor the are T-cell contain essential signaling. receptor signaling the T-cell The receptor of and a tandem domains—ZAP-70 T the case in a ITAM B cells, related tyrosine with functions both of kinase in Syk, tyrosines kinase, to Phosphorylation cells. recruit the in closely SH2 chains receptors transduce ITAM-containing (Fig. activating signals to immune-system accessory Other use 7.14). also on cells, cytotoxicity example and anti-body-dependent consider Chapter a cell-mediated where neutrophils, triggers receptor (ADCC) in which we this for pathogens. of by (CD16); found is it CD16 IgG facilitates FcγRIII macrophages is One also is and antibody-bound that the destruction NK 11; uptake To ζchain T-cell family signal, associate the another in of the FcγRIII as with the known protein receptor the member either chain. Fcγ also same found or with must Fcε Fc is (FcεRI) on The receptor Fcγ also another cells. chain receptor—the mast signaling component the I of the of by receptor As IgE Chapter this triggers discuss binds it on we degranulation antibodies, in cross-linking allergens, mast 14, and cells. are NK receptors (see Section cells activating 3-26). Last, associated on many another protein ITAM-containing DAP12, with its or kinase, stimulation additional these Syk following either phosphorylated the ZAP-70. tyrosine of ITAM-containing signaling leading Each a tyrosine to of receptor, of recruitment becomes associated chains exception of the With

Fig. that chains activating ITAM-containing 7.14 pair Other deliver with can receptors signals. other chains with T phosphorylated than accessory have when iTams, receptor containing the receptors that are B pair cross-linked. is and cells which cells receptors These deliver signals. activating on (fcγRiii, nK The or macrophages, iii cells, fcγ and is found cd16) neutrophils. receptor leading to function the antibody-dependent cell-mediated known cell, activates (adcc). the the receptor as process killing of cytotoxicity igG Binding of nK this to nKG2c, nKG2e, receptors with nK as activating associate cells, nKG2d, signaling chains. on also such and iTam-containing cells basophils. mast receptor (fcεRi) fcε found on and is The very subunit The affinity. α high to ige binds with antibodies four-spanning a subunit The protein. is transmembrane β mediators. ige, containing the granules mast triggered antigen subsequently to release binds is the inflammatory cell to When also dap12 with with the contain associates and chain the The nK one iTam and killer-activating associated the homodimers. as receptors, γ chain that are present chain fc receptors, per

expressed in ZAP-70 cells, Syk found leukocyte in all been subsets; cells. cells broadly is in contrast, T T only and has NK

receptors Several from seem pathogens to viral have acquired ITAM-containing their hosts. the cytoplasmic containing ITAM. LMP2A Epstein–Barr encodes an a virus gene These tail whose (EBV), membrane protein with a include signaling an 7-20, step in proliferation enables of B-cell to This in malignancies. the EBV-induced the pathways development Section EBV discussed by trigger important malignant HHV8), virus sarcoma is Kaposi protein herpesvirus or transformation (KSHV cells and expresses the that ITAM-containing Another it an the of causes which infects. proliferation

Activated 7-12 and promotes PI proteins activation. scaffold phosphorylates 3-kinase ZAP-70

recruitment of to receptor As and T-cell described ITAMs of in ZAP-70. activation the 7-10, in phosphorylation the Section tyrosines the leads where (Fig. cytoplasmic to the proximity it with transmembrane phosphorylates domain This (linker cell activated LAT provides large a a ZAP-70 protein membrane, the protein for cells), scaffold T 7.15). protein, another also ZAP-70 phosphorylates adaptor SLP-76. referred T-cell can the adaptor three-protein LAT complex, Gads; be complex, the a by in as linked this activation. central plays and role SLP-76 to LAT:Gads:SLP-76 protein any profound signaling is illustrated This seen development TCR and T-cell lacking defects by in mice the

7.1 MOVIE

Fig. phosphorylates signaling downstream SLP-76, modules. four LAT 7.15 and initiating ZAP-70 complex. recruits activated LaT scaffold T-cell Zap-70 activated the the (TcR) phosphorylates them receptor and and proteins to SLp-76 together. adaptor Gads, LaT holds and protein, the SLp-76 tyrosinephosphorylated an sites that modules. adaptors binding signaling and proteins these scaffold several initiate four multiple The downstream enzymes on essential additional recruit in pip2 phosphorylates the 3-kinase, required these which to component plasma activation several for of generate the is modules pip3. of membrane one key pi which of cytoskeletal and adhesiveness akt, of of cellular kinase enhanced activation the which promotes adaptor and serine/ actin vav, recruitment the transcription These the factor integrin clustering. protein and pLc-γ, metabolic activation activation; activity; leads which the enhanced of promotes modules polymerization the to include activation an that reorganization; adap, four induces threonine

cytoskeletal integrin activation leads four PLC-˜GadsVavZAP-70LATSLP-76Activated activation and Akt modules to actin to phosphorylates recruitment cellular enhanced ADAPVav and leads PLC-˜activation initiating reorganization factor SLP-76, ZAP-70 to metabolic polymerization signaling LAT increased and PIP3AktPHdomainADAP adhesiveness clustering activity transcription activation leads to leads

Fig. The activation. are by kinase T-cell of protein and phosphorylation Itk, C-γ in its and LAT activation crucial steps and SLP-76, recruitment by phospholipase 7.16 the the proteins activated the to T-cell phosphorylates SLp-76, scaffold at adaptor and protein by the which a brought are receptor Zap-70 Gads. form LaT together complex the complex of of phosphorylation production pip2 leading pi also the of This promotes pi by (formed to pip3 3-kinase, by the activation 3-kinase). LaT phosphorylated proline-rich phospholipase the in of to binding to pip3 and SLp-76. binds its by to then sites to ph membrane the domain and recruited c-γ (pLc-γ) is domain Tec-family itk. activated, by be pLc-γ must be phosphorylated kinase To the to with its by itk is by interaction SLp-76. domain membrane the recruited with and phosphorylated ph pip3, of interactions itk, by active. once phosphorylated c-γ is phospholipase

and ZAP-70. these in lacking of one humans components, well role 3-kinase understood, T-cell following detailed and to Section (see PI small that a the 7.4); A 3-kinase is evidence occurs the suggests current Ras. is the of linking event activation essential recruitment GTPase PI while for not ZAP-70 enzyme the receptor mechanism second stimulation rapidly activation activation adaptor Ras-GEF by activated LAT small binding Sos, to this forming second be and may by to of a recruitment protein Ras Grb2. Sos three-protein case, In Sos complex Grb2, LAT bridged via the the containing

complex the Following signaling 7.15). optimal which cellular of T-cell and induces Figure 3-kinase, T-cell branches formation of downstream activation changes pathway contribute receptor PI LAT:Gads:SLP-76 (see the of the to several that modules, into activation each PI module is to to both. the to initiated to the key the recruitment complex, Each via signaling intermediate generated by active by either a of complexes, LAT:Gads:SLP-76 3-kinase, or PIP3 the binding activation (PLC-γ), the initiates transcription; brief, among lead upregulates affects of cell to In modules which serine/threonine activation affects other the protein actin adhesion; which the and the which of protein the phospholipase Vav, which polymerization. Akt, kinase of activation the the ADAP, metabolism, these things; adaptor recruitment C-γ of these sections of be in in will modules detail Each below. described the

to that second factor inositol 7-13 messengers lead the activation. trisphosphate transcription PLC-γ and generates Activated diacylglycerol

of phospholipase of (PLC-γ). C-γ the is the module T-cell important One enzyme signaling activation receptor plasma by is then to the 3-kinase; of PLC-γ of the the has of to PH LAT formed and by membrane PIP3 to the its PIP2 inner SLP-76. First, phosphorylation PI been it domain face that by the phosphorylated brought binds binding of messengers the activation. pathway to of The transcription three activate that branches second factor terminal actions PLC-γ produce receptor distinct leading T-cell two

to role at activation Due PLC-γ crucial T-cell this controlled activation, different is levels. in several to not is Recruitment membrane, PLC-γ. activate while sufficient necessary, the to activation by of Tec tyrosine Itk, the PLC-γ requires cytoplasmic kinases. a family phosphorylation member of are plasma on inner the domains PIP3 interacts the of by membrane to specifically, and recruited (Fig. Like SH3 with contain and Tec the interactions PH, domains; PLC-γ, PH kinases the SH2, domain via these face membrane interact and SH3 SH2 domains SLP-76. the 7.16), with and interactions These Itk PLC-γ. to serve in localize to proximity close substrate, its

and of it PLC-γ the recruited the to been and 7-4 catalyze lipid can of membrane has been inner activated, Fig. has Section membrane Once the plasma PIP2 face the breakdown (see generate and the to be products, second inositol lipid 1,4,5-trisphosphate (Fig. PIP3) (DAG) diacylglycerol the 7.5) lipid diffusible with confused (IP3) (not membrane to messenger membrane the two 7.17). diffuses the signaling membrane of and is the the target that other to DAG to molecular the molecules in recruits membrane. confined serves plane membrane, as a but reticulum cytosol (ER) binds IP3 on and into endoplasmic the diffuses IP3 membrane. receptors the to cytosol. stored the channels, in calcium are and receptors Ca2+ which These into open release ER the calcium membrane. its ER consequent STIM1, low ER a then levels the in change of the conformational transmembrane clustering cause within in The protein the promoting channel channel: as The the to release-activated the plasma ORAI1, with (also membrane, known directly bind calcium where STIM1 calcium plasma membrane interact calcium channel). the CRAC they oligomers to to calcium allowing of pathways activate signaling into the further Binding to extracellular replenish triggers ER calcium channel calcium opening, to cell flow STIM1 ORAI1 stores. and

an branches— Ras, module three important in transcription activation (PKC-θ)—each T-cell protein because the of point activation, entry, activation the PLC-γ distinct The after activation step marks activation the a PLC-γ into Ca2+ stimulation of kinase the different the signaling C-θ of and factor. of of splits of ends which in this lymphocytes. to by cell addition signaling many pathways types, These are utilized in Their activation of stimulation. that in of the acetate myristate treatment T-cell with observation the shown into DAG) of pore-forming can the receptor T-cell many (an T phorbol effects (a drug to calcium cell) ionomycin flow cells of allows importance by extracellular analog is that reconstitute and found signaling mutated deficiencies (SCID). these been components, to and be Zap-70, immunodeficiency of in CD45, ORAI1, severe Carma1, of Lck, several combined Itk, cases Additionally, in including have

transcription entry 7-14 Ca2+ activates the NFAT. factor

One of calcium from ions leading cytosol. signaling of PLC-γ results an influx three in pathways the into the increased Ca2+ transcription of called factors NFAT cytosolic PLC-γ a signaling receptor of resulting from (nuclear T-cell outcome of activation via An is important the of factor the family activated

cells). T something a of misnomer, many tissues. expressed five NFAT different the are in because of members is this family of In absence activating the

Fig. Phospholipase to generate phospholipids 7.17 C-γ inositol two cleaves important molecules. signaling phosphatidylinositol the membrane. leaflet of a the component panel: of is Top (pip2) bisphosphate plasma inner the which phosphorylation, diacylglycerol which parts: When into away (ip3), the from is stays into pLc-γ it cleaves two inositol by the cytosol, (daG), pip2 diffuses and trisphosphate membrane. activated membrane in molecules Both signaling. of these are in important calcium phases are panel: middle there two of release. (ca2+) the phase early of the endoplasmic membrane, ions and in calcium eR. to the receptor cytosol (yellow) from opening (eR) calcium allowing to enter ip3 reticulum a channels the binds STim1. eR calcium sensor, the in eR The aggregation ca2+ the stores causes of of an depletion stimulates called oRai1 binding calcium plasma membrane. the to in Bottom STim1 by the calcium aggregated panel: second of entry and opening phase channels stores. restores calcium and eR cytosolic increases ca2+ further This daG and protein signaling kinase called the membrane, kinase called proteins Ras-Gef RasGRp recruits and binds importantly the a most (pKc-θ). serine/threonine to c-θ in nfκB. results activation and Recruitment activates of RasGRp activation pKc-θ transcription factor to of Ras, membrane the plasma the the

the in nfaT serine threonine is residues. by Left cytoplasm panel: on and phosphorylation maintained receptor after see reticulum shown; (not stimulation, the first the fig. endoplasmic cytosol, calcium panel: from center enters antigen 7.17) later extracellular from and the space (shown). it activating to and cytosol, nfaT. calcium binds to entering serine/threonine phosphatase the the complex binds after to the calcineurin, ca2+:calmodulin calmodulin, dephosphorylate panel: it once the activates dephosphorylated, transcription promoter moves nucleus, Right various into genes. where binds nfaT to of and the elements

T 7.2 residues. of kept by signals, is on NFAT cells resting MOVIE in cytosol the serine/threonine phosphorylation casein mediated including (CK2). phosphorylation kinase kinase 3 This kinases, 2 glycogen is by (GSK3) and serine/threonine synthase nuclear transporters, is the NFAT into (Fig. nuclear not unable When and of to is NFAT the enter nucleus recognized sequence localization phosphorylated, by 7.18).

conformational to binds able to cytoplasmic protein called Ca2+ receptor to a which a and activate The range then induces in T-cell resulting is signaling change of wide and bind target a from enzymes. different calmodulin, target cells, protein a calmodulin calcineurin, of T NFAT. on In is phosphatase an acts that important calcineurin Dephosphorylation to Fig. the and recognized by nucleus nuclear NFAT of allows nuclear sequence (see be NFAT localization enters transporters, by the 7.18). activation, T-cell genes the the of participates There turning it cytokine gene crucial (IL-2). for in as for on such many interleukin-2 the

tacrolimus illustrated and activation is of selective (also importance FK506). inhibitors T-cell of NFAT calcineurin as The called by in of cyclosporin (CsA) known the A effects calcineurin. cyclophilin this complex the with CsA complex A, and protein a inhibits forms a a binds calcineurin. protein making Tacrolimus complex (FKBP), protein, that inhibits different FK-binding similarly of formation calcineurin, these By NFAT. inhibiting prevent the active drugs sensitive they more of cell than types. many levels calcineurin, T are express inhibition this so of to pathway other low cells are Both are organ 16, the act Section as effective Chapter 16-3). thus transplants (see rejection used tacrolimus A and and widely cyclosporin to prevent immunosuppressants, of

the induces expression the relay mitogen-activated kinase Ras (MAPK) protein transcription AP-1. 7-15 stimulates of activation factor and

GTPase of A the activation is the second of PLC-γ signaling the small module branch Ras. occur means. various This can by Ras the membrane a mechanism DAG activation PLC-γ, for by variety generated is plasma cells via The in of the proteins. and diffuses activates T most in efficient which is these which guanine-nucleotide factor RasGRP, specifically a exchange activates protein One the Ras. of that is that called module DAG. domain RasGRP contains a to protein-interaction a C1 binds the interaction recruits signaling RasGRP complexes (Fig. This near membrane active to GTP. it exchange where the activates promoting Ras of by for 7.19), GDP which Sos, which the to Sections recruited by and guanine-exchange has itself LAT by the is activated recruited signaling phosphorylated also by and is (see in Grb2 factor T-cell the pathway receptor Ras adaptor protein binding SLP-76. 7-3), been 7-2

Ras inactive. initially is phosphorylates to which activates Raf, which factor Erk as RasGRP TCR and produces DAG, Elk-1 activates Erk nucleus Raf DAG the Ras nucleus recruits enters cytoplasm factors membrane Activated RasGRP which Mek transcription active Mek, activates Erk such Ras phosphorylates signaling inactive transcription Ras the Ras where it

known Fig. in protein (MAPK) MAP the then a Ras as serine/threonine activation triggers a three-kinase relay ends or of mitogen-activated a that kinase (see kinase Activated kinase 7.19). a the relay kinase receptor antigen the is kinase first of case Raf. In signaling, of member (MAP3K) called the MAPK of a phosphorylates is member MAPK serine/threonine kinase the a series, MEK1. Raf kinase called next (MAP2K) the that last signal-related on MAPK MEK1 phosphorylates and the member (extracellular a a T is kinase the and of cells relay, cells dual-specificity a kinase). tyrosine in protein Erk residue which B threonine that a is

their thereby three all kinases particular Signaling a specialized bind MAPK facilitated scaffold proteins MAPK to by interactions. by relay, accelerating cascades is in that in pathway. the of suppressor kinase Ras functions Raf/MEK1/Erk (KSR) scaffold protein The and membrane. cargo localizes Raf, the and associates receptor and T-cell During with signaling, MEK1, Erk KSR to its itself to the location, (see Fig. kinase with relay bound can KSR trigger that activated and In the Raf Ras engage 7.19).

MAPKs is gene and of activate that factors transcription function An important can new phosphorylate induce to expression. then the composed monomer a of from heterodimer transcription AP-1, to Jun acts Fos indirectly each (Fig. and the factors of transcription is which one Erk families factor generate 7.20). Erk Elk-1, the Active transcription factor which phosphorylates

Fig. leading activates factor transcription 7.19 cascades, activation. to MAPK DAG in cascades mapK of small activation all as such proteins, this are the example. G Ras initiated by state active from panel) inactive RasGRp, panel) is (Gef), daG. (first state membrane (second to exchange Ras factor recruited by to guanine-nucleotide is an an switched which a the by the Raf, mapK panel). of (third first Ras cascade, kinase (map3K) activates enzyme a the called kinase kinase a protein phosphorylates phosphorylates erk, mek, turn Raf which a mapK. and map2K, in a activates interactions to The erk scaffold KSR efficient facilitate shown). (not associates and with mek, protein their Raf, diffuse enter within and the can and complex phosphorylation from panel). the nucleus that erk cell releases the it activation so of (fourth it transcription factors new erk gene results in transcription. by phosphorylation of

Fig. transcription Ras/ as MAPK AP-1 The of pathway. 7.20 result the is a factor signaling formed erk the Ras–mapK Left enter nucleus, where phosphorylation factor the the it allows a erk cascade activated elk-1. the panel: transcription mapK phosphorylates result of of to as (SRe) to binds elk-1, serum factor factor along in of element stimulating (FOS) response for serum c-fos, with the response the gene its transcription transcription. (SRf), promoter the the kinase another Right can panel: kinase Jun the phosphorylation the of pKc-θ protein induce called (JnK). mapK phosphorylate and enables forms This factor dimer transcription which c-Jun, the c-fos. the nucleus a with JnK enter to of genes. is binds transcription factor dimer The transcription ap-1 c-Jun/fos phosphorylated that sites active many an target and promotes to ap-1

response with serum to called cooperates transcription factor a transcription initiate FOS factor of gene. the another but heterodimer, phosphorylates (JNK) the MAPK AP-1 Fos protein inactive to Jun form associates kinase remains with until this Jun. transcriptionally Jun called then T-cell turning IL-2. many gene of the encoding to Similar cytokine participates in important including AP-1 on for NFAT, transcription genes the activation,

NFκB factors the and transcription Protein activates C AP-1. kinase 7-16

an kinase is activation T from isoform that C and leading muscle. third the results pathway PLC-γ to of restricted of protein The PKC-θ, signaling in cells by and in of lacking T factors, cells the mature response to crucial AP-1, activation NFκB the signaling the a their PKC-θ thymus, transcription two receptor defect CD28. have cells Mice in in T-cell but and T develop T-cell factors for participate activation. These on turning also required in transcription genes example, addition for important gene to For NFAT in of and of AP-1, transcription IL-2 an component PKC-θ T-cell making requires NFκB activation activation. the

when Fig. PKC-θ membrane to a and DAG is activated PLC-γ by C1 (see the is has generated domain recruited 7.17). initiates PKC-θ results the steps of kinase a 7.21). (Fig. this location, that the In of activation NFκB in of series activity large to other CARMA1, membrane-localized and with form proteins. the multisubunit scaffold PKC-θ oligomerize phosphorylates it protein complex a causing we complex in the activates Chapter and TLR in that activating Fig. NFκB the its encountered This role (see signaling in in 3 TRAF-6, recruits same pathway protein 3.13).

is the a of a of NFκB name proteins. Rel family of transcription factors for family member heterodimeric of homoand the made general up NFκB is The heterodimer a activated most of in lymphocytes p50:p65Rel. common

scaffold it ˙(NEMO)IKKTAB1/2TAK1ubiquitinBCL10MALT1TRAF-6NF°B NEMO I˛B DAG on NF˛B, MALT1 makes IKK-°, phosphorylates TRAF-6 and nucleus transcription CARMA1 membrane TAK1, recruited the activates scaffold TAB1/2, itself PKC-˜CARMA1I°BdegradedI°B˛˝ I˛B a creates is a which and with and phosphorylates inducing on in of releases PKC-˜to which recruits and BCL10 phosphorylates Degradation ubiquitination recruited by degradation polyubiquitin CARMA1 the I˛B, where Phosphorylated

Fig. the it 7.21 mediated produced the signaling membrane, by T-cell kinase Activation activating c NFκB diacylglycerol by scaffold transcription of a is protein recruits a caRma1. pLc-γ, result antigen to phosphorylates a C. where (pKc-θ) as called of factor (daG), receptor kinase protein receptors protein complex maLT1 BcL10 that ubiquitin with the and a forms ligase recruits TRaf-6. e3 This in fig. described as by and the kinase kinase TaK1 recruited the the phosphorylates (iKK) is produced iκB [iKKα:iKKβ:iKKγ by (nemo)]. 3.13, scaffold polyubiquitin complex TRaf-6 phosphorylates ubiquitination, targets stimulating its proteasome. degradation for which by the iκB iKK iκB, genes. nfκB This of releases enter stimulate and its to transcription the target nucleus ectodermal that causes a skin results activation nfκB in immunodeficiency susceptibility infections, that nemo a as extracellular to known dysplasia. defect along with disease in prevents bacterial

the κB to by inhibitory The protein in inhibitor inactive binding of dimer held in called is (IκB). state an cytoplasm an for As described (see TLR Fig. signaling complex which serine the 3.13), of IκB first stimulates activates the activating degradation TAK1, a kinase kinases, TRAF-6 (IKK). by kinase IκB of and active into ubiquitination the nucleus of consequent phosphorylates degradation, causing IKK IκB, the entry NFκB. and and subsequent release its and subunit characterized known as immunodeficiency, Inherited NEMO) well developmental deficiency defects (also such and called leads skin dysplasia ectodermal in to IKKγ syndrome as ectodermal of which the hypohidrotic as a teeth, by as is structures X-linked immunodeficiency.

this factor also be JNK, by activate might can route. activate AP-1 able transcription to PKC-θ the and their in JNK our NFκB is in activation indicating pathway in defect incomplete. AP-1 have a that However, T defect lacking activation, PKC-θ still defect in no understanding activation, this cells but of to addition

upregulates cellular activation PI the kinase Akt. 7-17 via pathways metabolic 3-kinase serine/threonine

demands substantial requires a of antigen of signaling, rapidly energetic is activation productive the an also changes important the T-cell of macromolecular metabolism, cells. needed dividing to factors outcome and While transcription accommodate cellular in receptor response this B). as and protein the in initiated serine/threonine role important known the activation response (also recruitment plays module, the second 3-kinase a signaling pathway The central Akt kinase kinase via of PI by is PI the PIP3 in to its 3-kinase by domain, membrane, binds (Fig. generated via which Akt, PH 7.22; also see Fig. 7.5). that phosphorylated phosphorylates is by a activated, location, proteins. In once variety and downstream of PDK1, Akt inhibiting mechanisms. death cell by to its multiple One survival effects promote is cell of via of pro-apoptotic A phosphorylation Bad. the major protein mechanism the is the (see and protein to When (pro-survival) Bad Bcl-2 inhibit no bind longer Fig. phosphorylated, can antiapoptotic 7.22). properties in and T adhesion receptors the migratory regulate and homing 11). Akt that activated cells 9 effect Chapters of is detail expression (discussed to in activated the orchestrate Another of of Activated enzymes of cell’s nutrient the by by transporters this the the glycolytic mediated the to and increasing metabolism by the stimulate upregulation also Akt is glucose; of of increasing functions inducing utilization membrane. on activity T-cell

Fig. activated Akt metabolic via cell 7.22 promotes TCR kinase by and and survival serine/threonine signaling enhanced is mTOR. The activity generating 3-kinase activates panel the signaling one: pip3 the pi pdK1. plasma recruits shown), kinase membrane; T-cell receptor (TcR) in (not activates and pip3 pdK1. and and serine/threonine pip3 second via domain, a kinase, its by phosphorylated ph to binds activated akt, is at the is Bcl-2 panel binding active Bad, inhibiting pro-apoptotic two: and the phosphorylates membrane. which anti-apoptotic akt to the protein mitochondrial protein to Bad cell promote 14-3-3, to panel releasing survival. Bcl-2 binds phosphorylated three: is a GTpase panel four: Rheb. of the function akt small complex, TSc1/2 phosphorylate Gap a active second the to for TSc1/2 five: releases When Rheb leading to phosphorylated, Rheb protein, panel activation. the is it inactive (mammalian of activates mToR active and Rheb to target rapamycin). binds on increased lipid pathways ribosome to mToR mRna synthesis, lead acts production, biosynthesis, multiple activated, once translation. that and protein

allowing Bad membrane activate to phosphorylate active allowing Akt and Phosphorylated binds PDK1 mTOR Bcl-2 for GTPase, Akt, 14-3-3 Rheb, Active to from inactive Bcl-2 TSC1/2 synthesis PDK1 RhebTSC1/2 allowing production mitochondrial Bad the Rheb membrane mTOR ribosome lipid biosynthesis outer mitochondrial the inner Rheb to Bad, Bcl-2 Akt Rheb translation release, mRNA releasing phosphorylates promote Akt matrix bind phosphorylated Upon cell GAP survival protein recruits a active PDK1 complex, Active phosphorylates and releases Akt PIP3 Bad 14-3-3, TSC1/2 small

Fig. to ADAP activates LAT:Gads:SLP-76 of Recruitment complex integrin 7.23 the adhesion aggregation. and

Lfa-1 conformation weakly the to that antigen-presenting-cells. the Left on integrin a (TcR) is prior T-cell signaling, in binds to present membrane icam-1 low-affinity on receptor T-cell panel: TcR panel: an recruited is the SLp-76. tyrosine-phosphorylated adap LaT:Gads:SLp-76 domain Sh2 adap by and complex of signaling, to middle adaptor following the interaction protein the between adap a adaptor of Riam molecule), the GTpase Rap1. SKap then complex (Rap1-GTpinteracting and activating small recruits Lfa-1 active change Lfa-1 leads to in conformational Right binding a icam-1. Rap1 and high-affinity that panel: induces to aggregation of

target of regulator key to stimulate macromolecular another a is pathway, of important Yet biosynthesis function the (see of (mammalian Akt rapamycin) Fig. mTOR activated 7.22). Rheb. TSC small for case, phosphorylates and inactivates a In the the Akt GTPase complex, GAP this in leads activation the and activation, Rheb turn, mTOR. of This to to cellular the out The on multiple has activation. collectively, protein needed effects that mTOR are these production, and cell the provide essential expression, to pathway materials metabolism; to increased T-cell accompany carry division gene changes raw increased mTOR and lipid production, mRNA biosynthesis, ribosome activation leads synthesis, to translation. protein Specifically,

enhanced signaling cell adhesion. receptor T-cell integrin-mediated 7-18 leads to

The leads stimulation by adhesion. module signaling to enhanced TCR integrin third induced Fig. described (and ‘immune localizes promotes and as in a 7-19 changes the (discussed structure cytoskeletal this signaling in Together complexes into see with below the of process the interaction section), next cell-APC synapse’ known active T stability Section 7.25). of the target of stable T-cell receptor that is membrane The within minutes of and is immune with synapse, MHC/peptide the region T-cell formed or direct APC cell, the in contact ligands. recognition adhesiveness this of the T-cell is important integrin component LFA-1. One of increased weak a T-cell nonstimulated ICAM-1. ligand, the membrane, well on resides dispersed is its in T in low-affinity resulting state cells, to and LFA-1 binding On converts also ICAM-1. synapse, binding a change receptor each LFA-1 and for undergo that molecule a aggregate into conformational high-affinity T-cell at LFA-1 molecules stimulation, the partner Following Together, and cell–cell these the interaction. to adhesion stabilization lead and between enhanced the this cell changes T to of APC, to are the by recruitment ADAP LFA-1 on protein LAT:Gads:SLP-76 the complex induced adaptor These effects the (Fig. scaffold of 7.23). ADAP recruits SKAP55 turn, RIAM. In two proteins, and additional ADAP:SKAP55:RIAM of T-cell signaling. The Rap1 to complex the receptor site Rap1, GTPase the at activating binds small LFA-1 and promotes GTP-bound aggregation a converts then the LFA-1 into change high-affinity conformational Rap1 for ICAM-1. that binding partner stimulation. by importance and show receptor impaired pathway proliferation cells The following cytokine is of ADAP-deficient production finding the this that T T-cell underscored

by GTPase the cytoskeletal activating induces T-cell small signaling Cdc42. 7-19 reorganization receptor

also signaling immune The cytoskeleton. the TCR actin formation to involved of a in module, fourth stable leads reorganization of synapse, the Without fail. in interactions the T would completely fact, process, between would the not T-cell and aggregation cell stabilize, integrin APC would and activation occur, not this Rho-family Cdc42. transduced Vav, receptor component GTPases, that by GEF of activates is this A signal T-cell a major including of Vav domain PH is Vav of complex the the site PIP3 with receptor to interactions by Like domain PLC-γand with (Fig. recruited activation SH2 of Vav the LAT:Gads:SLP-76 and scaffold the Itk, 7.24). scaffold is the activated is also WASp by (Wiskott– Cdc42 syndrome to binding a LAT:Gads:SLP-76 GTP-bound by small When protein), conformational which Cdc42 to recruited in Aldrich the protein the adaptor protein Vav, Nck. induces the change complex these actin of binds and recruit to polymerization. leading This proteins WIP, active together, Arp2/3, form to WASp Wiskott–Aldrich is are of disease the WASp The importance by pathway basis for syndrome. the defects that fact underscored in immunodeficiency this the individuals WASp-dependent widespread actin WASp, have of in types, of to polymerization disease suffering the which impairments from multiple cell all depend functions. Due their expression immune on for this requirement to effective cells. CD4 T this antibody B in responses, interactions cells for cell-dependent to One is major defect the T between due ensure polymerization actin in and disease of to normally membrane from to T immune (Fig. is provide formation ‘help’ to onto T the adequate failure B cytokines cells directed ensure of in the the the secretion most Thus, B-cell the of WASpdeficient which from cell cells required results a defect likely synapse, 7.25).

specific some signaling, signaling the of are components 7-20 T-cell signaling logic that to to is cells. B-cell of but similar of B The receptor receptor

receptors. receptors signaling There B-cell signaling between are similarities from T-cell and many from the this in (see is and the Igβ receptor, Fig. As Igα antigen-specific T-cell chains, composed with associated signaling case B-cell of chains receptor ITAM-containing with 7.10). Lyn—are for the of (Fig. kinases three family—Fyn, thought Src Blk, cells, B In be tyrosine and to phosphorylation ITAMs responsible the of protein 7.26). kinases with These associate

Fig. complex of to Cdc42, activation actin polymerization. the Vav leading induces of LAT:Gads:SLP-76 7.24 to Recruitment GTpase SLp-76. vav, binding the a activated small ph to to the the in to binding for complex receptor is membrane by cdc42, panel: (TcR) recruited phosphorylated pip3 factor and T-cell its Left via domain by (Gef) exchange guanine-nucleotide of protein WaSp. to The form on binds protein adaptor an inactive phosphorylated small nck adjacent tyrosine SLp-76 recruits and the the to middle binds activates panel: cdc42, vav WaSp. which and activates arp2/3 binds Wip, to and WaSp Right polymerization. inducing panel: active recruiting actin as of aldrich immunodeficiency by this the protein by the WaSp is pathway The discovery disease for Wiskott– responsible gene illustrated importance of syndrome. the the encoded human

Fig. for immune cytokines. directed of structure secretion synapse a 7.25 The provides T-cell cell of (TcRs) takes on When a of interacting T T-cell process cell, antigen-presenting peptide:mhc the place plasma a receptors recognize receptor reorganization membranes on two the the on an cells. a plasma its two cell cytokines cell, the between at when the T-cell-secreted direct Left a the B-cell surface synapse panel: on the the cells. closest B peptide:mhc recognizes to onto membranes of site T contact cd4+ ligand of functions immune (red) complexes Lfa-1/icam-1 a of the TcR/peptide:mhc 30 the after of Lfa-1/icam-1 TcR/peptide:mhc of proteins peripheral and confocal panel: the (green) of show a the signaling central minutes Right complexes. images microscopy and ring the accumulation initiation been These peripheral green). central the complex complex have the activation (pSmac, supermolecular (cSmac, activation called and supermolecular red) structures the known synapse. as immune combined structure is The y. Kaizuka. courtesy of photograph

in and low-affinity with Igα via Igβ. receptors unphosphorylated ITAMs interaction a resting the are phosphorylate receptor-associated and which receptors ITAMs. tyrosine a cross-links After antigen, in residues the bound kinases multivalent the the activated them, have kinase, SH2 phosphorylated do containing domains, instead, Syk, express the not is B to a related ITAM. cells tyrosine closely ZAP-70; recruited two which simply additional binding ZAP-70, requires contrast to its by activated is phosphorylation phosphorylated activation, In to Lck the Syk for site.

one that B receptor as co-receptor co-receptor co-stimulatory to cells, functions and receptor CD81—often is a referred and accessory complex proteins—CD19, For into 7.27). the B-cell (Fig. CD21, the cell-surface of combined are enhanced is cells, signaling if receptor. co-receptor As the receptor clusters the with is from B-cell simultaneously the antigen-dependent bound T ligand B-cell and by antigen its with complement as the receptor known C3dg CD21 complement. 2, is fragment a receptor of for CR2) (also is This C3dg (see as means pathogens that such bacterial on antigens which bound Fig. cross-link the B-cell complex. can CD21:CD19:CD81 7.27) the with receptor by the itself, phosphorylation which recruitment cytoplasmic the induces the kinases, receptor-associated CD19 receptor PI signaling through (see turn binding and This of 7-4). of Section Src-family the in of augmentation kinases, tyrosine leads of B-cell additional tail 3-kinase to the of B-cell 3-kinase PI

Fig. and sites the transphosphorylation. to kinases with 7.26 phosphorylate and Src-family create binding are ITAMs Syk B-cell tyrosines via Syk activation for in associated receptors antigen binding (as kinases or figure) tyrosine The receptor in binding membrane-bound phosphorylated either B-cell the Src-family the a shown by Sh2 through amino-terminal by fyn, to their domains and single Blk, Lyn with domains. iTams, associate through their clustering, iTams the binding after tails igβ. receptor of and kinases associated tyrosines the in phosphorylate the on igα and cytoplasmic ligand igβ to chain. the the iTams of phosphorylated Subsequently, Syk binds other transphosphorylation, and receptor complexes Because signaling. cluster, Syk bound activate each further at least there are become thus by proximity can two initiating in in molecules each close

receptor the Fig. pathway signaling initiates from leading additional (see an B-cell 7.27). the antigen from B-cell recognition. strengthen to co-receptor serves the resulting signal Thus, yet B-cell unknown. receptor (TAPA-1), as role component The of the is CD81 complex, of the third

BLNK). known Syk activated, (also SLP-65 scaffold protein as the Once phosphorylates phosphorylation distinct form proteins, multiple adaptor functions proteins, two signaling SLP-65 a complexes tyrosine including LAT proteins, and of in composite T to cells, several of as in act SH2-containing concert. and variety a multiprotein providing SLP-76 these and enzymes for can sites that Like recruiting with T key cell-specific and Fig. PLC-γ, phospholipase form in is Tec to DAG (Btk) PIP2 the which is kinase tyrosine a signaling activated As cells, aid the of IP3 and Bruton’s (see hydrolyzes B protein kinase the 7.27). discussed factors. activation for to signaling DAG and transcription the As calcium the by of downstream leads T-cell receptor, development characterized functioning B lack cells, chromosome) deficiency in in (which of Btk and X-linked on disease gene resulting is prevents A is the by by agammaglobulinemia, which X the a encoded a of the antibodies. been linked mutations other and Chapter cells, B-cell in Btk, to molecules B 8). Besides immunodeficiencies receptor (see have signaling including SLP-65, chains in

on described with downstream dependent for the BCR SLP-65. Several also protein signaling shared other pathways TCR are signaling, are and adaptor WASp, adhesion polymerization small Vav-dependent by actin Fig. of promote These the recruitment and (see include integrin and and of that induction GTPases the activation Cdc42 7.27). In the of of recognition case B-cell

B-cell fragments, the receptor. with together the is co-receptor B-cell complement enhanced B-cell engaging the greatly when tagged signaling by antigen receptor antigen (BcR) is of the component cleavage (see to antigen-bound c3dg complement c3 fig. cell-surface cd19 and the to includes 2, component a allows to co-receptor of (Tapa-1). 2.30) cd81 the B-cell receptor (complement tagged also the cd21 cR2), bind which complex, antigen protein BcR signaling clustering in cytoplasmic residues of and phosphorylation co-receptor the igα result iTam receptor in tyrosine the and of subunits, antigen igβ. the cross-linking domains the with sequences of the of the the The domain cd19. Src-family kinase of also in phosphorylates cytoplasmic residues tyrosine to phosphorylated T kinase igβ which iTams Syk, and similarly tyrosine igα and in activate Zap-70 the functions recruit The in cells. plasma generation of leading pip3 The cd19 in tail recruits to phosphorylated pi the membrane. 3-kinase, by phosphorylates scaffold protein associates activated cin85. the with SLp-65, membrane binding the membrane-associated Syk plasma which activation. recruits pdK1 akt akt, and pip3 leading to and phosphorylated Btk of phosphorylation Btk and the and pip3 recruit SLp-65 leading activation tyrosine Tec-family pLc-γ. kinase pLc-γ, to inactive vav, and pip3 phosphorylated SLp-65 nck, recruit and WaSp. also high-affinity activates also and small GTpases induce vav Lfa-1 the WaSp, to conversion leading binding to state. aggregation integrin that GTpases polymerization; activated activate of actin the

cytoskeletal kinases phosphatases and GTPases, and changes, Adaptors lipid adhesion, scaffold Ig°Ig˛Tyrosine kinases proteins Phospholipases serine/threonine metabolism ˜˜°˛˝˙˙ˆmIgMTCR Transcription kinases, and factors,

Fig. pathways. 7.28 antigen of receptor Summary signaling receptors in as signal orchestrated in of cells. this T-cell B-cell transduction downstream pathways produce changes an occur many stages section, series the involving of outlined widespread the that proteins of the categories in and are detectable stimulation antigen first tyrosine kinases. following The the activation events receptor of following complexes. the are receptor phospholipases modified, to and and lipid adaptor activated recruiting this, scaffolds proteins kinases and The signaling level phosphatases. amplifies protein these small GTpases, multiple by serine/threonine of stages next earlier activating kinases, to metabolism, transcription these of cytoskeletal lead to Together, B-cell increases changes, in factor all and contribute activation, cellular which adhesion activation. and T-and

synapse to interface. also receptor membrane-bound signaling an antigen, that cell–cell B-cell localizes complexes signaling produces the immune CD4 to prerequisite form to B cell, peptide:MHC in the synapse One antigen function to T by the in of that uptake presenting complexes cells B key promote is a cells. the antigen immune of

metabolic in signaling receptor cells. induces B changes B-cell also activated is the the of site T cells, As PI for 3-kinase, to action the leads the activation at whose formation membrane of this activated is case the on PI(3,4,5)P3 B-cell response of phosphoinositide receptor. dependent the complex of is receptor response by combined plus B-cell through B-cell augmented the This signaling co-receptor CD19/CD21/CD81. pathways Fig. additional proliferation activation as which is and cell activated, downstream phosphorylated recruits (see leading Akt, then promoting to survival of Akt-dependent well mTOR, and PI(3,4,5)P3 as 7.27).

Summary.

are which responsible complexes with additional antigen The the for multiprotein the signaling that surface on of interact proteins chains receptors antigen-binding from in the lymphocytes receptor. are protein known as ITAMs. chains tyrosine-containing These motifs signaling carry activating addition types receptors widely cell chains many ITAM lymphocytes. motifs in by containing used Signaling to are in immune series that activation broadly results In by Fig. a are antigen in lymphocytes, in the events of receptors biochemical outlined of 7.28. This phosphorylation ITAMs the initiated by signaling the cascade by Src-family kinases. is of ITAM in The ZAP-70 kinase, recruits then Syk cells T another tyrosine cells. B phosphorylated in and the and in T of in or scaffolds LAT cells, SLP-65 cells, and B activation called 3-kinase. of results in Syk ZAP-70 and of the in SLP-76 phosphorylation Activation PI activated Vav, PI recruited Akt of Multiple and phosphorylated PIP3 and and activated C-γ, by including plasma are whereas the 3-kinase ADAP, phospholipase recruited these the proteins is signaling membrane. generating scaffolds, at by action diacylglycerol (DAG). and generates (IP3) trisphosphate inositol PLC-γ concentrations, kinase has in the and Ras. intracellular an G important is calcium in role changes and inducing IP3 involved in protein C-θ protein activating DAG small in and proliferation cells, the these namely, the T In ultimately for of result induce transcription the cytokine pathways AP-1, IL-2, essential activated of together, transcription NFAT, the activation is further lymphocyte. factors factors, of three NFκB; differentiation and these transcription which receptor reorganization. in adhesiveness, both factor cells T B leads metabolic enhanced activation, activity, In signaling addition survival, and cytoskeletal transcription antigen cell cells to to and receptors is become of antigen by engaged co-receptors as receptor–antigen a that by binding. result Signaling facilitated the MHC-binding and complex B-cell proteins containing in the in transmembrane CD19 cells CD4 complement-binding CD8 co-receptor cells. B and T These are co-receptors

T Co-stimulatory in receptor B lymphocytes. modulate receptors inhibitory and signaling antigen and

lymphocyte and antigen the the of and is T-cell the adaptive activation, determine immune response B-cell are receptors initiated. specificity initiated for essential that Signals by to on receptor T the B or antigen not cell. cell activate a sufficient is naive signaling However, from its own lymphocytes activation. naive achieve require additional to full signals These the on and are receptors, and or B can costimulatory Receptors either cells T second this receptor of the cells of family called necessary members provide CD28 that signal of are TNF proteins superfamily. CD28 utilize use receptor, the cells B co-stimulatory family as naive member the primarily TNF naive While T receptor CD40. cells receptor and The activation transcription that overall T cell. receptors thereby activation the factor function to antigen these B ensuring or induce of enhance the signaling is PI signals of cell co-stimulatory activation, 3-kinase through downregulate B on cell-surface co-stimulatory In signals. to function activating T activation to receptor cells signals, cells receptors these and other contrast system. of in immune in to infections receptors particularly case important chronic immune These destructive the are inhibitory or can the lead conditions, controlled by that responses are inefficiently inflammatory preventing autoimmune that excessive

receptor CD28 protein cell-surface signaling for naive is a T-cell activation. 7-21 required The co-stimulatory

T described in to sufficient activate not by signaling The sections the through previous is cell. T-cell receptor the complex naive itself a in T As can proteins noted co-stimulatory bear activate co-stimulatory naive molecules cells that Chapter antigen-presenting cell-surface or as cells known ligands. 1, We antigen in for to called that the discuss cell transmit detail co-stimulation along on a the naive is receptors, immunological signal for T-cell signal of required, with with T activation—this in this cell-surface requirement co-stimulatory consequences ‘signal Chapter These 9. known interact stimulation, receptors, sometimes as is 2.’

receptors the cell-surface The protein understood CD28. of these best is co-stimulatory mainly B7.1 present (CD86), dendritic cells is the B7.2 cells. (CD80) the such binds of as specialized and surface cells and which all antigen-presenting CD28 on naive are expressed ligands on T co-stimulatory cell. the same and ligand become lymphocyte activated, both naive the To engage on antigen-presenting must co-stimulatory a antigen and T-cell cytokine mainly signaling promoting proliferation, production, by survival. CD28 cell antigen-dependent aids activation T-cell the CD28. signaling domain All mediated cytoplasmic by effects are of motifs in present these

Lck tyrosine molecules, the YXN and its domain by in that can After on becomes by cytoplasmic tyrosine non-ITAM protein Grb2, engagement CD28 in recruit a motif a in motif adaptor phosphorylated YMNM. B7 residues The carries tail that cytoplasmic binds domains a and Itk. proline-rich motif Lck (PXXP) SH3 the CD28 of also of details uncertain, generate to major Although CD28 (Fig. phosphorylation to activate 3-kinase of is are PIP3 effect PI the a 7.29). CD28 induced signal signal of the T-cell cooperates co-stimulatory the by mechanism, modules T-cell receptor three with receptor ensure By this maximal described four to the of above. activation signaling a membrane, high PLC-γ Itk Specifically, to concentration PIP3 can where activation. of recruits the Lck phosphorylate enhancing it, thereby 7.17). and metabolism cellular also increased PIP3 cell and to Section recruit promotes which survival functions activate Akt, (see An NF-90; protein is to IL-2 NF-90 phosphorylate of the binds phosphorylated, translocates when the to mRNA, leading to IL-2 Akt stabilizes from function synthesis. and RNA-binding nucleus and increased to cytoplasm the additional the recruits (see Vav, cytoskeletal 7.19). reorganization leading to PIP3 Section Finally, the functions receptor amplify CD28 of signaling to downstream co-stimulatory Fig. responses T-cell most (see stimulation to Thus, through 7.29).

7.3 MOVIE

B7 leading on PI Akt SH2domainkinasedomainAktItkSLP-76LATPDK1PLC-˜activeCdc42inactiveCdc42Vav allowing B7.2 PDK1 CD28 Cdc24 ligands CD28 allowing to activation activating recruits to also activate APCs also recruits induces expressed to and Itk, B7.1 CD28B7MHCPIP2PIP3PI3KPI3KPIP3 Akt, binding specialized produce 3-kinase phosphorylation, PIP3 to Vav, and PDK1 PLC-˜PIP3 PIP3 are it recruits and phosphorylate phosphorylate

Fig. transduces The CD28 7.29 co-stimulatory protein antigen T-cell that pathways. signaling receptor enhance signals expressed The (first cd28, and on cells only are panel). (apcs) specialized dendritic cells ligands as B7.1 namely B7.2, antigen-presenting for such ph substrates in of the pip3 with enzymes them their bringing production together their that 3-kinase cd28 (pi3K), membrane. pi induces with of via thus its tyrosine subsequent engagement phosphorylation, which activates domains, several recruits survival phosphoinositide-dependent and enhances kinase protein The protein cell becomes which metabolism (see kinase-1 by upregulates activated phosphorylated is akt, and fig. (pdK1), cell 7.22). the for critical the is pLc-γ of to full activation fig. Recruitment the of (see membrane kinase itk 7.16). fig. polymerization cdc42 activation leading inducing vav, and (see to also actin pip3 recruits 7.24).

for which is important CD28. requires PLC-γ, co-stimulatory 7-22 transcription activation Maximal induced factor a of signal activation, by

maximal function to CD28 via local important the the co-stimulatory signaling of through of production promote One activation of PLC-γ is PIP3. by by domain, Itk phosphorylation PH recruits Lck. Itk its This enhancing where by and phosphorylates the is then SLP-76, PLC-γ SH3 (see it recruited SH2 Activated Itk activates to complex Fig. its to binding and domains LAT:Gads:SLP-76 phosphorylated 7.16). leading DAG PLC-γ the produce activation cleaves NFκB. PIP2 AP-1, to NFAT, ultimately the of to factors second IP3, messengers Activated and and transcription two leading requires emanating receptor the factor and signals CD28. the Thus, PLC-γ activation of full activation from T-cell both transcription to

essential the AP-1, into proliferation differentiation which the T-cell cells. promoting to act gene is expression stimulate NFAT, effector IL-2, for and of to together is cells, major the NFκB In functions one T cytokine of for of and factors that promoter for bound IL-2 elements gene be the transcription contains IL2 The to multiple regulatory must initiate expression. by in IL-2. lymphocytes, transcription is are that sites are produced as this factors, but such control bound by Oct1, constitutively switch sufficient on not to already Some Only IL-2 in gene activated control all bound AP-1, NFκB NFAT, sites the expressed. and are to promoter are and the their is when cooperatively bind a Fos. with by Jun, to NFAT and forming NFAT, promoter and the affinity AP-1 and of heterotrimer higher CD28 IL-2 activation. enhances increasing NFκB co-stimulation by further transcription In addition, IL-2 and signaling pathways Thus, T-cell both the the that CD28 only receptor in promoter is ensure integrates to from (Fig. signals produced IL-2 appropriate circumstances 7.30). leads CD28-induced leading with increased production NF-90 activated of phosphorylation co-stimulation to by cells. Together IL-2 CD28 the substantially stability, mRNA to increased T of IL-2

B-cell augment receptor superfamily T-cell and 7-23 activation. TNF members

T-cell antigen activation through the requires receptor Tand signaling, receptors B-cell on B-cell or receptor signaling While these naive cells,

Fig. multiple that Simplified on IL-2 pathways scheme 7.30 the promoter. depicting signaling converge

receptor the cd28 the the the the IL-2 multiple into (TcR) pathways T-cell iL-2. to signaling production of promoter output, ap-1, nfaT, cytokine a nfκB emanating from binding gene single integrate and and of c nfaT; calcium ap-1; protein mapK activates The kinase activates and pathway activates nfκB. three IL-2 all are to pathways transcription. required stimulate binding of to to gene requires the element, of and ap-1 another specific both of site. promoter activation additional the binding nfaT a its on own the and ap-1 required transcription. oct1 that is factor is a transcription for IL-2 receptor bound regulated and is constitutively other by or to the T-cell the promoter it signaling. therefore not is cd28 factors, transcription unlike

cells. respectively, is not to the sufficient activate 7-22), CD28 an frequently is discussed the co-stimulatory by For provided signal additional is required above naive and, 7-21 receptor. cells, (see T as Sections and contributed B additional by as TLR, (PRR), on interactions a signal activation pathogen the receptor such direct and innate be For cells, cell. between B can an the pattern recognition naive the formation activation contributed all B and antibodies production for more the to leading However, activation memory cells. CD4 of the to effective by signals of are of T additional B-cell classes B-cell cells, Chapter production which and of bind component of on is their B-cell to 10). this cytokines, the stimulate T-cell receptors One (see surface the the is on and expressed The the cells the stimulation of component the on by CD40 the by CD40 T ligand cell. B essential provided second CD4 cell T more importance is antigens on the the to of cells. disease The by that for severe CD40–CD40-ligand a by ligand responses CD40 caused absence patient’s a from expression highlighted interaction CD4 B-cell protein immunodeficiency the resulting antibody impaired responses T of discovery is

CD40 is than large the consists a 20 TNF which receptor superfamily, more member of members. of NFκB 11), (Fig. (see induce specialized family, majority of cell members CD40, death, the PI as and 3-kinase some to such both members, following While pathways the Chapter are stimulation the activate superfamily receptor of receptor TNF including this Fas 7.31). on PI the to a survival, 3-kinase NFκB cell effects B-cell signaling. has pleiotropic feature pathway leads CD40 is widespread and of central enhanced physiology, While activation and The signal is at the Akt, PI activated which the recruited major of generation B-cell membrane. is and kinase the following mediator 3-kinase the PI(3,4,5)P3 of serine/threonine activated are the mTOR cell. of for cell uptake and then that the and progression, cell all cycle downstream activation, essential pathways of which metabolism, Akt glucose response induce B stimulates multiple survival, productive or pathways, the enhance B-cell cell to as analogous induced on general the CD28 In to of signaling in respectively. the serve cell, Akt activation a T terms, B T-cell levels manner functions both on receptor receptor by CD40 the receptors

distinct signal of receptors, by TNF antigen receptor from mechanism not that as the activation CD40, involve tyrosine superfamily it of including kinases. a members, does of proteins recruits receptor-associated TNF stimulation receptors adaptor known TRAFs (TNF as Instead, factors). of multiprotein complexes, to serving five promote the as that assembly adaptors simple In addition

Fig. 7.31 important an superfamily receptor is on B member TNF The molecule CD40 co-stimulatory cells. T members receptor Several superfamily are on the cells expressed cells. Tnf B and of by to is occurs and non-canonical stimulation receptor function key of nfκB, of from a one pathway. antigen pathway as the receptors initiated is activation the nfκB by these a often which the distinct referred pathways. Tnf superfamily members receptor signaling pi 3-kinase also activate receptor cells superfamily B cd40. one is important member on Tnf TRaf nfκB-inducing are prior which stimulation, ligase, ubiquitin to ligases, are the with molecules, associated and kinase another ubiquitin niK. ciap, ubiquitination binding and these promotes steady-state niK. under conditions, degradation of TRaf cd40L, intracellular is by cd40 to the recruited is domain stimulated of to binding When complex cd40. this leading ubiquitination to K48-linked of TRaf2 of ciap, catalyzes TRaf3. K63-linked ciap-mediated ubiquitination allowing degradation, activate and phosphorylate releasing and niK, kinase to α niK TRaf3 iκB leads (iKKα). This to subunit, precursor nfκB cleavage transcription p52 nfκB protein form the to form inducing active binds iKKα active to phosphorylates the factor. its p100, relB the to which pdK1. 3-kinase, the cd40L by to activates stimulation also activation of which pi of leads akt cd40

of the also ubiquitin known six as function TRAFs E3 ligases. receptor non-canonical distinct members to TNF to and ability NFκB the the activate initiated activity the (see pathway, to of one superfamily using from This Fig. by most as stimulation receptor pathway NFκB often antigen a contributes the pathway referred 7.31). TNF not 3-kinase known. induce by activation which TRAFs is contrast, the precise In receptors mechanism PI yet and biochemical

on response activation recognition B antigen and constitutively B-cell CD40 the B-cell expressed during in is to receptor. functions cells by receptor differentiated of into TNF them cells have memory expressed of including B-cell also is or particular survival superfamily maturation, members a cells at are antibody-secreting stage important cells. B and cells, in that B-cell on each Additional B on many of are members which upregulated expressed T-cell following superfamily receptor T Similarly, cells, activation. TNF are of 11). CD30, function as stages infection 4-1BB, T-cell later response such to enhance molecules, at cellular and metabolism (see the Chapter to important survival contribute OX40, CD27, signals and These

pathways. with co-stimulatory signaling by interfering responses

B7-family that related ligands. receptors to expressed belongs bind a CD28 family and by structurally of lymphocytes are activating signaling as Some, and regulating act response. inhibit important ICOS, immune such by 9, are the in but can receptors, apoptosis, stimulate the is receptor which in as receptors, antigen others Chapter the discussed include Inhibitory death-1), both B the and (programmed related attenuator and while (CD152) (BTLA) to T cells CTLA-4 cells. expressed and lymphocyte and PD-1 B is T by by T CD28 cells expressed receptors to marked BTLA in alter be than the lymphocyte responses an multiple CTLA-4 changes lacking organs, causes magnitude causing spontaneous CTLA-4 the from seems lymphoproliferation. PD-1 less young of most uncontrolled of loss important: widespread that die following whereas of at these, T Of rather proliferation age cells mice or a activation, these PD-1 activities receptors. of have targeted function CTLA-4 been therapeutics block the Both development and protein-based for to of that the The inhibiting 16). T-cell to enhance responses goal receptors, these referred inhibitory of as strategy these by a therapeutics (see therapeutic Chapter to checkpoint blockade is Recent antitumor CTLA-4 enhancing of both cancer PD-1 the trials patient’s that blockade and in clinical own responses. by efficacy have the treatment remarkable T-cell demonstrate

CTLA-4 binds is same for to on and co-stimulatory CTLA-4 inhibitory than (Fig. T and (B7.1 induced activated ligands but the activation, rather is enhancing T-cell as engagement CD28, B7.2) cells 7.32). controlled of by The its CTLA-4 largely function of expression. surface regulation is the T-cell moves intracellular Initially, cell but after resides surface to on signaling. membranes receptor CTLA-4 expression the The of CTLA-4 of GVYVKM cytoplasmic its is motif tyrosine-based by surface tail. phosphorylation controlled in it is the to adaptor the motif is able which molecule bind from When surface. AP-2, CTLA-4 clathrin not removes this phosphorylated, to B7 in on AP-2, motif this it cannot cells. bind CTLA-4 can molecules When remains it the antigen-presenting is bind and where membrane, phosphorylated,

orientation. than has molecules CD28, its affinity of ligands a for B7 a importance CTLA-4 higher B7 its it function, inhibitory apparently engages for does and, different in homodimers. and expressed CTLA-4, as B7.1 all CD28, are two avidity dimers B7.1 that direct the 7.32). configuration confer that to engages different for engages B7 allows one-to-one in correspondence, extended (see CTLA-4 dimer interaction cross-linkages a in dimer a but CD28 dimer one high A a Fig. by some no of so. like is longer act was recruiting the to later, other this CTLA-4 inhibitory presumed phosphatases, inhibitory described receptors thought to be once but pathways. signaling directly CTLA-4 clear whether It is still activates not inhibitory Instead, to thereby of co-stimulation. reducing in binding its may CD28-dependent B7, the result blocking actions from part CD28

exert the effect inhibitory of other can CTLA-4-expressing T activation on an T also cells cells. from this molecules yet is not CD28 B7 do clear, effect in T the required might the stealing cells, cells. result ligand by antigen-presenting it other to they on How CTLA-4 binding but for actions excluded, CTLA-4 been not Direct on have cells T however. of high that to cells the express require autoimmunity T normally. regulatory Notably, CTLA-4 are CTLA-4 and on of to their levels function suppress they surface, needed 9. in in described Chapter are cells detail Regulatory

responses phosphatases. by receptors recruiting downregulate 7-25 Inhibitory lipid protein lymphocytes or immune on

cytoplasmic Some motif (ITIM, motifs their are inhibit inhibitory amino can in (Fig. [I/V]XYXX[L/I], that X where that possess acid) consensus as sequence receptors is lymphocyte activation other the immunoreceptor tyrosine-based known any regions TXYXX[V/I]). immunoreceptor sequence motif or 7.33) related the tyrosine-based (ITSM, switch consensus SHP When phosphatase) and either domains. an (SH2-containing of in inositol phosphatase), ITSM can tyrosine it phosphatases, is or via SHIP inhibitory called the phosphorylated, their two SH2 ITIM recruit (SH2containing added protein tyrosine a to of proteins. groups SHP variety by kinases removes a phosphatase tyrosine that phosphate is and the thereby reversing thus removes signaling. recruitment of inhibiting the SHIP phosphatase as from to and generate an cell is and the PIP3 such Akt inositol to proteins kinases membrane Tec PIP2, phosphate

of just CD28 dimer binding for of providing B7 one A dimers, dimer two dimer B7.1 of distinct CTLA-4 high-avidity allows B7 clustering different to engages One orientation bind one CD28 CTLA-4

Fig. in for CTLA-4 B7 higher engages has 7.32 affinity orientation. CD28 a and than multivalent a it dimer, the are both dimers on of a B7.1, not. ligands cell expressed which is cd28 two which surface to cTLa-4 and bind as is and and both B7.2, action contributes of however, that way the the of cTLa-4. cd28 binding the cTLa-4 and of differ a of in B7 orientations inhibitory to of dimer of one one B7.1. dimer engages cd28 just molecules such engaged are one of allowing of But of cTLa-4 once, complexes that dimers avidity. a binds at high into these to way different in two cluster B7.1 dimer affinity molecules T in competing of could for antigen-presenting block providing an by an co-stimulation give and may B7 advantage B7 for the available on it higher cells. which cell, one molecules, cTLa-4 the it This, of mechanism

NK receptors that cells, inhibitory motifs tyrosine-based T and B cells, cells express contain immunoreceptor

Fc˜RIIB-1 BTLA, KIR3DL KIR2DL PIR-B CD22 PD-1

Fig. contain activation. involved cell-surface motifs lymphocyte downregulating receptors in 7.33 Some that or inhibitory Several (red in tails motifs) transduce rectangles). more that lymphocyte activation (immunoreceptor iTims one tyrosine-based nK-cell inhibit receptors signals contain their or cytoplasmic phosphatases inhibit iTamcontaining that, activated, when derived various iTims to bind receptors. signals from

One (see PD-1 receptor is ITIM-containing Fig. induced which activated cells, on B cells. myeloid cells, and T 7.33), is transiently ligands ligand-1, (programmed death and B7-H1) B7-family ligand-2, PD-L2 (programmed PD-L1 death bind the can B7-DC). to It Despite their directly that PD-1, for cell ligands in function as death. these inhibitory proteins now rather we than the names, receptor acting understand of PD-L2 induced a wide inflammation. by whereas is on expressed antigen-presenting variety cells expression is constitutively PD-L1 during cells, PD-L1 have a controlling could of critical Because is expressed role expression regulation PD-1 T-cell constitutively, responses. in For can T-cell cytokines example, enhancing PD-1, pro-inflammatory the signaling by thus response. repress of to presumably because develop inability PD-1 T-cell Mice an gradually activation. regulate autoimmunity, lacking effector the the expression reduces to limit activity the of but helps clearance. to chronic this infections, In damage T expense of cells, pathogen at PD-1 bystander of potential cells; widespread

an T as well ITIM and BTLA and of on innate an the cells immune some as cells, B is ITSM on contains and cells activated expressed system. TNF expressed (HVEM), but herpesvirus this called members, entry with CD28-family not dendritic family; ligands receptor receptor the on cells cells. other member highly binds and T however, B7 resting Unlike BTLA does is immature the of a molecule interact lymphocyte and a inhibits mechanism are utilizes further When cell, same on the second BTLA HVEM co-expressed activation. that BTLA that from HVEM HVEM BLTA binding and partners NFκB-dependent HVEM. this to downstream prevents signaling configuration, of would to In pathways pro-survival stimulate binds alternative two positive pro-survival expressed to and stimulate the different receptors are the signal these BTLA Alternatively, when the cell. HVEM HVEM-expressing on functions of cells, interaction in

and also Other and receptors. B when cell along inhibit on receptors ligated antigen T cells activation can with the ITIMs cells contain example Fc receptor the binds region of cells, One B antibodies. which the FcγRIIB-1 IgG on is Fc as activating result, with immune complexes at receptor the naive B-cell receptor. are poor As this cells, of due IgG antigens B to inhibitory present containing the a antibodies co-engagement ITIM block into SHIP a complex FcγRIIB-1 PI 3-kinase with in the receptor B-cell to recruits (Fig. the of actions The 7.34). B microbial mammalian transmembrane cells Another acid-modified on but recognizes is protein cells on on that commonly inhibitory CD22, glycoproteins pathogen a surfaces. rarely receptor found sialic the CD22 that SHP, associate a as ITIM receptor. thereby CD22, phosphatase adaptors SLP-65 from such B-cell that inhibiting signaling dephosphorylate with can with an contains interacts that

Section 3-26). (see the is on NK motif of these cells an ITIM by cells receptors activity also motif signaling in inhibit killer important that The NK inhibit receptors I molecules the inhibitory a of recognizes cell NK release that the signals recognize MHC healthy and uninfected transmit when cytotoxic class the granules cell’s cell. These NK role for ITAM-containing receptors cells, play important NK setting from in positive cell activation the signals balancing an threshold ITIM-containing receptors. In by

Summary.

and activation cells. antigen for receptors on through B cells these essential of is the Signaling the T cells initiate or through and However, B not receptor response. T naive cells, B-cell respectively, receptor, the signal the to T-cell a is sufficient for In to these addition require through of signals antigen environment serve cell the of presence signals, accessory an to the the receptor the receptors ensure cells that infection. monitor to An important signaling secondary

Fig. Fc the 7.34 The ITIM-containing receptor by SHIP. phosphatase receptor recruiting inhibits signaling inositol B-cell receptor immune is igG, present complexes the the the fcγRiiB is the at fc an engaged with iTim-containing time B-cell binds that in already antigen receptor. as same When B-cell receptor receptor motif recruits Src-family iTim then at fcγRiiB, phosphatase inositol the (BcR) which The kinase of the domain-containing Ship. Sh2 the B-cell phosphorylates present Ship membrane, in dephosphorylates plasma pip2. the generating pip3 vav, receptor on activated ph enzymes, the pLc-γ, to complex. such and domain Btk, pip3 stable recruitment depend domain-containing as their to B-cell binding ph their for enzymes the signaling. loss of pip3 inhibits The and these of B-cell terminates recruitment receptor

by family CD28 bind of is members which system the proteins, the provided proteins. T of co-stimulatory family cells of naive in B7 amplify cell. the are CD28 the receptor target of signals that the Activating naive signal and members family provide the appropriate in activation T co-stimulatory by from T-cell important of the ensuring cells receptor of In CD40. cells, B superfamily, provided secondary by are TNF signals such members the these as the and receptor completely block other signaling of by activating to function members Inhibitory or families receptors. CD28 attenuate a expression of and ligands control inhibitory be generates understood. to is that activating immune level The their responses of only sophisticated beginning receptors regulated and of

to Summary Chapter 7.

respond to of cell-surface to the is receptors many pathogens. ability different appropriately crucial of foreign system the to by immune Signaling sorts the demonstrated diseases. The aberrant are autoimmune is both importance of signaling, immunodeficiency diseases that signaling pathways these and include many due diseases to which by the of messengers kinases. activation phosphoinositides and Common second the signaling pathways and both features of tyrosine of many are serine/threonine and as generation calcium such of signaling and plasma proteins the complexes. important initiation signaling multiprotein is An the recruitment signaling in concept membrane proteins assembly receptor the of pathways by of to the and factors proliferation, that the directly or lymphocytes. activation function to the cases, of lead differentiation, In transcription transduction of signal many leads to indirectly activated effector migration Other transduction and functions mediate cell changes. roles shape of signal cytoskeleton to the changes important that such as are in for are Fig. of receptor B-cell steps summarized and pathways in T-cell signaling are These the 7.28.

these understand in basic important mind are complex. signal is understand that pathways, not While why transduction of it beginning so to yet we to we keep are circuitry do the pathways responses. as signaling such of and the diversity, reason amplification, might properties have be One in roles signaling efficiency that robustness, pathways goal pathway signaling for sensitivity to important the needed to and An for design the will specific responses. of signaling contributes understand be how particular future the quality each

Questions.

for proteins of that intrinsic signaling events. receptors kinase True subsequent and downstream or False: phosphorylation 7.1 activity allows cytoplasmic bear antigen

are following receptor kinases receptors serine/ (null). Matching: kinases no threonine 7.2 receptor whether (RSTKs), activity indicate (RTKs), intrinsic have tyrosine enzymatic the or are

A. Kit ___

B. B-cell C. ___ ___ receptor fLT3

if adaptors can D. ___ enzymatic and intrinsic Short scaffolds modulate Answer: how signaling 7.3 activity? no receptor they TGf-β have responses

of 7.4 may or alterations (one following increased Which Choice: more activity Ras the apply): in Multiple would result of

a that GTpase A. enhances in its activity mutation Ras

of overexpression B. Gefs

GTp of C. in the cytoplasm depletion

overexpression of Gaps D.

to that of immediately ____ word the in in binds engagement: downstream ph, 3-kinase a ____ 7.5 Sh2, fill are E. T-cell best ____ 1–5) kinase, Ras phosphorylated proteins scaffold below. the to that Matching: Sh2 phosphorylation the activities the numbering and linked receptor iTams selected Fill-in-the-Blanks: renders for each is from domain ____ produces 7.6 unsusceptible SLp-76, with and activation events the following Recruitment of ____ domain-containing LaT proteins a after occur the and blanks tandem Lck, pi iTams by mutation Zap-70, pip3 (by by activated kinase Gads, containing sentences, signaling a pX order Src-family of list and of it Gaps used word should once. be only each

pathways receptor signaling to out into branch many leads or akt antigen LaT:Gads:SLp-76 many signaling events downstream that modules. can complex of the from ___________, by enzyme be activated both. pip3 generation ____________, scaffold the pip2 or These by the recruit on pip3 proteins recruits ___________ scaffold proteins phosphorylated while domains. residues tyrosine ___________ containing the domains, containing and which complex, produce to WaSp. activation to the an (4) leads activation activates pip2 ___________, that of SKap55 ___________, four cleaves phosphorylating pathway (3) that These and and pip3 TSc Gef binds adaptor (2) daG __________, ____________, Riam, the of to ip3, which a recruits and inactivating (1) the are by mToR and modules adhesion, cellular actin to transcription ultimately metabolism, increased cellular key respectively. genes, increased These lead of pathways polymerization, and increased

function. protein 7.7 small its (GTpase) match Matching: the to G

A. polymerization i. _____ actin WaSp; Ras

B. cdc42 ii. _____ cellular mToR; metabolism family) (Rho

C. iii. _____ Rap1 Lfa-1 cellular aggregation; adhesion

D. Rheb iv. _____ Which the proliferation cellular pathway; false? 7.8 Choice: is of mapK Multiple follow statements

polyubiquitination signaling. K63 downstream A. cellular leads to

K48 by leads degradation polyubiquitination the B. to proteasome.

the its that e2 Sh2 selects enzyme C. in target (ubiquitin-activating) of its ligases)—cbl (ubiquitin ubiquitination—e1 an (ubiquitin-conjugating) enzymes, three families e3 via of and enzymes, e3 enzymes domain. is involved out enzymes

D. of di-ubiquitination monoor receptors proteasome. the leads surface by to degradation

the Matching: disease match with the 7.9 that human gene is

hypohidrotic X-linked iv. ____ D. name WaSp and receptor ectodermal in the corresponding Fill-in-the-Blanks: T/B respective dysplasia 7.10 immunodeficiency signaling counterpart: component or its cell

B T cell cd3ε:cd3δ:(cd3γ)2:(cd3ζ)2 A. cell __________ B. C. cd21:cd19:cd81 __________ cd28 __________

D. Lyn Blk, __________ fyn,

F. __________ LaT:Gads:SLp-76 __________ Syk E.

references. General

Roberts, 6th A., of Biology the M., K., Molecular Alberts, ed. Johnson, J., Walter, P.: Raff, and Lewis, Cell, B., Garland Science, New 2015. York: Kramer, and Tatham, Transduction. Gomperts, Signal B., P.: I., Elsevier, San 2002. Diego: Klingmler, F., U., Cellular Signal Marks, Mler-Decker, and K.: Processing. York: Science, Garland New 2009. and L., Shaw, Samelson, A. (eds. Signaling. ): Immunoreceptor Press, Cold Spring Harbor Cold Harbor, Spring NY: Laboratory 2010.

Section references.

extracellular biochemical 7-1 events. receptors Transmembrane intracellular convert into signals

receptor Weiss, A.: signalling. T and J., cell Lin, J. Cell Sci. 2001, 114:243–244. G.A., and Smith-Garvin, J.E., Jordan, M.S. Koretzky, T activation. : cell Annu. Rev. Immunol. 27:591–619. 2009,

receptors cTLa-4 activating with pathways lipid both phosphatases. and/or iTim-containing that intracellular or protein interfere by 7.11 co-stimulatory signaling and pd-1 False: True inhibitory are

against is immunoglobulin for therapy autoantibodies that administration Multiple of used intravenous a the antigens). of exogenous widely disorders 7.12 Choice: (antibodies autoimmune involve production self presence Researchers B the on the discovered the the critical own of is sialic of that have in cells. immunoglobulins acids infused for autoantibody inhibition production patient’s could for B cells, this the the production receptors inhibition finding? be following of Which responsible potentially antibody given of by

pd-1 cd40 A. cd22 D. fcγRiiB B. C.

large complexes. Intracellular mediated BTLa signaling is signal propagation multiprotein E. by 7-2

N.P., Samelson, C.L. L.E., E., L., Coussens, Sherman, Sommers, Balagopalan, and story: a and coordination, choreography. LAT tale The cooperativity, : of Spring Harbor Perspect. Cold Biol. 2010, 2:a005512.

and Jordan, M.S., Koretzky, G.A. SLP-76. signaling multiple protein adaptor of cell the in hematopoietic by lineages : receptor Coordination Cold Perspect. Harbor Spring Biol. 2:a002501. 2010,

T.: system. Lim, new a evolving and signaling: Phosphotyrosine Pawson, communication W.A., cellular 2010, 142:661–667. Cell

and Scott, J.D., they’re space Cell and and T.: time: Pawson, in when together where signaling come proteins apart. 2009, Science 326:1220–1224.

different molecular G proteins signaling as 7-3 act switches in many pathways. Small

Rho in GTPases and Etienne-Manneville, A.: cell Hall, biology. S., 420:629–635. 2002, Nature

N., and Mitin, C.J. Rossman, K.L., Der, : interplay Ras Signaling in function. superfamily Curr. Biol. 15:R563–R574. 2005,

Signaling variety recruited are proteins by to a of membrane the mechanisms. 7-4

by SH3 of L.: Buday, signalling Membrane-targeting adaptor proteins. molecules SH2/ domain-containing Biochim. Biophys. 1422:187–204. Acta 1999,

and Kanai, S.J., M.B. Brown, G.E., Field, F., Yaffe, Akbary, H., Matsuo, L.C., Cantley, T., Liu, H., bind p40phox lipid PX : PI(3)K. p47phox to and The products Nat. of of domains Biol. Cell 2001, 3:675–678.

M.A. Lemmon, recognition domains. phospholipid-binding : by Membrane Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 9:99–111. 2008,

inhibit responses. activate 7-5 can of proteins modifications both Post-translational and signaling

the and the proteasome. lysosome to A.: from ubiquitin Ciechanover, Proteolysis: Nat. Rev. Mol. Biol. Cell 2005, 6:79–87.

Ubiquitin-binding Prag, and domains. G.: Hurley, Lee, S., J.H., Biochem. J. 399:361–372. 2006,

M.: Y.C., process Penninger, a ubiquitylation: reversible J., Liu, Immunity Karin, modification. by of and Nat. Rev. Immunol. 5:941–952. 2005,

V.M. Dixit, and I.E., Wertz, to : ubiquitination. Signaling regulation by NFκB: Spring Perspect. Cold Harbor Biol. 2:a003350. 2010,

activation 7-6 some The receptors generates small-molecule second messengers. of

and Kresge, R.L. Simoni, Hill, N., R.D., and W. the adenine Sutherland’s cyclic monophosphate of discovery messenger : system. Earl second J. Biol. Chem. 2005, 280:39–40.

E.W. T.W., Sutherland, Rall, and adenine ribonucleotide particles. of a : tissue cyclic by Formation J. Biol. Chem. 1958, 232:1065–1076.

chains 7-7 of receptors carry consist out with Antigen that variable receptor. of function chains the signaling the antigen-binding associated invariant

and M.B., Strominger, Brenner, I.S., Trowbridge, J.L. T3 association T glycoprotein T beta and proteins: human of cell heavy Cross-linking receptor between subunit idiotype : the subunit. cell the 40:183–190. 1985, Cell

M.E., M., Call, Wiedmann, Wucherpfennig, Pyrdol, and K.W. J., : T The formation in of the receptor-CD3 complex. cell principle organizing the 2002, Cell 111:967–979.

Kuhns, M.S., M.M. Davis, and the sum TCR parts. many of signaling emerges from : Front. Immunol. 2012, 3:159.

Harford, R.D. and Samelson, L.E., Klausner, J.B., antigen T the receptor murine the complex. : of Identification cell components of 1985, 43:223–231. Cell

Liu, W., Sohn, S.K. H.W., P., and Tolar, Pierce, receptor signaling B-cell oligomers. molecular : assembly of active and The organization Immunol. Rev. 232:34–41. 2009,

receptor initate Antigen the the a recognition across co-receptors its and T-cell by membrane transduces to 7-8 plasma signal signaling.

L.E. Klausner, Samelson, and R.D., : the kinase receptor activation pathways: tyrosine connection. T antigen cell 64:875–878. Cell 1991,

and Weiss, Littman, D.R. A., receptors. by lymphocyte antigen : transduction Signal 76:263–274. 1994, Cell

by by 7-9 a its T-cell of Src-family receptor kinases, Antigen the recognition ITAMs generating signaling to in intracellular signal first leads the and co-receptors cascade. phosphorylation

Palacios, B.B., E.H., of structure, ZAP-70. Hsu, Kuriyan, J., The regulation, Levin, S.E., A.: Au-Yeung, Weiss, and L.-Y., S., Deindl, and function Immunol. Rev. 2009, 228:41–57.

J.C.D. R.R., Bartelt, and Houtman, for activation. drive node protein : T an LAT integration as that signaling pathways serves The adaptor cell Wiley Interdiscip. Rev. Syst. Biol. Med. 5:101–110. 2013,

zeta pro-tein-tyrosine and ZAP-70: TCR 70 A.C., A.: Turck, Chan, chain. Kd the that M., kinase associates C.W., Iwashima, Weiss, a with 71:649–662. Cell 1992,

N.S., with A.C., M., Chan, Oers, the TCR kinases. A.: B.A., van interactions of two Irving, distinct and Sequential Iwashima, tyrosine Weiss, cytoplasmic 263:1136–1139. Science 1994,

K., Vanhaesebroeck, lymphocyte differentiation development, PI3K B.: and activation. Okkenhaug, and in Nat. Rev. Immunol. 3:317–330. 2003,

L.E. Samelson, Trible, J., W., R.P., Sloan-Lancaster, and Kitchen, Zhang, J., : cell cellular activation. tyrosine links kinase receptor the ZAP-70 LAT: that to T substrate Cell 92:83–92. 1998,

and ZAP-70. tyrosine activate Phosphorylated kinase the ITAMs recruit 7-10

J.: ZAP-70 linker. P.R., Kadlecek, Kuriyan, Visperas, and the phosphorylation Structural Q., of for S., SH2-kinase of T., Yan, activation T.A., by Barros, Deindl, basis A., Weiss, Mol. Cell. Biol. 2013, 33:2188–2201.

receptors leukocytes are in activation. other on signal ITAMs that found cell for also 7-11

Lanier, L.L. natural and tightrope: killer cell activation Up the inhibition. on : Nat. Immunol. 9:495–502. 2008,

scaffold ZAP-70 7-12 activation. proteins phosphorylates promotes and 3-kinase Activated PI

R.P., W., L.E. Kitchen, J., Trible, Zhang, Samelson, and J., Sloan-Lancaster, cellular receptor the links substrate that to tyrosine cell kinase T LAT: activation. ZAP-70 : 1998, 92:83–92. Cell

7-13 that inositol to the PLC-γ messengers transcription generates trisphosphate factor activation. diacylglycerol and lead Activated second

Schwartzberg, Berg, Lucas, L.D., J.A., and L.J., Finkelstein, P.L. kinases lymphocyte development T and : in Tec family function. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 23:549–600. 2005,

and phospholipase P.-G.: Ryu, J.H., cellular and Chang, Diverse H.-J., Suh, Jang, C-γ1. of Choi, roles physiological Y.R., H.M., S.H., J.-S., Kwon, Yang, Adv. Biol. Regul. 2012, 52:138–151.

entry transcription activates Ca2+ NFAT. 7-14 factor the

J., and calcium, and regulation NFAT. L., P.G., Chen, calcineurin, Rao, Hogan, Nardone, Transcriptional A.: by Dev. Genes 2003, 17:2205–2232.

Molecular and A.: of signaling Rao, lymphocytes: R.S., Lewis, Hogan, ORAI. and in STIM calcium basis P.G., Annu. Rev. Immunol. 28:491–533. 2010,

A., Papolos, al. C., Rieux-Laucat, LeDeist, Lhy, Rao, S., A., Rechavi, C.A., G., Khalil, K., Picard, F., Hivroz, F., et C., McCarl, STIM1 with and a immunodeficiency mutation associated of autoimmunity. syndrome N. Engl. Med. J. 360:1971–1980. 2009,

Y., Srikanth, and Rao, Prakriya, Hogan, S., Gwack, A., Feske, S., M., P.G. CRAC subunit Orai1 is of channel. essential pore the an : Nature 443:230–233. 2006,

protein 7-15 factor relay (MAPK) activation kinase transcription expression of AP-1. mitogen-activated Ras and the the stimulates induces

J., J.D., Downward, Rayter, P.H., Graves, D.A. Cantrell, S., Warne, and upon P21ras of Stimulation : T-cell activation. 1990, Nature 346:719–723.

S.J., Leevers, Marshall, C.J. and oncoprotein. ERK2, extracellular Activation by of kinase, signal-regulated : P21ras EMBO J. 1992, 11:569–574.

References.

R.: regulation. and Roskoski, ERK1/2 kinases: MAP function, structure, Pharmacol. Res. 2012, 66:105–143.

and immune-cell Shaw, Filbert, E.L.: signalling. proteins Scaffold A.S., and Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2009, 9:47–56.

C factors transcription AP-1. kinase activates NFκB 7-16 and the Protein

CARMA1-mediated and lymphocytes. NFκB and JNK in Lin, activation Blonska, M., X.: Immunol. Rev. 228:199–211. 2009,

critical in Blonska, M., Phosphorylation plays D., activation. of receptor-mediated NFκB B., D., Li, X.: Y., CARMA1 Pappu, role Wang, Lin, cell and Matsumoto, T R., Kobayashi, M., a H., Chen, Wang, Immunity 2005, 23:575–585.

Thome, NFκB the M.: activation. to D., and Phosphorylation of Rueda, CARMA1: link(Er) Immunity 23:551–553. 2005,

Moreno-García, Pomerantz, K., Y.L., and Bandaranayake, D.J. J.L., M.E., B., Ovechkina, Rawlings, A.D., Sommer, Guo, CARMA1 NFκB activation. controls : Phosphorylation of the linker 2005, Immunity 23:561–574.

functions BCL10. CARMA1 distinct modifications Post-translational R.: and M., regulate Thome, Weil, and of Immunol. Trends 28:281–288. 2007,

cellular upregulates kinase Akt. 7-17 serine/threonine PI activation via pathways metabolic 3-kinase the

Gamper, and Powell, J.D. C.J., not cells. signaling All mTOR-dependent mTOR: is PI3Kinase dissecting signaling and independent in pathways T : Front. Immunol. 3:312. 2012,

The Kane, downstream T pathways kinase/Akt PI-3 Weiss, and PIP3. A.: and pathway pleiotropic activation: L.P., cell of Immunol. Rev. 2003, 192:7–20.

in T Metabolism Pearce, E.L.: activation and cell differentiation. Curr. Opin. Immunol. 22:314–320. 2010,

cell leads T-cell integrin-mediated signaling enhanced receptor 7-18 adhesion. to

Koretzky, and G.A. N., Bezman, ITAM molecules. adapter of integrin and Compartmentalization by signaling : Immunol. Rev. 218:9–28. 2007,

M.R. A., M.L., Mor, and Philips, Dustin, adhesion LFA-1 GTPases Small signaling. modulate reciprocally and and : Immunol. Rev. 218:114–125. 2007,

activating the cytoskeletal small induces signaling receptor GTPase by T-cell reorganization Cdc42. 7-19

J.K., Burkhardt, Shaffer, E., and Carrizosa, M.H. cytoskeleton actin cell T : The in activation. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 26:233–259. 2008,

Henderson, Tybulewicz, R.B. V.L.J., and their GTPases : regulators Rho family in lymphocytes. and Nat. Rev. Immunol. 9:630–644. 2009,

cells. the 7-20 to similar signaling, B-cell components receptor signaling B T-cell logic is of some are to signaling of of but specific that receptor The

C.M., Pleiman, Clark, M.R. J.C., and Cambier, its Signal B : transduction and by the coreceptors. receptor antigen cell Annu. Rev. Immunol. 12:457–486. 1994,

Hourihane, Law, Gold, M.R. Blum, Chan, Richards, T.L., Stevens, V.W., S.P., Datta, and J.D., D.A., DeFranco, A.L., Foy, S.K., J.H., S.L., receptor. antigen : B-cell transduction Signal by the Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 1995, 766:195–201.

N.E., Harwood, and F.D. Batista, Early in : events cell activation. B Annu. Rev. Immunol. 28:185–210. 2010,

F., Koretzky, Abtahian, G.A., M.A. Silverman, and regulation lymphocytes signalling SLP65: beyond. and of in complex : SLP76 and Nat. Rev. Immunol. 6:67–78. 2006,

M.: Tyrosine substrates kinases and T., Kurosaki, B Hikida, in lymphocytes. and their Immunol. Rev. 2009, 228:132–148.

signaling 7-21 protein cell a for activation. receptor The is required CD28 naive co-stimulatory cell-surface T

Michel, a for signalling. F.: and TCR CD28-mediated support O., co-stimulation: Acuto, quantitative Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2003, 3:939–951.

C.B. Rathmell, Riley, Parry, M.H., and R.L., June, Elstrom, Plas, Thompson, Frauwirth, C.H., J.L., R.V., K.A., J.C., Harris, D.R., regulates metabolism. signaling glucose CD28 The pathway : 769–777. 2002, 16: Immunity

A.H.: Mechanisms of costimulation. Sharpe, Immunol. Rev. 229:5–11. 2009,

which important factor by a PLC-γ, transcription is co-stimulatory Maximal activation, CD28. for 7-22 signal requires of activation induced

and Chen, Flies, L., D.B. co-stimulation of cell co-inhibition. and T Molecular : mechanisms Nat. Rev. Immunol. 13:227–242. 2013,

receptor activation. and TNF members 7-23 superfamily augment B-cell T-cell

D.B. L., and Flies, Chen, mechanisms co-inhibition. co-stimulation T : and cell of Molecular Nat. Rev. Immunol. 13:227–242. 2013,

J., Miletic, Rickert, A.V. and R.C., Jellusova, and by B-cell the receptor tumor : biology superfamily Signaling in disease. necrosis factor Immunol. Rev. 2011, 244:115–133.

on with immune lymphocytes interfering Inhibitory downregulate pathways. responses co-stimulatory by receptors signaling 7-24

Z., Nakamura, Y., K., al. et Manzotti, E.M., C., Baker, Briggs, K., Qureshi, O.S., L.E., J., Jeffery, Zheng, Schmidt, Attridge, Kaur, S., CD80 the of cell-extrinsic of function a basis molecular Trans-endocytosis for : CTLA-4. and CD86: 332:600–603. 2011, Science

transduction. CTLA-4 and Taylor, signal coreceptor Schneider, and expression Rudd, CD28 and C.E., H.: A., Immunol. Rev. 2009, 229:12–26.

on phosphatases. downregulate protein receptors immune lipid Inhibitory responses or recruiting by lymphocytes 7-25

F.: receptor Di Acuto, signals Michel, mechanisms. and O., feedback proximal Bartolo, T-cell by V., negative Tailoring Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2008, 8:699–712.

D.B. and Chen, Flies, L., of T co-stimulation mechanisms cell : Molecular and co-inhibition. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 13:227–242. 2013,

Lymphocytes T Development The of B and

most production B specialized cells. in the The lymphoid most lymphopoiesis, are central lymphoid or new cells bone and place takes for lymphocytes, tissues—the T marrow thymus of primary) (or which tissues— the for originate the but of mature cells. complete in develop where Precursors populations their T B both T of thymus, for cells cells migrate marrow, most to most the there, development precursors the into bone whereas they individual adaptive of T pathogens enabling of lymphopoiesis circulating a encountered major B-cell is and of on respectively, diverse immune A range receptors responses generate B goal against thereby cells, an lifetime. make receptors to a wide T-cell during to the and repertoire In which fetus central and migrate lymphoid called such (also lymphoid and to lymphoid spleen, large of tissues mucosal lymphoid the are nodes, the populate of peripheral new tissue. secondary the tissues) as sources lymph juvenile, numbers the tissues the lymphocytes, individuals, cells thymus the the of and organs. lymphoid T-cell cells peripheral outside development central new division T In the mature by the down, T are mature of in slows maintained numbers even adults. cells, produced New the in marrow, bone from continually contrast, in B are emphasis the T development cells cells. of an the CD4+ cells from with uncommitted focus of This chapter will and B major CD8+ and B on their and T cells progenitors, on populations T The cells, briefly invariant additional zone cells will B TCR+ cells, B-1 (iNKT) subsets cells cells, be B as B discussed. such of cells, development and NKT γ:δ Treg cells, and of marginal T

5. mechanisms cells, B cells by expressed the and and antigen is which and were receptor described the antigen-receptor a Chapters complete The structure by of 4 assembled, T in genes Once carry receptor pathogens own can an antigen testing yet has formed, that select a of wide an that rigorous individual’s useful is been not antigen receptors—that lymphocytes antigen cells. to recognize is, against react spectrum and will receptors required be receptors the a diversity the can especially repertoire of individual only lifetime. possible are her fraction is an to recognizing that Given as incredible can foreign his likely in that those in rearrangement receptor useful the antigens, or mature lymphocytes express to process that important total of it generate, responding small and whether the specificity We immature and are mature survive and or the receptor repertoire, will determine how join of ligands self the the describe lymphocyte affinity either to die. for tested particular receive seems it developing enables way, to with bind antigens, weakly In that signal survive. a self a that general, interact whose receptors in them antigens self or that lymphocytes known as that MHC which ensures of process, own respond to T peptides an selection, molecules. recognize able positive be cells will MHC individual’s T to to particularly development antigens of to it molecules, consisting This peptides critical the cells, bound one’s in composite because is bound α:β

contrast, is negative the of self-tolerant. in autoimmune with selection self-reactive is this process prevent ways of the eliminated be to immune lymphocytes system made strongly reactions; which must In one receptors as the the being vast in apoptosis, fate see, the receptor, is death of we The signal of lymphocytes, and received will developing default absence from by any

B Development lymphocytes. of lymphocytes. T of Development negative selection and Positive of

T cells.

Fig. marrow develop bone B the 8.1 lymphoid and cells peripheral they migrate be in can by activated to where antigens. organs, first marrow cells bone development, their genes. the B immunoglobulin rearrange In in phase the of progenitor is bone stromal but dependent is (first independent cells phase interactions antigen panels). on with of marrow This in environment. its carries the in antigens antigen it the phase (second B in form now can that and interact panels), of cell-surface an an receptor cell It with ends second IgM in immature either B by are in cells thus are repertoire. inactivated selection, a removing process strongly this self-reactive Immature antigen at stimulated die the negative many from cells stage B of or that emerge well of mature the third as phase periphery as IgD cells immature express and the surviving the into In development, to B IgM. organ peripheral lymphoid They can specific in now their with panels). a activated encounter foreign be antigen (third by differentiate long-lived (fourth antibody-secreting plasma cells and cells proliferate, Activated memory into B panels). and cells

of lymphoid completing before central before the the developing or lymphocytes lymphoid emerging maturation from die majority organs in peripheral organs.

stem receptor of chapter humans respond functionally this development with the ready lymphocyte in and of the up we mature, In unique to antigen. antigen and the B cell cells bone T marrow in from mice specialized foreign uncommitted cells the different stages to a its describe the to are which it activates 9–11. lymphocyte, life its a history in become or with in effector the an of stages in an The lymphocyte, to antigen encounter mature Chapters final discussed memory of that and T-cell life predominates distinct that in fetal after is that waves fetal lymphocyte during take place Band birth know ontogeny. late the We earlier from development now development originate developing tissues the more liver cells primitive fetal These in the even waves hematopoietic found from earlier stem in in and embryo. and develop function and progenitors generally marrow mucosal cells develop immune B early epithelial stem bone T that cells, the responses. from innate in fetal these populate Unlike tissues lymphocytes that and from in subsets are populations In secondary lymphoid these lymphocytes adult, tissues. minority of the (see T develop that that bone marrow B 1.20). and the cells and stem adaptive of cells immune and from chapter focus the Figs This on cells will response comprise 1.7 three parts. is chapter into The divided The and two respectively. T-cell B-cell development, first describe discuss of third positive the the T section, in the cells In selection thymus. we and negative

lymphocytes. of Development B

in of Fig. B a history The are life phases lymphocyte’s main shown 8.1. and stages the and by development The B-cell T-cell in defined successive both antigen-receptor steps are in genes. functional of the mainly expression assembly

B-cell bone of marrow Negative the the marrow in Generation in bone receptors selection

lymphoid B-cell cells to of the B and Migration system through organs activation circulatory

each that a step for signal gene to lymphocyte that of as chain is theme of next progress of is the gene stage. major rearrangement cell progress the recurring development, to the the production successful to serves rearrangement a protein At the monitored; leads multiple a the developing is B opportunities requirement also receptor but expressing We for there that one with reinforce will that rearrangements increase express a just each B likelihood the see that cell antigen presented of that cell that checkpoints functional are receptor, specificity. bone at develop from diverge. earliest multipotent the cells looking hematopoietic in by B-cell B-cell recognizable of the lineages stem will point the the lineage how marrow, at cells what the We and start T-cell and

in cells the from hematopoietic derive marrow. stem bone 8-1 Lymphocytes

(HSCs) multipotent progenitor that innate cells lineage—B cells all (see cells cells, to Fig. and of The cells stem derive from lymphoid hematopoietic common themselves the from (ILCs)—are derived the give all rise lymphoid blood which T cells, cells, lymphoid 1.3). to the that Development differentiation. from follows basic cells cell cells the are cell precursor B committed into T principles cells becoming of or stem the are for the of properties immature that mature more the function essential loss are along are of of cell. the acquired, Properties characteristic gradually with cell that become cells as first the committed the myeloid, of T-cell B-cell then case (Fig. lymphocyte development, the to to opposed In either lymphoid the or the lineage lineage, and to 8.2).

bone development B the for subsequent signals lymphocyte of provides from for progenitors differentiation of cells hematopoietic the the and specialized both of cells. marrow The stem microenvironment nonlymphoid lymphocytes to the direct network switch lymphocytes produced program are the developing developing developmental Such of key that are that by genes connective on intimate (Fig. cells tissue act on contact signals with the specialized stromal in and the 8.3). of stromal the The is cells contribution twofold. and their interactions ligands. contacts by lymphocytes the form with molecules they cell-adhesion developing between adhesive specific First, they proliferation. chemokines Second, and and differentiation control soluble and cytokines membrane-bound provide lymphocyte that

differentiate first both cells myeloid (MPPs), hematopoietic stem cells produce which stem but longer and into lymphoid cells. are cells The no progenitor multipotent can self-renewing on FLT3 cell-surface cells. the tyrosine stromal membrane-bound Multipotent as ligand that kinase FLT3 known receptor express a binds progenitors and express transcription MPPs factors Additionally,

Fig. the 8.2 of all multipotent stem the cells immune A cell system. generates hematopoietic other the cell with stem cells hematopoietic gives bone marrow progressively potential. multipotent rise the In or to sites, limited more is A shown here. simplified progression its for has lost example, properties. stem-cell The progenitor (MPP), multipotent hand MEPs), first cells with on and to the other, branch myeloid common the (CLPs), to progenitors and lymphoid one and, potential. with lymphoid (CMPs on The potential, the leads erythroid rise organs as peripheral former including as macrophages monocytes all the that reside well lymphoid to shown). in (not The granulocytes, elements, blood give nonlymphoid dendritic cells and and and tissues circulating cellular cells CLP can to thymus. the rise is heterogeneous or through single or and marrow differentiation stages of The successive in cells cells, either bone B NK give population cells, T circumstances in pathways, their cells certain progenitor be switch that may considerable plasticity commitment. in may There these in either progenitor may not however, cells simplicity macrophages; these to B give alternative example, For pathways shown. rise or are cell for a from are to lymphoid be progenitor. dendritic thought cells Some also the derived

Fig. marrow on The B-cell cells. development are stromal bone early stages dependent 8.3 of bone stage. immature marrow B-cell with development cells of Interaction B-cell progenitors to required for stromal the is Fig. described cell designations development, as defined B-cell refer and pre-B 8.4. of pro-B cell The to phases in binds on cells FLT3, kinase its which stromal express Multipotent ligand to tyrosine receptor the progenitor cells. next stage, FLT3 to required the progenitor. lymphoid the common for through Signaling differentiation is in progenitors cells and cells lymphoid chemokine stem (SDF-1) The appropriate stromal the retain bone acts to marrow. CXCL12 at cells. is interleukin-7 B-lineage the (IL-7) cells for required IL-7 and by at development receptor this The produced of stromal is present stage, for interact (CAMs). Progenitor cells through cell-adhesion cells also bind adhesion other and VLA-4 molecule VCAM-1 to through molecules the stromal integrin on the to kinase interactions B-cell of the the induces the on receptor (CD117) of factor progenitors. The the on pro-B kinase (SCF) the adhesive cell, which of binding stem-cell the surface and proliferation stromal activates cell tyrosine Kit promote the development discussed the actions factors the are The text. transcription in of B-cell listed in proteins of pink of the expression at particular the denote development. indicated The stages bands horizontal

that hematopoietic multiple and receptors transcription factor such the as are of the the for receptor c-kit. lineages, PU.1 required development the stage, rise of two cells produce all next In MPPs that the progenitor give lymphocyte to lineages. subsets yet cells. progenitor ILC3 ILC as produces cell, One the ILC2, ILC1, subsets, unnamed, and is as the second from progenitor A arising (CLP). the cell lymphoid MPP common known progenitor into through Differentiation the FLT3 requires signaling of receptor expressed on CLPs MPPs. MPPs repopulation the actually shown population with Progenitor of lineage experiments and multipotent CLP is represents that have transfer continuum a cells cell potential. decreasing and heterogeneous NK subset broadest CLP and of is with cells, able T B potential cells. to cells cells, generate the A cells, B CLPs is subset only the a of cells of and to second third A exclusively and subset generate T committed lineage. CLPs is B-cell able to rise (see CLPs give B-cell-committed Fig. cells to pro-B 8.3).

together multipotent progenitors (IL-7), for the interleukin-7 progenitor FLT3 by production signaling PU.1. expression induced by from which cell receptor the accompanied is with of of The the of activity lymphocyte is secreted growth marrow cells, not humans). cells by developing B of The the stromal in IL-7, bone cytokine for is survival in (but essential and mice possibly additional the The receptor called two also composed receptors. five (γ-c), it cytokine of is a polypeptides, receptor chain and so IL-7 γ is chain receptor IL-7 cytokine common because α the subunit of and IL-2, IL-4, IL-7. for IL-9, addition in IL-21, includes family the This receptors cytokine of receptors IL-15, to binds signaling by the receptors. to is and also the a each These Jak3, of tyrosine protein that productive γ-c required for exclusively signaling receptors kinase share

in all the γ-c, IL-7, development. deficiency IL-7 a importance IL-7 with B-cell a receptor mice block genetic Due of Jak3 development, severe to exhibit or murine B-cell α, for in

is present membrane-bound the bone B-cell and B-lineage hematopoietic stromal growth marrow a the factor essential cytokine cells Another stimulates for factor of cells stem that development earliest on progenitors. stem-cell (SCF), receptor with (see tyrosine kinase SCF on cells the Kit precursor Fig. interacts the 8.3). for chemokine also SDF-1) stages B-cell (stromal of development. essential 1, factor CXCL12 is the cell-derived The early cells, marrow may produced bone in roles It one precursors and the be constitutively by to microenvironment. its of developing is marrow retain stromal B-cell and not stroma-derived IL-7 lymphopoietin IL-7 includes receptor the γ-c. binds that but Thymic receptor resembles (TSLP) αchain, a B-cell the period in development TSLP least, promote its the Despite bone liver at perinatal in and, name, marrow. may the mouse embryonic in

is of cell, induction factor specified the the transcription A B-cell stage, by pro-B B-lineage-specific E2A. definitive expression it expression. that initiates and E2A some are but is known what the in factors not clear progenitors, transcription E2A PU.1 It for required the Ikaros is of B-cell then induces (EBF). the factor of E2A expression the early EBF state. survival E2A IL-7 the of progenitors, determine signaling pro-B-cell drive these together of while proteins the to expression the act that promotes committed and

As stromal with cells marrow, in within they contact mature, B-lineage cells. the the remaining migrate lines the called inner as in bones cavity long a endosteum, which the the of region lie earliest femur tibia. The cells and such the stem mature move and sinus cells with cavity. as stromal the in marrow trabecular contact Developing they spaces, toward central make the of B-lineage the cells they reticular 8-7 The in chapter. in development cells 8-8 mature into of B as Sections describe occur immature and spleen, lymphoid stages the of final such peripheral this of B organs which we cells

the of heavy-chain development 8-2 rearrangement B-cell begins locus. by

are, in large cell, pre-B early mature B-cell stages order late and B The cell, of they cell, immature cell (Fig. small pre-B development pro-B cell, B the cell, occur, pro-B 8.4). 5). expression when the Rearrangement of recombinase locus in the occur, the proteins several and EBF cell and RAG-1 initiated including is gene the the key induce enable components of to V(D)J heavy-chain Chapter RAG-2 rearrangement pro-B that (see of E2A Only rearranged one fixed time, at a is sequence. a in locus gene J (IgH) a rearrangement the joining heavy-chain first the take of a to locus. immunoglobulin The at D to segment is gene segment place in be JH mostly progenitor. pro-B-cell early seen can the the lymphoid place rearrangement stage, early D as but to as common takes the or absence In occur. EBF to E2A this fails initial rearrangement event of (see B-cell induced Fig. Pax5, key factor activator is transcription protein one Another EBF known protein the E2A as (BSAP) isoform the of which is and by 8.3). the targets are and Section component receptor of the CD19 for co-receptor both Among and the the component pre-B-cell Igα, gene (see the 7-7). for gene Pax5 B-cell receptor a of signaling B-cell the indicating the that to is pathway can Pax5 cell of develop the down pro-B In B-cell to be induced commitment the fail Pax5, to for T types, cells rise pro-B cells B-cell required and absence to but of give cell lineage. further the myeloid pre-B Stem Early Growth Germline VJ Ig˙ ˛5 chain L-chain Germline rearranging light-chain the mature Mature rearranged cell Ig expressed induces an surface that scaffold cell N-nucleotide genes B cell Surface Unknown Immature Ig˝ pre-B rearrangedV–J RAG-1 the VJ BP-1 pro-B B-cell ˜ as receptorIL-7R Intracellular of lgMpre-B expression H-chain development VDJ Absent the addition Germline recombinase rearranged rearranged transduction CD45R B-cell D–J cell and IgM on also cell is chain of Amino-peptidase from rearranged Surrogate part CD43 Lymphoid-speciÿc RAG-2 cell Pax5 lgM Kit cell lgD Signal V–DJ VDJ genes factor receptor. (BLNK), pre-B-cell VDJ B VpreB SH2-containing Function Absent cell CD19 surface Btk transiently signaling ˜ protein for GermlineGermline protein CD24 antigen receptor Small TdT required the rearranging Large linker cell rearranged for rearranging Protein of pro-B Absent VDJ further components receptor pro-B Late at made spliced alternatively IgD intracellular H-chain transcripts and from IgM Mainly

Fig. genes. B-lineage the several the of a and immunoglobulin of through marked by rearrangement proceeds The expression stages cell development 8.4 not germline nonlymphoid rearrange stem in immunoglobulin the cells. in to all gene The cell has they found begun configuration segments; its (Ig) are yet rearranges (H-chain) locus first. The heavy-chain progenitor in DJH D of lymphoid occurs occurs. cells, in the pro-B segment JH a cells Rearrangement mostly to which gene pro-B common to early rearrangement a starts late gene in VH generating and segment part Fig (see and the rearrangement successful of as leads Igα, a VDJH Btk receptor, via pre-B-cell complete immunoglobulin signals Igβ, 7.27). chain A the which to of heavy expression point small and a cell, cell expression cytoplasm. Once become VpreB) become pre-B occurs, cease which to large is (λ5 chain the the and in stimulated resting alone cells; of pre-B chains the μ surrogate this this cells to the light proliferates express the heavy at cells the to start pre-B RAG rearrange light-chain the reexpress Small (L-chain) genes. and proteins at molecule Igα cell cell Upon successfully gene, immature cell which and also IgM expresses that via Igβ. assembling complete signals light-chain the an a becomes a a surface, B mRNA by Fig. μ Mature mechanism B δ a splicing (see a chain of chain, cells as produce well alternative as heavy a heavy additional cell 5.17), by and on surface. of marked are appearance the the IgD place spleen. All stages the B in cells marrow; mature occurs final in B maturation to the the IgM+IgD+ takes the bone development cells through immature of in are The B-cell earliest expressed the and mouse), development. CD45R surface are (B220 CD19 which throughout markers B-lineage marker the pro-B by Kit of expression the CD43 cell IL-7 A distinguished (a is of also (CD117), unknown and receptor. function), function). to marker CD24 (a express pro-B of cell starts A late unknown is longer enzyme no Kit pre-B the is expressed. cell expression by whereas phenotypically distinguished the A of BP-1,

7-20). (see Section temporal expressions listed some required of development in receptors The the are transcription Fig. B-cell factors, surface and of proteins, for and 8.3 Fig. 8.4.

of B-lineage Although nor and of occur rearrangements the same cells genes do the cells. enzymes, genes in immunoglobulin T in T-cell in Band rearrangements uses both recombinase not V(D)J complete core operates cells, T-lineage do system occur receptor about The to of with do that associated joined. gene the are be lineage-specific segments occur rearrangement ordered transcription events low-level

to (Fig. initial D JH heavy-chain rearrangements the locus in The immunoglobulin cell 8.5) at occur which point both typically cell. a alleles, the late pro-B becomes on D Most in segments stop because useful, joins encountering most gene translated a to are potentially without be in humans human three can reading D codon. all frames JH rearrangement. mechanism and also undergoes special need there only early to D successful there ensure need for this allele at Thus, joints, no distinguish to no to one is is that JH a stage with stages, advantage. rearranged sequences Indeed, be two given off successfully likely D–JH at failure an starting may rate of later the

Fig. a by productively expressed the immunoglobulin is immediately rearranged B gene cell. 8.5 as developing A protein to D initiated rearrangements. rearrangement In JH cells, heavy-chain gene with pro-B early is transcription arrow). in protein expressed, As (red the μ is top no occurs functional shown although panels, occurs on cells, rearrangement DJH pro-B first. In late to VH one chromosome functional to is produced, on If occurs DJH rearrangement H-chain the chromosome. VH no second as cell chain. together productive are chains, which complex a and the chains light by gene soon two μ takes As other rearrangement a heavy-chain λ5 make in up VpreB, a with surrogate expressed place, (center complex immunoglobulin-like is The pre-B-cell whole the receptor as panels). known rearrangement; Igα this inducing is signal chains, and other which by Igβ, associated the pre-B-cell stage B halt gene to transition proliferation. protein with to two drives the the large It cell heavy-chain cell leads a produce a to pre-B-cell death. to leading functional receptor H-chain Failure signal to large cells, progeny cells The pre-B light-chain rearrangements stop commence. gene which of and small pre-B become dividing in rearrangement rearrangement Section and 5-2) Vκ–Jκ to occurs Jλ unsuccessful, occurs first, next. (see if Vλ expressed the bottom light-chain in form surface, gene as at chain complete μ Igα is molecule, cell of and the a panels. the Successful IgM that which results rearrangement the Igβ to production binds shown light in a with together chain complex surface receptor trigger the cessation Signaling of light-chain thought rearrangement. to gene this is via chain death. a cell functional to Failure leads L to produce

chain, heavy proceeds rearrangement pro-B complete a gene late cell DJH segment a with VH a To of produce to a now the sequence. immunoglobulin to In only rearrangement to to on contrast first VH one rearrangement, DJH chromosome. D occurs JH ceases of production after a intact rearrangement DJH becomes VH successful cell pre-B which to μheavy leads rearrangement to and the chains, the cell. A Pro-B cells mediated 8-3). pre-B-cell signal the an receptor do fail as (see a receive to not that chain eliminated, μ important are they Section produce survival by cells of are stage. this pro-B At least at 45% lost three is nonproductive DJH by VH to is a each triplet acid as first at cases, out rearrangement amino nucleotides. least of two of encoded In the then frame, of When the chance this three occurs failure. in rearrangement a chromosome, again rearrangement other is two of theoretical initial out on with 1/3) pre-B [1/3 rough of a estimate chance thus (2/3 0.55]. × generating 55% the is cell of = A + the pseudogenes somewhat V protein. can that prevent that contains functional because gene The yet expression defects lower, a rearrange segment repertoire actual frequency have major of is the the chromosome nonproductive it for cell other is locus as rearrange. initial and successive the most to rearrangement the lead pro-B undergo does An same to will possible rearrangements loci automatically elimination, chromosome, on where on not fails, that

this stage the deoxynucleotidyl of by transferase enzyme The (TdT). is at B-cell the terminal antigen-receptor diversity enhanced repertoire is nontemplated nucleotides (see rearranged 5-8). segments adds expressed pro-B and the between (N-nucleotides) the TdT joints cell Section by gene at but its during expression it during the expressed adult rearrangement. is at humans, stage gene pre-B-cell heavy-chain rearrangement, cells declines In in pro-B gene light-chain heavy-chain This all and light-chain D–J of quarter found a explains about genes only joints the human in N-nucleotides but joints. V–D of in are nearly why rarely that development showing TdT off in are V–J is found switched earlier slightly the B N-nucleotides of joints, cells. in mouse mouse light-chain first expressed In supplied development, and lymphocytes, when with being if at levels, is TdT immune is fetal low system the T B only all. peripheral at

The to for stage. receptor for pre-B-cell cell 8-3 tests cell from signals transition pro-B the and successful chain pre-B complete of heavy the a production the

V(D)J sword. imprecise recombination The double-edged a is nature of it produces the it rearrangements. antibody Although results in diversity repertoire, increased also unsuccessful many in need Pro-B functional testing cells a a of way has whether produced. heavy been chain potentially therefore production. chain signal They a that its successful incorporating heavy by functional into can this receptor do a have absence whose loci yet of test the in light This not place rearranged. chains, takes to that a chain pre-B-cell proteins chain the μ the invariant resemblance two and make receptor can structural ‘surrogate’ light Fig. form Instead, pair together with (see have to (pre-BCR) pro-B the cells 8.5). to The of B pre-B the receptor considered is made, cell. been and has the assembly then cell a productive pre-B-cell rearrangement cell signals a a that

by The genes expression from chains their EBF is and loci, are antigen-receptor Fig. 8.4). the by separate E2A induced (see surrogate encoded and nonrearranging close the C because VpreB, called amino-terminal chain; has region λ other, One resembles the of to light is its of called at an the light-chain resemblance V end. domain domain λ5 the a extra but the Chapter in signaling and 7 Igβ, also the invariant Igα complex mature on express cells cells pre-B Pro-B and the B receptor as cells. of components proteins introduced B-cell by Igβ pre-B-cell just tyrosine interacting the tails, through their of signals Igα intracellular cytoplasmic and kinases transduce with receptor, components As

pre-B-cell 7-7). molecules tails signals they bind receptor mature cells inducing signaling cross-link and the VpreB and on on to clustering and (see in transduce ˜5 through Section function antigen other Amino-terminal the receptor receptors, each as B adjacent

important pre-B transition mediates that signaling an receptor cell. Formation provide and pre-B-cell cell the between the checkpoint the the through and pro-B of this receptor heavy-chain that formed after blocked and pre-B-cell that cannot the either mice the produce transmembrane B-cell genes domain, gene development cannot λ5 have rearrangement. be is mutant or In receptor lack heavy-chain normal soon receptors the transiently, formed. of pre-B-cell receptor λ5 as perhaps because begin development, complex stops B-cell In is to pre-B-cell mRNA expressed be as the production receptor the on signals only pre-B at for present to levels cell from cell. cell Although the surface, transition pre-B-cell required low generates pro-B the external the signaling receptor. ligand No to by in other seems or be antigen involved as oligomers pre-B-cell are generate interact signals or each with 7-16. Section other, forming Instead, receptors dimers in described that to thought involves pre-B-cell ‘unique’ termini receptors regions in which proteins and of the cell are Dimerization the λ5 amino domains other in VpreB that cross-linking 8.6). of immunoglobulin-like adjacent on the present not (Fig. and surface mediate the and requires receptor signaling kinase intracellular an tyrosine (Btk), PreB-cell scaffold Bruton’s BLNK 7-20). Tec-family tyrosine Section protein kinase (see B-cell mice, BLNK In block leads the pro-B-cell development in a humans stage. and of to at deficiency produced. agammaglobulinemia X-linked in In deficiency, profound are Bruton’s cells immune mutations B-lineage-specific mature a BTK B in no (XLA), the humans, cause which gene interrupting cell to block the B by in transition The development is pre-B almost mutations from total, BTK caused B-cell in immature cell. from the similar, or but gene in X-linked severe, mice. xid, arises called in A Btk defect mutations less immunodeficiency,

Pre-B-cell enforces signaling locus and allelic receptor rearrangement 8-4 heavy-chain exclusion. inhibits further

locus the heavy-chain sensitive become and pre-B-cell to cell The clustering of halts rearrangement IL-7. allows generated pro-B receptor to further signaling the by initiating transition proliferation, induces large cell the This the to

Fig. dimerization pre-B-cell spontaneous of unique λ5. regions by and The 8.6 initiates through VpreB the receptor signaling induced VpreB (green), surface λ5 a protein Two substitute to thus and expression. chain, light bind its for a chain and heavy chains, allowing (orange) surrogate V in interaction, VpreB while part of for the region light-chain this takes λ5 surrogate the light-chain region. substitutes constant the out here the in shown domains, as from domains. and regions extending λ5 globular Both ‘unique’ immunoglobulin-like amino-terminal present are other unstructured contain tails VpreB that not amino-terminal interact spontaneous of with with corresponding pre-B-cell associated regions cell regions pre-Bcell one surface. the on receptor pre-B-cell dimers on can the the These formation adjacent the receptor promoting receptor, signaling generates from on Igβ. dependent is the Dimerization that and ITAM-containing Igα receptor pre-B-cell the of presence the signaling chains and expression of inhibition the and cell. signals cause The RAG-1 large the the pre-B of proliferation RAG-2 Chris Garcia. Courtesy of

Fig. 8.7 in Allelic exclusion cells. individual B acid of encoded species to immunoglobulin constant polymorphisms these lead light-chain have amino genetic regions differences the of Most proteins. between and their the polymorphisms heavy-chain genes; are expressed by proteins individuals variants in light-chain species These different a as of known or allotypes. heavy-chain individual express immunoglobulin a, the B individual of homozygous b. of make cells allele (Ighb/b) a the allele (Igha/a) immunoglobulin allotype of In b homozygous for rabbits, in heavy-chain whereas will immunoglobulin all B the for locus example, cells allotype of in an the all an the for the can (Igha/b), and other, carries which one the a-allotype be animal a but cells the allele express the to Igh the immunoglobulin B both individual allele loci b-allotype, of or (bottom at the a heterozygous In of surface b shown either not panel). at because cell, receptor, productive rearranged two the in signals a of chain a of heavy-chain production rearrangement. of reflects allelic gene the the immunoglobulin alleles This further the the heavy Igh one rearrangement exclusion forms only which of successfully cessation pre-Bcell B

pre-B cell. two antigen B in of receptors specificities. a producing at result Successful both cell could different heavy-chain alleles rearrangements the receptor the prevent a pre-B-cell state this, in To two of enforces cell. a diploid allelic only in the of one exclusion, which is expressed alleles by gene signaling occurs pieces both one heavy-chain the the for expresses exclusion, (Fig. and one years of that original at nearly loci, Allelic experimental discovered receptor support ago which one light-chain of the the type provided lymphocyte of antigen theory and was locus 50 8.7).

ways. in pre-B-cell from the heavy-chain allelic Signaling receptor three exclusion promotes of the it RAG-1 RAG-2 the and genes. directly by reducing recombinase expression activity reduces V(D)J First, reduces of pro-B of phosphorylated is entry cycle. for levels to indirectly synthesis when by to targeted which response protein Second, (the occurs it of phase) into RAG-2 this phase degradation, DNA RAG-2 the causing in cell the be the cell S further this of the although machinery, preB-cell access receptor precise the recombinase reduces are clear. details to not signaling Finally, locus of heavy-chain the B-cell At heavy-chain RAG be stage a that of development, at rearrangement. again order does rearrangement, expressed light-chain the locus will not locus undergo out to point later in carry proteins but further absence the does heavy-chain of In locus of occur. pre-B-cell the receptor allelic not signaling, exclusion to that cells this a the successful develop. proliferative a in pre-B-cell B-cell a causes role pre-B of of profound reduction stimulate precursors second receptor of deficiency a Since in and is heavy-chain mature rearrangement, signal expansion cells important with signaling B numbers

rearrange and express the cells light-chain 8-5 locus Pre-B immunoglobulin. cell-surface

joins the cells. the cell division, from stage cells large transition The 30to pre-B-cell become rounds by pre-B by before pro-B-cell 60-fold of about they several to is of resting expanding the small accompanied in-frame population successful with with large numerous rise cell pre-B heavy-chain A particular small rearranged cells. to pre-B gives a therefore gene and cells, rearrangement in again the begins. the pre-B small proteins RAG of are light-chain locus produced single pre-B rearranged important a of and cells with an makes different diversity. B-cell gene, are generated Each make antigen many which cells so a cell, light-chain specificities receptor to from these can different contribution overall

Light-chain also rearrangement exhibits exclusion. allelic currently the place time, regulated locus mechanism a at a allele only a generally one understood. by at at Rearrangements take not light-chain process joining; fails lack if and D repeated allele of rearrangements rearrangement same segments, by V functional chain, at occur VJ gene segments J produce the can V unused light-chain The to rearrangement light and a occurs J and 8.8). a (Fig. loci to particular Several be a before light-chain attempts can on second initiating chromosome. any made therefore productive chromosome on gene of rearrangement rearrangements one the at are two greatly the intact This different of light-chain increases chances an chain, loci. there eventually generating light as especially progeny generating cells that succeed be classified result, in As immature reach bear cells. as and IgM molecules stage a that B many intact can the preB-cell lists in involved of the V(D)J recombination some regulated B-cell Figure expression is development. and their how proteins 8.4 shows throughout 8.5 point assembly surface B-cell stages a of the complete of summarizes of immunoglobulin. the up to Figure development surface marrow, fail in the Developing pool. assemble eliminated apoptosis complete cells to and a are bone B-cell the that from immunoglobulin undergo B

Fig. rearrangements Nonproductive rearrangement. gene by be further can 8.8 rescued light-chain the offers initially an and the pre-B rescue many of that rearrangement. loci organization opportunities out-offrame in of make for humans mice light-chain The cells κ here illustrated rescue the at is human Light-chain locus. a segment first 3’ new the a is with recombine a nonproductive, to 5’ with out-of-frame it Jκ them Vκ rearrangement. to segment the rearrangement can join located replace gene If between gene and remove there chromosome, gene in In to each humans. can because five are this five functional up principle, times Jκ on happen segments genes gene may (not rearrangements rearrangement fail If productive of shown). all λ-chain join, to light-chain yield a succeed κ-chain

expression chains an type chain—κ As or B one well as of light of display λ—by isotypic also allelic the cell. only that individual exclusion, light exclusion, is, this not is regulating mechanism Again, the known. process the rearrange λ humans, and mice the In tends before to κ locus locus. light-chain λ cells the myeloma rearranged, secreting their genes κ first generally chains observation are both κ κ light have generally only λ in the deduced chains, and whereas rearranged. light-chain was secreting that light genes from myelomas This is does reversed, rearrangement gene This κ the however, genes. not of absolutely require the occasionally λ and rearrangement previous order other from in vary one cells mature ratios the of different extreme κ-expressing B The λ-expressing versus species. to rats it is cats is 65%:35%, In in and the it 95% is to in 5%:95%, humans 5% opposite it λ, in typically and that mice. κ of mice functional with species. gene in of and correlate the Vλ number segments strongly Vκ These most ratios genome the the of and gene of the segment reflect kinetics efficiency also rearrangements. They the because useful and indicates clone ratio the clinical population is disorder. The in dominance of aberrant mature the lymphoproliferative a ratio κ:λ presence in an of one κ:λ lymphocyte diagnostics,

tested Immature autoreactivity before leave bone 8-6 the cells they are B for marrow.

the on immature paired pre-B μ surface becomes a an cell IgM, Once with chain, surface a and or B rearranged (as IgM cell. cell can chain a be sIgM) expressed has the light stage, is self or receptor for to autoreactivity. antigens, antigen reactivity At tested the first this autoreactive elimination will be B-cell ensures or tolerant whole self a of of population B as the inactivation antigens. cells The that produced tolerance The a as arises tolerance central lymphoid B-cell marrow. is because development the stage in central organ, it bone this known at of 8-8). lymphoid organs take fully place steps not cells maturation the bone peripheral in and are Section require mature (see However, that marrow leaving additional B in self-reactive may in Chapter escape later the we As B that and 15, tolerance from be see still cells shall chapter removed central

Fig. Binding to cells. can immature death molecules or the inactivation to self the marrow 8.9 bone B of in lead

may bearing not the that immature both First recirculating where normally; panels: and IgM surface. they become IgD encounter bone mature B B the tissues, on their to lymphoid marrow from antigen peripheral migrate cells mature do cells they of the cells are MHC, developing B deleted the panels: those for as when from receptors multivalent ubiquitous these Second recognize express cell-surface that example, such ligands, receptors molecules self repertoire. cells receptor editing B The (see either undergo Fig. self-reactive thereby deletion. programmed in cell the eliminating death the resulting undergo (apoptosis), themselves receptor, 8.10), or cells clonal self B that to soluble receptor (anergic) cells rendered able bind IgM. cross-link panels: unresponsive antigen B-cell antigens the surface are to the little and Third bear immature they express where die. with B but cells and other anergic in fail anergic; to cells periphery, survival They the the competition B periphery, to in if signals remain migrate receive IgD self any or and do to receive which not them, soluble monovalent mature signal low Fourth panels: antigen whose or affinity, inaccessible cells B is bind normally. with antigens immature unable and them. present said self-reactive, are ignorant to ligand potentially but activate Such is their are be to however, is clonally cells because

place process a tolerance, is final and have after takes of the in peripheral bone that stages during they to B-cell the maturation, 8-7. Section repertoire peripheral left as marrow, described the referred

to functional in B-cell the depends a the receptor of B receptor environment. delivered on from Igα with associates complex and cell with fate it the sIgM interacts form ligands complex, when in Igβ immature and marrow bone this signals an truncated important marrow, the reduction a signal cells bone mice reduction cannot B B show from immature marrow the number the of cytoplasmic periphery: number in peripheral with B a Igα domain signaling and/or the cells cells. that in and fourfold Igα that of emigration in in a dictating their is of the hundredfold in particularly survival the express into cell 8-27). immature receptor on dependent concentrations circulation their in exist S1P the the promotes bone the that expression lipid G-protein-coupled release high ligand towards the (see B from marrow cells S1PR1, and migration to of also a The S1P that Section of blood of is the binds

that have mature antigens strong to self (Fig. B to no cells continue reactivity Immature first panel). 8.9, venous the enter the the by carried and circulation, sinusoids marrow central sinus, spleen. leave enter that are supply the blood the to They via is, is cell if strongly strongly newly bone this is encounters self-reactive—development the however, the a in cross-linking antigen at expressed B If, the stage. arrested receptor marrow—that

four are Fig. expression self-reactive self-reactive (see fates that of have for shown B-cell genetically modified immature cells mice Experiments the that possible receptors using there enforce B 8.9, three panels). last fates anergy; by receptor receptor as the in stimulate death process apoptosis, a a and to a immunological to antigen cell These in known by induction clonal production too of resulting concentrations state or ignorance which of are deletion; antigen, state the are B-cell new receptor permanent a unresponsiveness low signaling. editing; of of dependent B B-cell antigen. for of is the receptor the The cell the on self-reactive outcome each interaction with self

Fig. can specificity. of antigen their by rescue some editing 8.10 by chains light cells receptor Replacement changing self-reactive B by that antigens is as multivalent panel), surfaces its arrested. When a cross-linked cell development receptors cell strongly developing are MHC on molecules antigen expresses such (top B self turn The (second and genes surface not does expression of RAG IgM the decreases off panel). cell of Continued synthesis light-chain rearrangement. to continue cell the gene proteins RAG allows light editing is (third the new panel). with combines form usually expression previous receptor chain, receptor; a productive a heavy the This process rearrangement new which leads chain new of a called to and the to new never antigen not the cell cell had like self-reactive, with (bottom and a much that reacted panel). is is If this ‘rescued’ self normal right development, continues receptor rearrangement; (bottom react however, cell self self-reactive, strongly with left the apoptosis, of panel). repertoire to rescued may undergo deletion continues remains cells B antigen, it be by in will clonal another the If it cycle resulting if from of it

autoreactive the with antigen receptor gene not B self-reactive. be autoreactive cells a is rescued replace by recognizing self can that that receptor multivalent Immature further express rearrangements new that an a receptor mechanism is termed receptor This editing (Fig. 8.10). immature being RAG made. still sIgM, first produces an proteins are When B cell the receptor rearrangement If development to cross-linking cease gene of self-reactive, proteins disappearing. not eventually B-cell allows sIgM is the with absence RAG continues, and Fig. strong gene cross-linking results sIgM; in RAG as can For autoreactive in of receptor, with rearrangement self continue, expression and continues, encounter however, an light-chain described an antigen the 8.8. by self-reactive replacing rescue with sequence. the secondary another cells light-chain and self-reactive These deleting rearrangements B immature it can gene normal new autoreactive, the B the cell light not development. If chain is continues is available recombination. are or autoreactive, receptor rearrangement no J non-autoreactive a the continues until gene for If until V produced remains light-chain receptor segments and additional tolerance antibodies to levels erythematosus of well is by the characterized mechanism receptor importance defects editing in systemic The autoimmune high process contribute diseases a arthritis, diseases rheumatoid established, lupus 15). of as this Chapter of autoreactive two human and (see as

chain a shutdown heavy caused rearrangement isotypic the light chain of of was a this that and exclusion. production ensured successful light-chain and allelic originally It both thought instantaneous and that the almost locus the light-chain principal B continue follows allelic that cells proteins suggests to successful means fall of made productive mechanism even alternative unexpected after rearrangement of an the a RAG be ability could The terminated. of rearrangement non-autoreactive their genes, rearrangement, exclusion, where a level which is rearrange by to self-reactive in having light-chain the apparent is now is allelic exclusion absolute, two that cells light are chains. rare B express there different not It as that

apoptosis fail their specific deletion, are the known Cells that to to death repertoire. autoreactivity a editing eliminate cell in receptor which generate as by to subjected remain efforts clonal non-autoreactive receptor a undergo they when process from autoreactive transgenic suggested all of sIgM, which nearly cells as that H-2Kb the specific anti-MHC experiments mice expressing immunoglobulin molecules, class of B an B-cell I clonal Early developing both expressed using immunoglobulin tolerance. was in a mechanism MHC for chains predominant deletion cells, the that of transgenic expressing had mice These not transgene-encoded normal numbers found studies bearing B all anti-H-2Kb receptors. H-2Kb development both B-cell expressing transgenes, in blocked. mice was immunoglobulin the H-2Kb and However, of Normal B cells by instead, anti-H-2Kb pre-B of most matured the in B were the immunoglobulin marrow lymph cells immature found, died apoptosis. and cells to spleen the numbers and nodes; B as populate bone sIgM cells expressing these immature never but using recent studies, However, more

migrates self-reactive, self for receptor by immunoglobulin is new outcome receptor light-chain more Arrest IgM continued this loci of immature the cell Appendix clonal within If no autoantibody by heavy B-cell new the B A-35, expressed and the that the immature method), new IgM Strong periphery Section recombination speciÿcity than deletion, receptor IgM that A antigen the receptor homologous rather still have If rearrangement: placed cells. for mice chains been B low matures details cell-surface the to indicate B undergoes is self-reactive, is I, is ligation likely (see cell development light bearing transgenes and longer for and editing, apoptosis the autoreactive of of now

cross-linking discussed so far their We formed of cells B multivalent fate have undergo that sIgM. newly the of cross-linking valence, small as low respond cells soluble antigens encounter B Immature of proteins, such differently. self weakly that more some B (see are enter cells this of but In anergy, not situation, self-reactive Fig. immediately and do die state or permanent inactivated a unresponsiveness, 8.9). B cells. antigen from T with cells antigen-specific specific cannot be Anergic even activated by help their mice. elucidated transgenic phenomenon this was Again, using soluble form also anti-HEL expressed transgene in were that mice Hen lysozyme for from immunoglobulin. egg-white high-affinity was (HEL) a transgenic in cells from B and marrow, but antigen. not The bone could emigrated the to respond HEL-specific matured reducing is and peripheral compete as their excluded and tissues B in lymphoid of follicles, lymphoid of cells (described areas to migration cells impaired, from the Furthermore, ability thereby anergic are with B the in immunocompetent detained cells Section 8-8). are life-span their further T-cell the B Under where relatively cells self-reactive die normal successfully cells anergic mature, quickly. few circumstances, these mechanism This is the of peripheral ensures self-reactive of potentially pool long-lived cells. purged B that cells

immunological of to fourth nothing them; cells that of potential Fig. The immature fate they self of B (see self-reactive in a is antigen ignorance state remain happens their 8.9). self not cells respond affinity do have for antigen Immunologically a reasons ignorant for but sense and various it. to not to may developing B may weakly bind concentration, accessible that or does be cells antigen signal. not the in generate activating an to low or spleen, or so it marrow may the bone receptor in B-cell be The inflammation should concentration, different (and self that activated as conditions unusually be or cells and some such activated under fundamentally available an certain reaches they receptors ignorant are) can self be could not non-autoreactive fact cells high by inert, the with are never be becomes from Because in antigens. they antigen when considered or

are ability all not The pathogens. allowed B some strikes tolerance balance self-reactivity the that respond self-reactive perfect the to fact and is maintaining to between mature reflects cells to that and central system the immune purging too too receptor pathogens. the If cells the recognize variety of might to wide repertoire were efficient, of elimination self-reactive limited unable become thus and a price we under self-reactive disease 15 is ignorant the certain cause circumstances. disease shall activated Some this of that see autoimmune be lymphocytes in can and Chapter balance: in in self below. cells mature the continued inaccessibility are marrow, check Normally, ignorant held can emigration bone a help, induced their however, be lack by B cells T-cell following the from which of that B is described or antigen, the the of tolerance

for are or antigens first the self 8-7 sufficient in eliminated quantities time that inactivated. of encounter the Lymphocytes periphery

or organ new are cells in the in only for expressed can of numbers bone reach lymphocytes purged affected. that B this large specific of marrow, autoantigens While are are autoreactive population from lymphocytes the or little is thyroglobulin, Some highly that compartmentalized are the circulation. specific, available the thyroid product so any are if tissue like in antigens, also. inactivated their cells encounter B the time eliminated that self-reactive first periphery the Therefore, must specific newly for emigrated autoantigen or in be are B immature, newly acts cells This as known tolerance on mechanism, which still is emigrated tolerance. that peripheral organs, deletion, lymphocytes in self have lymphoid that encounter survival antigens de periphery anergy, self-reactive in the can central or the lymphocytes novo Like fates: several (Fig. 8.11).

the B deletion. cross-linking encounter clonal cells absence periphery antigen of in infection, that newly the strongly will an undergo emigrated In a This MHC B in studies of specific H-2Kb cells expressing elegantly molecules. for class receptors was I B-cell shown promoter. of in use transgenic the These of the cells animals, gene restricted molecule the a to expression are liver-specific when, liver the by even is B H-2Kb deleted B counterparts marrow, cross-linking unlike apoptosis further in in editing: bone is strongly undergo encounter There antigens their receptor the which no that the cells periphery attempt receptor rearrangements. directly, to difference somewhat may the their and rearrange the more be can cells in mature longer fact that no light-chain This loci. due the periphery are B

As peripheral antigen marrow, immature soluble developed with become an and B that newly cells the bone cells in abundant B bind encounter unresponsive. that the regulated by be the in the control by demonstrated promoter under placing changes HEL inducible can diet. transgene was of in an This mice different at effects B It its is and possible study any the of thus time at lysozyme of maturation. cells production thereby stages induce to HEL-specific on chronically shown they exposed have are inactivated antigen. are and peripheral cells These to that immature marrow B both bone soluble when experiments

signals cells Immature spleen and and the B turn survival. in rapidly through for the arriving receptor over require cytokines long-term and positive B-cell maturation 8-8

Fig. tolerance. recognize undergo Transitional cells B peripheral 8.11 that self antigens After are the immature B known as from and cells bone transitional cells. entering emigrating marrow circulation, B the spleen fully antigen. are their yet the tolerance to receptor of following subject mature, by in a engagement sIgM still these self cells Not a B-cell that B antigen and receive signal cell a death. undergo cells multivalent self encounter strong receptor Transitional self die rendered the anergic, are due in spleen soluble a ultimately with B within days cells that binds (see B-cell Transitional excluded follicles to to molecule from and the sIgM Fig. being few a 8.12). continue molecule self remain that and Transitional the B cells ignorant antigen affinity low their clonally of self a with soluble maturation. bind to mature reaction cells. into B no continue with B Transitional self cells their also maturation and maturation lead stages in of sIgD, upregulation of B-cell the final place B-cell in the take to follicles spleen. The

periphery, the still marrow from emerge immature. bone they into functionally cells are When B the final As the in above, discussed their maturation periphery

and differentiate cells that and cells cells enter an follicular Transitional cells B encounter tolerance. into zone immature maturation follicle undergo B receive survival for to the to and B opportunity provides self or antigens signals B peripheral marginal the cells IgM levels the and high is documented, and on known. is expression express in mature of of not changes cells sIgD, of function sIgM whereas levels mature high low cells well IgD; of as levels B B B express cells mature of the while sIgD but Immature sIgD little sIgM B

mature marrow fully cells survive Most the not B immature become B will cells. bone to leaving Figure the 8.12 the produced that of enter B newly fates possible shows periphery. cells daily roughly pool. steady-state in the is marrow the the of of peripheral from B new cells The population total output 5–10% B-lymphocyte bone cells be seems to cells. stream of of new B size B the constant, pool remain an the by to In of balanced needs unimmunized number which peripheral due that animals, equal means removal the this of to homeostasis, mature the cells B only of and of 1–2% these long-lived, peripheral die are each day. majority However, Thus, of die every population, which are of B-cell that days. than peripheral immature the B the 3 most turning-over 50% die more cells rapidly in in access to in for due than seems to to formed the periphery for cells the newly a competition peripheral days the be between follicles survive The more spleen. failure B cells B of few to most a and is do immature through B passage the produced their halted they newly periphery not If enter die. cells follicle, eventually number limited generated all is B the so follicles competition The cells lymphoid continual entry. of cannot day, for accommodate and each of there

necessary follicle B-cell The signals provides survival. for abundantly factor dendritic by the particular, BAFF is made (for to by cells B-cell the the (FDCs). In belonging cell activating member but produced several family) is TNF TNF-family follicular types, by (see to non-hematopoietic capture antigens cells recognition for specialized 9-1). FDCs B-cell B-cell the follicles in are are that Section antigen receptors resident BAFF, for BAFF-R, different express three and namely BCMA, cells receptors B TACI. The immature is long-lived B mice BAFF-R B have peripheral mutant lacking the and few cells BAFF-R for cells. most B-cell mainly important survival, because follicular also and required production, IgA the 10. TACI see APRIL, but we for for of TNF not which antibody bind important cells as survival immature related B BCMA in shall cytokine the family Chapter is is

Fig. cells maturation follicles B spleen. in 8.12 complete B-cell their Transitional the in in pulp. white blue), a a shows T cross-sectional distribution panel the comprising view cells of B and spleen mouse of The brown) (anti-B220, cells micrograph (anti-CD3, the indicating the top the staining) to B-cell-rich of marginal are (also brown B Surrounding due B220+ the zones presence follicles brown (intense cells). sit cords passing (mostly myeloid cells. rich plasma macrophages), blood pulp which within white the in pulp, cells, and red red cells is The the follicles complete the necessary that left where of must and their maturation they (middle bone receive cells B signals maturation in have B-cell panel). survival Transitional marrow spleen, the component low One through B-cell is signaling a the of level essential receptor. on member, cells the follicular A BAFF, dendritic essential a of expression is factor TNF-family (FDCs). second B-cell stimulates BAFF-R BAFF the on promoting B survival. transitional cells, exhibit BAFF-R. cells the little Newly (T1) B IgM, surface high of and transitional IgD, emigrated levels stage cells CD21 follicles, In become to these the 2 B (T2). B-cell upregulate transitional cells cells. and long-lived surface B mature become IgD, the Finally, cells upregulate B majority cells, cells cells. B The follicular are as known recirculating B of long-lived A numerous zone B-cell population. is second, subset the less marginal complement zone very cells of thought CD21. be B levels to self-reactive and are receptor express Marginal weakly the high at the junctions. the white to zones of area cells pulp/red These migrate the pulp, white marginal pulp splenic an or poised In B marginal make this location, rapid pathogens. blood-borne are zone responses to cells to antigens and fail within bone of leaving the and marrow excluded to B the days die signals 2–3 receive follicles will that from T1 Transitional cells survival maturation are (bottom panel). death. cells also anergic follicles undergo the excluded cell Self-reactive and B are from Cyster. Jason Wang of and Micrograph courtesy Xiaoming Howard Immunology, of UCSF. and Medical and Microbiology Hughes Institute Department

(see the Section T1 proceed by B Section defined 2-13 called through Immature receptor the cells (complement B-cell distinct transitional two or T2, component in spleen of and CD21 7-20). stages, and the 2) co-receptor presence absence spleen mice the B lacking CD21, to B immature cells stage lack fail the cells. the in T1 mature but and In express BAFF, mice progress to and pool. through for B-cell stages T2 and spleen through B-cell the T1 cells enter is in receptor to peripheral the long-lived the Signaling required immature progress the also B be the cells, this of an are signals; the case, signals are although In thought into developmentally signals not high-affinity arise B-cell maturing signals instead, between interactions that do receptor to antigen, not would responsible programmed weak, for this B-cell is from these the receptor sIgM the B-cell strong constitutive signaling mechanism receptor the known. with induce which B constitutive BAFF-R with in periphery. signals final signals stages weak the B-cell to of promote essential the These B-cell receptor are together the maturation purge failure development to occurs such diseases, overexpress B been individuals who of BAFF, balance auto-reactive B-cell the between the cells. syndrome, as signaling linked BAFF-R in a receptor that and and autoimmune has to Sjögren’s result from Disregulation appropriate of

lymphoid and B cells often The cells. as other B-2 of to the cells, organs majority referred in B peripheral that B spleen follicular secondary known are as reside marginal pulp predominance marginal A minor found zones named spleen in population second, junctions zone at their of for of cells the B at pulp/red that cells, B Fig. consists the (see the white lie 8.12). the common stage the in maturation marginal B-cell zone both marrow that and from of and bone follicles. cells lineage derive a develops splenic in Follicular final during bifurcates B the versus cell precursors, mature transition stage. the maturation peripheral signals transitional diverge marginal reconstituting B-cell starting Experiments cells culture, immature that lineages fully as the promoting stage, B-cell from B-cell in the at zone T2 indicate follicular to BAFF expression. and mice cells in B are BAFF lacking are Like marginal missing cells, signals, on dependent B zone follicular cells very complement be the expression levels B zone Marginal of high of their can CD21. by identified receptor express B generate on that predominantly single have some a whereas developing receptors knock-in that marginal receptor gene all cells. using B-cell immunoglobulin cells mice follicular rearranged others zone Studies generate B B-cell cells demonstrated B specificity details the the the of commitment a follicular factor the of still not understood. in determining process indicate transitional zone of however, final These receptor that is to versus this findings cells the lineage; marginal fully B major specificity B-cell the are B zone Due marginal cells poised blood. to filtered pathogens are to or to antigens rapid responses the location, from make their cells thought marginal zone Therefore, early B of for an is it defense blood-borne that pathogens. line represent

B with their we memory encounter B cells, B-cell which B to also return antigen; from cells mature plasma generated first antibody-producing addition in cells Peripheral Chapter in after 11. include memory will to are cells pool. that entry peripheral the mature long-lived already in B-cell cells established for are Competition follicular and relatively favors B stable have CXCL13, to Mature Section they the make is expressed 10-3). express easier; changes receptor might FDCs for (see the which undergone their phenotypic by cells for example, access follicles CXCR5, B that They which also expression have newly capacity B enhances developed increased B CD21 cells, immature with the cell. of signaling the of compared

of B-cell continued maturation role plays positive The the receptor in and peripheral cells. a recirculation B B-cell B the mature lack involved which (see immature from develop Section fail kinase cells to the receptor is tyrosine Mice B Syk, signaling cells. 7-20), have that in but survival be mature for cells. may the a signal B of final required maturation or B-cell Syk-transduced Thus, for expression Furthermore, in mice the loss the evident is B-cell cells conditionally required survival, mature BCR is cells. all B-cell B of from is for as B deleted of in whose continuous receptor specifically signaling, weak example, of maturation events. has for all be interactions each unique the is B-cell antigen-specific may in signal assembly induce a downstream responsible specificity, the triggers some and of used for the signaling not infrequently receptor by for and or final ‘tonic’ receptor receptor Although the which generated B-cell but complex signals a the survival; could, important

are innate B-1 B lymphocyte cells development. an arises early in that subset 8-9

organs, focused populations and development B this the on B cells reside follicular has such marginal Thus cells of chapter (B-2) B secondary far, the cells. in of that as zone majority lymphoid immune These adaptive populations B-cell comprise arm of the response. the two third cells, is important system. part innate of subset B the A B immune of B-1 called cells, peritoneal only numbers low present lymphoid the in large and in secondary cells and are organs, in found in instead. cavities numbers are These pleural which to B-1 cells produced of circulating infections. constitutively that are are antibodies, major source prior by antibodies are B these B any the secreted cells ‘natural’ recognize of and Most cells antigens, bacteria. made by controlling cells polysaccharide pathogenic and important are viruses capsular antibodies infections B-1 in B B-1 B

is feature from that B-1 ‘help’ IgM of antibodies they produce B the cells T class One can important of without cells. the T be be Although can to by appear involved. when cooperation, this of cells antibodies first 48 within antigen, enhanced cannot response T-cell hours exposure of decreased, as interaction helper memory antigen why each to is exposure. antigen-specific exposures elicit might cells or responses an immunological T The lack not with cell same of repeated the generated responses: B-1 a similar, explain result with provides that are mice B-1 anti-phosphocholine an this the cells produce of clear, B-1 in While are deficient infection more B bacterium. against susceptible cells to pneumoniae precise still not Streptococcus they because to fail functions with protection antibody pathogen. help B-1 in specificity, required, response with of of antigen-specific a this make potent infection can can early fraction this produced a antibodies no because be cells the T-cell Since is and significant role is same the have Whether not certain. cells B-1 human

cells cells B-1 are found from and progenitor stem bone liver marginal of Unlike majority (Fig. in that marrow zone generated from develop cells, follicular cells B B the fetal the 8.13). numbers. in are cells fetal large B-1 produced early and During late mice, neonatal B in stages B are follicular of and cells predominates, few birth, B made. development B-1 After the zone cells marginal and are indicates cells. to B-1 B producing giving committed this that from B rise and are to Current evidence cells B-2 cells the lineage, progenitor those distinct cells. of the or are Whereas on B-1 effect in B-2 BAFF-R, development survival mice BAFF cells B deficiencies or have absent B lacking these no the signals the final development. maturation non-canonical that for weak require B-cell in receptor signaling B-cell activation the B-1 is of that Additionally, pathway the a promote stages the spleen B-2 dispensable 7-23), Section B-cell (see NF-κB pathway also these developmental between differ requirements Cytokine pathways. cells. B-1 IL-7 mice normally that components, B defects IL-7R in B-2 B or development signaling lacking develop prevent the cells of not for needed B-1 development which development requires B-cell factor also cells. the the PU.1, B-2 of is transcription B

Summary.

long-lived 8.14). bone to progenitors pool the peripheral from mature B-cell in B-cell the the this have In (Fig. marrow we development followed earliest section, surrogate light receptor; development. this heavy-chain this is locus first μ The successful, chains rearranged heavy to pre-B-cell with produced B-cell form the is a first the and, if checkpoint is in that combines chain is pre-B-cell successful rearrangement, causes of the and heavy-chain exclusion. signals thus Production receptor rearrangement cessation of gene allelic enforcing this light-chain generating also rearrangement initiates subsequent pre-B-cell attempted. progeny proliferation, be It which in can numerous the formed, immunoglobulin again initial B-cell rearrangement the is complete rearrangement and gene cell its continues light-chain ceases, B productive, If receptor gene development. is a either J regions used continues until available up. first or gene made is If the are rearrangement rearrangement all rearrangement is a light-chain productive unsuccessful, productive made, dies. is rearrangement If no B the cell developing on the Once cells B the receptor antigens. surface a of cell, undergo tolerance to immature self is expressed immunoglobulin complete continues in a time after This and process for cells begins the emigrate short the immature B marrow to bone periphery. through occur B-cell For and of BAFF B their the stages the the follicles the cells, spleen, signals in of require B-cell majority the maturation of well population the final member as as family receptor. TNF

Fig. zone of and of cells. marginal cells), B the B-1 A properties B follicular 8.13 cells comparison cells, (B-2 the addition the to develop cells the in can In developing omentum. B-1 in liver, in as sites such fetus, unusual throughout the in B-1 young cells although produced they animal, be probably predominate can life. N-nucleotides. life, variable-region mainly neonatal contain Being few rearranged during and sequences their fetal produced birth the In mouse after levels not peak reach of cells contrast, zone do 8 accumulate marginal in B age. and until weeks the share and a for BAFF their Follicular and B precursor development. cells spleen; a zone B-2 T2 subsets consequence, IL-7 transitional B on the common cells in are marginal as population, signals dependent both cells IL-7 or not contrast, cell BAFF. In does development B-1 require lymphocytes selected cells and self-renewing as by ubiquitous a antigens. foreign self are of thought that of are pool activated partly best B-1 and specificities. variable of repertoire the this are a antigen-binding in early produced cells possibly life, and B-1 cells Because because have regions restricted the of selection, that those to of a V-region be zone set B-1 Marginal that of restricted select have by may cells also specificities a antigens cells. B repertoire selected similar because certain of sites at be drive B-1 most that these major probably in antigens population cells B the seem cells of proliferation. to cavities, B-1 cell to body exposure not to are marginal and spleen B thought remain of cells the the recirculate. zone Marginal zone in in antibody; of Partial that of IgM much the B-1 blood. contribute of cells leads B-1 IgM to the mainly the secretion activation cells circulates marginal of that B-cell cells adaptive cells). antigens cells bacterial of react B-1 immune (B-2 these The response carry and the they with both more follicular repertoire to and B carbohydrate less a diversity out common the zone suggest than limited propensity primitive, γ:δ to T In regard comparable this are cells. they

Fig. of human development 8.14 the conventional summary of B-lineage cells. A and immunoglobulin cell-surface The some successive the state shown proteins, intracellular of stages B-cell of the development. expression for some of molecules genes, expression B-2 the are conventional of essential and changes, in (see undergo 5), antigen-driven produced and by are as B-cell Chapter immunoglobulins genes further immunoglobulin somatic which hypermutation differentiation, plasma evident memory cells. cells such switching the During class the described detail 9. stages These Chapter antigen-dependent in are more in

CD38 Somatic cell B hypermutation C˛. Plasma Memory lgG and Isotype switch or cell C°, cell lgGPlasmablast plasma VJ rearranged antigen-1 CD135 C˜, to IgA Ig CD45R CD45R CD20 and IgG, II hypermutation II rearranged. CD19, membrane CD40 CD20 Lympho-blast Mature CD21, CD45R cell IgD CD40 CD40 splicing Somatic CD19, B CD20 class yields class IgM, lgMlgD class VDJ naive MHC CD21, CD19, II secreted CD21, both Alternative lgM MHC MHC membrane form. produced in ˝chain CD45R yields ˝+ˆmRNA D–J MHC CD19, Ig yields pre-B-cell CD40 rearranged rearranged. pro-B Late Alternative rearrangement AA4.1 CD40 CD34 cell RAG-2 genesB CD38 pre-B-R cell RAG-2 CD45 ˝chains VDJ Germline IgANTIGENDEPENDENTTERMINALDIFFERENTIATIONCD45R CD20, CD38 CD19, V–DJ V–J TdT ˇ5, AA4.1, Intra-cellular pre-B VDJ VpreB CD38, pro-B II II ˝˝RAG-1 class cell MHC proteinsANTIGENINDEPENDENT CD20 CD38 splicing receptor cytoplasmic Surface Stem class CD34 CD45R marker rearranged cells IL-7R genes Germline Germline Germline CD40 ˇ5, CD10, class AA4.1 CD19 CD45R MHC ˇ5, Early TdT pre-B Light-chain VpreB cell Large class II splicing AA4.1, CD19 secreted II proteins rearranged Heavy-chain Germline CD10, Alternative AA4.1, RAG-1 CD20, VpreB IL-7R cell MHC rearranged Small IL-7R

AA4.1

CD19, CD20

Development of lymphocytes. T

T bone lymphocytes multipotent the the cells, marrow. hematopoietic stem cells in from derive B Like the the bone they the marrow their to thymus, However, from where mature migrate via cells (Fig. blood progenitor 8.15); reason is the or lymphocytes, thymus-dependent (T) cells. T the this for name the many including development T-cell antigen parallels rearrangement of successful B the and testing antigen-receptor of of stepwise heterodimeric eventual ways, in assembly that for rearrangement, orderly genes, cells receptor. gene the a sequential and and distinct has cells lineage. the receptors generation B some expressing not genes, as Nevertheless, antigen features the two of distinct α:β by γ:δ the for T-cell such T development of lineage cells, lineages the thymus in encoded seen cells which shapes depends and thymocytes, cells, are the to T as restriction interactions T repertoire on that generally also that ensure well thymic self rigorous as with Developing self-tolerance. selection undergo of as cells mature MHC known anatomy considering before of We with its development thymocyte to relationship the and the a of gene rearrangement mechanisms begin overview selection. thymic general of stages and

events but originate important in progenitors their in the all development marrow, bone T-cell 8-10 the the thymus. in occur

heart. thymus above upper thorax, just the the in is The situated anterior outer thymic into differentiated lobules, consists of an numerous inner cortex—and It clearly each region—the medulla an (Fig. cortical 8.16). in large thymic a of developing network known thymus individuals, the of as numbers embedded contains epithelia young the T-cell precursors stroma. In bone of marrow. that development the analogous a cells cells provided B stromal This T-cell provides by microenvironment to unique for for the

Fig. to T are antigens. thymus 8.15 migrate the development lymphoid foreign by where and in peripheral cells activated the organs, they undergo migrate the lineage commit marrow Notch T-cell bone following precursors the where to to thymus, the signaling. receptor T-cell they from them. leading bear thymic positive receptor to T-cell panel); selection are the transmit α:β molecules genes (top self cells rearranged T-cell that compatible survival first with are thymus, that the on of receptors with a interacting MHC In epithelium, signal leads Self-reactive a second repertoire signal in negative and death, them that to process receptors panel). cell selection of a cells the removed are bearing transmit from (top selection that antigen repeatedly foreign leave blood cells T organs, they to encounter survive thymus the (top circulate become to third leave lymphoid migrate where periphery; and panel). mature peripheral and in they specific activated the through the may the their clonal cells. to effector leads and differentiation T expansion Activation into they infected where infection, shown). areas, B-cell antibody or attracted sites an to attracted response these of activate to help of where into macrophages cells they (top are (not panel); Some are others kill activate can fourth

Precursors proliferate in are signals T and cells antigens and the organs T survival. Notch T-cell cells cells following lymphoid Immature initiate foreign peripheral gene the commit T-cell lineage to T rearrangements activated signaling self MHC that Activated for eliminate receptor Mature encounter and infection recognize receive thymic interact with T self are self strongly that precursor repertoire thymus the tract mature removed T-cell from kills cell MHC macrophage spleen Notch Those cell cell lymph stromal node gastro-intestinal activates antigen dendritic

development Mature genes by their the migrate sites T-cell cells progenitors lymphoid their and peripheral repertoire complete cells where Activated the to cells migrate rearranging migrate selection T and antigenreceptor infection develop organs T in undergoing bone of marrow the to the thymus to

Fig. cellular of the thymus. human organization 8.16The cortical regions. made in which contains of up (outer) and The the is above which lobules, body, heart, midline lies the (central) the of each medullary several discrete of thymus, epithelial the cells the in which the diagram of branched thymocytes As and scattered immature thymocytes left, with cortical associated; clearing macrophages in on the thymocytes. (pale consists are blue); (dark blue), cortex shown are immature (yellow), involved cortical closely which apoptotic medulla macrophages (dark medullary with and blue) (yellow) cells epithelial dendritic cells The (orange), marrow mature of (yellow) thymocytes along bone consists origin. of and of sites corpuscles are also probably cell Hassall’s degradation. undergoing immature are immature whereas cell mainly proliferating cells, thymic layer are in thymocytes cortical the outer The the T deeper selection. thymocytes cortical cells a the stained photograph thymus, equivalent and human shows The with section hematoxylin of eosin. stained. lightly darkly the stained, cortex is is whereas The medulla corpuscle. large Hassall’s medulla The is in body a the Photograph of C.J. courtesy Howe.

from in early known embryonic structures third pouches. endodermderived thymic development The pharyngeal arises epithelium the as thymic thymus, tissues anlage. or epithelial rudimentary form These a intrathymic origin the committed are dendritic hematopoietic lineage, to by of cells. colonized to is which T-cell large thymocytes, and that numbers cells to give of This rise inducing Thymocytes arrangement survival, thymocytes cells influence they epithelial epithelial the depend the that the which structure reticular thymus: a the formation for within thymic they are the not of surrounds of (Fig. on passengers simply developing 8.17).

cellular the in architecture thymus of illustrated Fig. human The is 8.16. medulla. cells cortex marrow-derived and are thymic differentially distributed between the Bone some and whereas along with only thymocytes, more dendritic scattered cells, in macrophages, B mature thymocytes immature and the cells, The medulla. are cortex found contains macrophages, below, events developmental organization discussed compartments. in this two As these different the be reflects will that occur

importance on The knowledge indeed, was in the our T-cell development of through immunity of the in mouse. comes most thymus mice; first of thymus from the experiments discovered yet removal birth difference at a and the not resulted on that been lymphocytes time between It in when mice, (thymectomy) immunodeficient the mammals B this interest surgical of in focusing had at T thymus organ found was defined. immunodeficient including observations has the the in T-cell of importance in children, since development. Much evidence, thymus confirmed and B the with individual mutation, in not in few affected the but syndrome DiGeorge thymus lymphocytes humans and lymphocytes. In nude form T the produces does mice associated cardiac, 22q11. combination with immune of and facial, DiGeorge is syndrome of complex deletions chromosome defects a endocrine, nude cell the Foxn1, terminal gene nude required this differentiation; also mutation name mutation for was to for epithelial hairlessness. mice due defect given in to causes it because transcription in a is factor The a the and on defect dystrophy. with been nail associated 17) immunodeficiency, chromosome (which absence in of T-cell FOXN1 cases of Rare congenital is the a alopecia, thymus, gene a have human

In after birth. in at weeks develop thymus to developed fully mice, whereas it for continues humans 3–4 birth, the is production T-cell puberty. is by of rate greatest thymus the before The life. is begins puberty, adults of T cells shrink, After it new to although the does continue in throughout thymus the and reduced, production after thymus not of puberty and T-cell any notable humans, numbers. by of mice both is removal function loss In accompanied the or without of T new cells T production seems of be cells T T numbers by the significant Thus, repertoire immunity by is is once it the instead also peripheral mature long-lived cells; division and established, T-cell of maintained some of sustained the can that pool cells.

signaling. Notch occurs following the Commitment T-cell lineage thymus 8-11 in the to

from to a T the lymphocytes. gives rise in also develop progenitor lymphoid that lymphocytes B marrow bone these to of Some progenitors leave marrow migrate the the and thymus. bone transduced to signal cells from specific a progenitor the through receptor thymic the epithelial In genes. on called is switch cell thymus, that Notch1 receives a is the lineage. to the specify precursor to development animal the T-cell the widely used in development, B-cell lymphocyte commit to rather Notch in instructs differentiation; than signaling tissue signal lineage Notch the thought is including γ:δ choices, T-cell choice. versus lineage required is α:β T-cell help to signaling other Notch throughout also and development regulate

T-cellspecific thymic is and expression the gene to lineage in to progenitor the Notch cells signaling T-cell program (Fig. initiate essential 8.18). commitment required factor-1 transcription is GATA3, (TCF1) signaling Notch each of induces expression for factors, of which and T-cell First, the two T-cell development. Rag1, genes, GATA3 (see well components receptor gene encoding as and gene T-cell TCF1 T-lineage-specific expression Fig. required receptor complex, of those as the a several of as Together, and rearrangements initiate such CD3 for B-cell 8.18). However, TCF1 induce program the sufficient and to of not entire T-cell-specific GATA3 gene expression. are gene the third factor, to for a progenitor program. of phase activating Bcl11b, cells required by T-lineage A is commitment T-cell alternative necessary complete induce expression this fates; prerequisite from final is commitment transcription adopting restricting T-cell

the proliferate there. in 8-12 extensively precursors die T-cell thymus, but most

of proliferation. enter the before bone a thymus intense marrow a week precursors up from phase to arriving T-cell spend there they the differentiating in mouse to adult × 108 the In about young a 2 contains thymus 108 thymocytes. × each new day are 106 however, cells to of × leave 106 thymus About each the 2–4%) about 5 day; 2 only (roughly cells. as mature 107 T these generated thymus T thymus continue to number. does the cell number or size in disparity number the generated Despite the grow of cells not the between the leaving, in and in because also by of thymus apoptosis 98% Section that thymus die the (see in is about the thymocytes 1-14). the This develop by cells, the of are apoptosis condensed are residual the recognized and chromatin macrophages bodies, cortex throughout ingested undergoing seen thymic apoptotic are (Fig. and apoptotic which Cells inside macrophages, 8.19). apparently This

Fig. The network the 8.17 surrounding cells developing form of thymus thymocytes. epithelial a thymus, of occupy of epithelial extensive cells. In scanning an thymocytes cells) network this of electron spherical developing the the (the micrograph interstices the van W. Ewijk. of Photograph courtesy

Fig. thymus development gene mouse signaling the of with 8.18 program cell-surface proteins, and T-cell and The rearrangement, stages expression of transcription the in correlate of factors. α:β proteins, the

stroma. are thymocytes interactions expressed Lymphoid ligands the proliferate on precursors to committed Notch to T-cell the and with thymic triggered lineage become through TCF1 in expression the the to signaling T-cell induce which Notch of Bcl11b. induce GATA3, requires of commitment expression turn and that This expression gene begins cells in and double-negative (DN1) program Kit. CD44 the express by (DN2) irreversibly the of to CD25, marked committed IL-2 become expression α stage, at the is Cells chain receptor. the the lineage subsequent which of T-cell locus, DN2 they this occurs, and After becoming and as become to cells cells. the CD44low the (CD44+CD25+) DN3 β-chain this, begin rearrange Kitlow on (pre-TCR), pre-T-cell entry they CD44lowCD25+ a expressed into and until in which cell are the productively rearrange cells form is the to locus; β the pairs triggers the chain DN3 pTα cycle. surface called in-frame chain surrogate with stage The β-chain the then receptor cell the arrested which signals the causes amounts triggers proliferation, Expression CD25. of in on and the small cell with cell gene association pTα:β cessation loss rapid of of CD3 rearrangement the surface β-chain of cells. cells The DN4 as known then are CD4 and cease are expressed. the proliferate to cells CD8 and Eventually, DN4 locus. at small The double-positive efficient begin α-chain cells the CD4+CD8+ rearrangement levels selection. T-cell receptor the cells α:β and express are then of CD3 low an associated and The complex ready for consequence some single-positive to selection, are but selected to into to negative failing of a Most thymus. selected and or CD8 be by die cells the eventually CD4 or cells mature positively as leave single-positive into regulated CD4 is or cells Runx3, CD4+CD8+ by CD8 Maturation ThPOK respectively. and of double-positive cells factors transcription a in receptors (S1P) thymocytes stage; sphingosine peripheral trafficking, to such emigrating express is the failure if their 1-phosphate part as receptor, to involved defect S1PR1 due exhibit Fig. in KLF2 in is expressed the tissues, at first absent, single-positive to lymphoid (see it 8.32). in the discussed contributions of The other development are the T-cell proteins to text. individual

Fig. macrophages the in that cortex. apoptosis are cells by ingested 8.19 undergo thymic Developing T in medulla of dye. shows stained the red a been a with through left section The the have part and apoptosis which cells thymic for cortex panel right the to the cortex The thymic photograph. in is cortex rare Apoptotic throughout in but the are medulla. cells the scattered are macrophages. a thymic cortex shows for cells for right of The magnification and panel has section apoptotic at stained blue that red been higher can seen be apoptotic macrophages. within The cells panel, right panel, ×45; Magnifications: left ×164. Photographs and J. of Sprent C. Surh. courtesy

crucial recognize peptide:self the to T-cell of because is screening self profligate for each reflects thymocyte the it thymocytes a ability that part and undergoes waste complexes for intensive of self-tolerance. MHC development

changes the are in thymocytes in development stages marked cell-surface by 8-13 Successive of molecules.

developing developing cells, a stages. Like pass thymocytes series of B distinct through Section by and of the the status and the of in the cell-surface as the receptor, in by and such in of These 4-18). (see expression CD8 T-cell genes proteins changes the T-cell expression Section marked complex 7-7) are receptor CD4 the changes and proteins co-receptor (see CD3 T surface as particular reflect cell-surface the differentiation. proteins of for of stages used These at combinations of state markers different functional cells the maturation of cell, changes are and principal The Fig. in summarized stages 8.20. are of different γ:δ, T-cell cells—α:βand lineages which receptor development. T chains—are of Two types distinct early T-cell produced have in CD8 and distinct develop cells cells into cells. subsets—CD4 two α:β functional Later, T T T

progenitor of of first bone surface not T cells they their When marrow, are from molecules genes most thymus and mature enter cells, the the lack characteristic the rearranged. receptor give major cells of population cells. the to T These and minor rise T α:β population cells of the γ:δ can a or this If lymphoid fully it consists is and individual which to cells, thymic of progenitors progenitor the committed cells, peripheral these B injected lineage. of to into although mixture multipotency, uncertain NK are whether cell γδ the αβor of T-cell retain give rise whether population even the circulation, progenitor only some cells cells

of lineage by an first followed trigger phase molecules specific CD2 (in stroma and and for T example, thymic differentiation cell cells, Interactions with the T-cell of cell-surface the expression along for pathway, Thy-1. mice) the initial the proliferation last thymocytes not lineage the of T distinctive end week, of mature can phase, define about that markers a T-cell three but the bear markers do cell-surface which express At the the of cells. this any are CD3:T-cell CD4 the and CD8. the complex co-receptors or These receptor cells Fig. Because and of CD8, such called CD4 thymocytes absence of (see the double-negative are 8.20).

Fig. thymocytes 8.20 distinct the Two in of lineages produced thymus. are subpopulations. the T-cell important receptor and identifying complex for are T-cell molecules CD8, chains) and molecules CD4, thymocyte receptor (CD3, β and cell-surface α any not or called ‘double-negative’ in and thymus the express CD4 these of not earliest are do these they because express thymocytes. cells cell CD8, proteins, population does The when γ:δ minority precursors cells T-cell even or the mature), CD8 majority α:β and the include to These that lineages: CD4 rise of T-cell cells two lineage. (which T population give lack and stages CD4 proceeds which cells development by ‘double-positive’ of the thymocytes. α:β cell; these CD8 expressed are are T through both known prospective same as in The These and enlarge divide. cells T-cell small they double-positive become that express receptor. of Later, the resting levels cells low but can lose peptide:self within self MHC level receptors double-positive either of expression complexes and small or Most interact expression CD8 T-cell increase molecular of cells thymus receptor. with of the CD4 becoming cells, the those thymocytes whose after die the is thymus mature after The CD8 cells. which, exported CD4 maturation, the are ‘single-positive’ from thymocytes, or outcome process of the this T as single-positive

the fully the immature cells. double-negative of thymocytes developed are only ~60% thymus, In T to 5% 6-19). Section (about thymocyte α:β receptors T populations all cells; γ:δ T belong very cells The (iNKT of 8-16) (see of also mature cells diversity T-cell see thymocytes) cells T limited Section two of and including that more lineages, minority pool double-negative receptors expressing bearing T-cell includes for molecule. the In term we and the not this thymocytes that a do ‘double-negative thymocytes’ yet express discussions, immature subsequent receptor complete reserve T-cell γ:δ T (see Fig. rise These and give to cells both α:β cells although the pathway. 8.20), most them develop along of α:β

in detail pathway Fig. more is The α:β in shown 8.18. adhesion IL-2 further of stage subdivided Kit, Section for chain receptor), (see CD44, four expression basis of (the The on of be and the into receptor the CD25 α molecule 8-1). can the stages the SCF double-negative the T-cell both CD44 are germline these the Kit the thymocytes but At not cells, CD25 genes configuration. encoding are receptor of cells; in in express called and chains first, DN1 double-negative and and are is to surface As thymocytes express called Kit cells. and later, of cells; CD44 their mature, are reduced, begin expression CD25 and DN2 DN3 they they on called

DN3 Jβ DN2 with cells in continues begins the and β-chain to some to Dβ receptor rearrangements of with Vβ T-cell DJβ rearrangement. locus Rearrangement in cells and fail remain gene of once the β-chain rearrangement and a make the in soon rearrangements lose productive that Cells locus stage to they again and cells CD25 progress the express DN4 successful expression which that of stage, make (CD44lowCD25+) proliferate. die, at protein whereas DN3 β-chain β-chain to the CD25 gene of knockout deleted by expression mice which develop A-35). in functional I, the transient T normally has IL-2 gene is unclear: in the Section been (see The significance Appendix of cells important development mice contrast, thymocytes, quite number double-negative much earliest of Kit a lacking cells. the By in is Kit T that smaller for of double-negative the have In through signaling Notch each progression continuous development. stage is of for T-cell important addition, stroma. produced essential by is A thymic IL-7, is which the second factor receptor humans. and a T-cell absence receptor In signaling mice γ-c, development both or Jak3, block the IL-7, protein in severe of IL-7 the occurs α, in IL-7 cells to by NK a γ-c immunodeficiency disease the caused immunodeficiency cells, is SCID human the of T In primary and characterized genetic expression. by combined leading X-linked absence in protein fact, deficiency (severe disease), defects

DN3 In (see thymocytes Fig. chain pre-T-cell (pre-T-cell α), the called a (pre-TCR) 8.18), a the in pair receptor assembly allows analogous pTα function the expressed receptor. chains receptor complete surrogate with that of and pre-T-cell structure α which pre-B-cell is to β the with components complex T-cell CD3 a the (see cell signaling molecules expressed pre-TCR that is surface provide in of Section The 7-7). receptors the on not interaction the that constitutive with complex As receptor, signaling does a CD3:pre-T-cell ligand. of the the with assembly preB-cell receptor causes require dimerization. a to similar evidence shows manner that forms the structural in dimers pre-TCR Recent pre-BCR The pTα domain makes important two contacts. Ig pre-TCR Vβsubunit of to constant-region associates with domain itself. the It form the the Ig bridge surface A two pre-Tα Vβ the from another of to a different distinct between pre-TCRs. molecule, binds a pre-TCR then forming domain the highly The across region Vβ with families. involves many that contact of residues are conserved Vβ β-chain leads cell arrest way, this and which expression and both dimerization, the of CD8 of rearrangement, further In induces pre-TCR ligand-independent expression to gene the the of CD4. proliferation, vast thymocytes. These up of make majority the double-positive thymocytes begins become locus double-positive to the large and Once α-chain to have thymocytes rearrange. small the cells, ceased have proliferate double-positive

cortical positive crucial will a as the in epithelial we role selection, receptors later T cells has in see thymic of chapter. and cells developing this

the medulla. migrate T the cortex from developing selection, positive to After cells matured fewer cells the newly leave single-positive those and that predominantly thymus. the contains present The will are lymphocytes, T medulla eventually in a plays The role medulla selection. negative the generally in absent that The cells dendritic express from environment include this antigen-presenting co-stimulatory cells which are cortex. molecules, In cells reactive specialized peripheral cells antigens. present medullary the self addition, for of T epithelial selection for these negative antigens

progenitor. cells a arise T γ:δ receptors with 8-15 common α:βor from

primarily comparison the little differ receptors, T cells, expression receptors CD4 they of recognized about epithelial the and relatively co-receptors; 4-20). T-cell that sites not be MHC Section CD8 in restricted mucosal bearing thought (see and which with γ:δ from found lack to T in α:β ligands the T by known in cells γ:δ cells are α:β is are and make used are different loci from Recall receptors. T-cell these genetic that to types 5-11 of Section two the are loci rearrangement, the γ followed β shortly locus. thereafter δ by first and to undergo The so within locus, eliminate α the rearrangements addition, the the sequences locus δ coding the α In chromosome. contained on is locus at the δ versus While lineage is α:β the there process. precursor the is cells to γ:δ individual mechanism understood, commitment the not in regulating of this plasticity some still cells. and α:β pattern of can T mature and γ:δ from in thymocytes found in rearrangements deduced This be gene the although cells genes. nonproductive, are mostly these β-chain often contain out-of-frame, of 80% rearranged T γ:δ α:β rearranged, T mature γ-chain contain Mature genes, and cells can but

receptors expressing distinct γ:δ arise development. T-cell two 8-16 T phases in cells during

the of arise cells are T as adaptive immune cells components T innate than α:β the γ:δ γ:δ Although rather the mature same most cells, progenitors from system. T acquired function the elicited defined can When a in thymus effector have is be complete, their following maturation cells that their rapidly the activation. and in emigration most the After γ:δT take the up mucosal from stable to body, locations. these in sites residence thymus, and home cells epithelial

T period. cells γ:δ the the majority mice, development arise and early the in neonatal embryonic In during of body express to Vδ T-cell 8.22). the cells regions develop the cells receptors (Fig the same that from and first are assembled T thymus, In γ:δ all T fetal Vγ the has epidermal become adopt populate that dendritic-like wedged epidermis; T the among and a keratinocytes cells name dendritic 8.23). T (Fig. the the form cells cells These them given (dETCs) of and to and DETCs and respond chemokines. skin surveillance of cytokines producing infection the injury by provide to and clearance, to enhance promote inflammation repair the pathogen they lesions healing These wound skin. induce in factors epidermal conditions, survival. growth growth that factors also and help dETCs steady-state produce maintain In

a second in γ:δ subset develops Following T dETC the the fetal cells thymus. of cells, of home tissues These such lung, tract as cells also reproductive to the the the skin. of to the dermis mucosal epithelia and and such programmed as when is to subset This play injury. responses to and infection is a and stimulated, in role produce IL-17 to inflammatory thought cytokines are essentially single the T combination. these (Tγ:δ-17) that being dETCs, Vγ–Vδ invariant, Like T-cell IL-17-producing composed γ:δ of cells a receptors express Tγ:δ-17 segments—Vγ5 express cells. subsets, Vγ and gene receptors in and distinct two dETCs Vγ6 the the dETCs However, use the in T-cell fetal cells, that Tγ:δ-17 the receptors in diversity As fetally thymocytes not derived TdT, express two there the enzyme gene V, additional segments the T-cell fetal these do at between J junctions contributing and of no D, N-nucleotides the are

of lymph Weeks reproductive D2 to 2 skin development home home ˜ nodes 2 V˜6 14–18 ° 5 intestinal in and of skin C˜ Starting cytokines Starting ° cells Stem 103 D2 programmed J2 spleen, spleen V6 fetus to 1D become IFN-˜ spleen, tract, cells J1 programmed are IFN-˜ programmed epithelium secrete D2 lung, C˜1 cells day and 1 ° J1 and J2 D2 T 17 fetal programmed C ˜:° C˜1 104 IFN-˜ and C1 liver ° lymph of ° C ° to development J2 15 ° cells and secrete secrete lung 2–7D1 in secrete ˜:° of in ° V1 C° thymocytes of C V˜1 in Days ˜:° in IL-4 and epithelium 18 fetus ° °˜ IL-17 lymph predominant programmed to epidermis and ° V˜4J˜1 ° J2 J2 are ° Numbers ° factor, V and are in 2J skin are to C˜ home 107 liver are programmed ˜:° lung, ° C ˜:° development V 2–7D1 of and age growth ˜:° D2 cells home thymocytes ° chemokines ˜ to ° including dermis lymph adult during V˜5 V˜7 V˜4J˜1 are ° ° established cells C spleen, ° nodes, keratinocyte become epidermis cells Stem fetus ° cells infammatory nodes, V1 cells 2–7D1 19 uterus ˜:° ˜ secrete V˜1,2,4 V˜1J˜ V°6D nodes T skin Days ˜ and ° 16–19 adult skin, Days and to and mucosal in and V and and ˜ 17 ° ° C1 Birth cells and to dermis to development 106 V˜7J˜ V˜4 intestinal dermis, 105 ° secrete newborn, V Stem late Stem lung, established ° IL-17 epithelia, gestation rare to 16

Fig. T-cell genes expressing in segments. rearrangement gene in Vδ different mouse 8.22 of the waves proceeds of The and and cells δ γ Vγ receptor mouse, with its 2 the gene Cγ1 weeks in of At is about (Vγ5). closest locus expressed V gestation the row (first next a expressing in replaced few most the numbers Vγ6. days, decline thymus After are cells and the cells of proximal panels) by in Vγ5-bearing gene, little chains with are rearranged shown expressed the lower and diversity Vγ the same is rearranged Both the junctional Vδ γ or the in gene, these as chain. either in panels, δ-chain there specificity, most same although of case cells these each in consequence, γ:δ T the share produced the recognized early As each not a antigen of is the waves known. in chemokines. growth become programmed factor selectively Vγ5-bearing they epidermis; established are cells in cytokines inflammatory keratinocyte The secrete and to the and epithelium of reproductive are Vγ6-bearing the and the lung, contrast, tract, the programmed established cells of the become IL-17. to dermis and in skin, In secrete the two The wave γδ gestation, day on 17 populations. begins different of development of and produces next pairs which the rearranges Vγ4 expresses chains. heterogeneous delta chain, and population One with are and (IL-17-secreting) dermis and subset home These cells of second cells, Tγ:δ-17 nodes, of the lung, Vγ4-bearing skin. spleen, the lymph the to Vγ1, nodes, to population wave The in second expresses lymph and spleen, this and homes liver. chains are NKT with IL-4 Some these of and γ:δ cells to paired and IFN-γ, and Vγ6 are secrete cells. programmed represent wave the T-cell during development, fetal Finally, development into persists and of adulthood. late begins γ:δ last delta last many cells bearing Vγ2, includes This heterogeneous Vγ4 wave of Vγ1, and chains. population different paired chains with a organs to These are secrete cells lymphoid and IFN-γ. programmed to home chains. bearing chain this population the delta The are Vγ7 wave paired cells in last other heterogeneous with well as epithelium are intestinal to secrete cells programmed home antimicrobial These γ:δ as and to IFN-γ the compounds. thymus. Although continue lineage γ:δ stage in to becomes cells developing T-cell T birth, dominant α:β after the the this produced the be at population

Fig. Langerhans epithelial network cells. 8.23 layer, the an Dendritic with within reside forming T cells epidermal interdigitating cells a layers murine interdigitating network red) (dETCs; T an the of view the shows epidermal sheet epidermal Langerhans dendritic forming of This and epidermis. within (green) face-on cells this are in cells epidermal fluorescence image. visible not epithelial The of cells name. is the T source form their branching γ:δ dendritic-like The these of γ:δ MHC or all damage nonclassical T the Sections receptors can ligands cells which not (see recognize induced pathogens. Although are molecules and epithelia γ:δ 6-16 T-cell UV be stresses 6-17), such by known, in as some for such damage, may innate as serve cytokines the immunity. dETCs producing in turn, Thus, and, response of adaptive immune sentinels activate that Courtesy Adrian Hayday. of

cells. T subsets γ:δ of for remains development embryonic during V, certain Why segments incompletely gene particular J and rearrangement selected times at are understood. D,

dETCs (see the Vγ6-positive Fig. from develop Tγ:δ-17 the exclusively stem cells derived and early liver hematopoietic from cells wave the fetal of 8.22). in brief subsets only never then of a arise period Consequently, fetal the two for these T-cell time thymus, γ:δ and again. is birth. T-cell of second fetal phase thymus before A γ:δ in initiated just the development in distinct and functions each life, level at produces with adult several effector homing tissue cells, a This low properties. the and of subsets throughout thymus phase persists their Like T distinct later-developing in fetal can usage cells and regions of Tγ:δ-17 (see cells, receptors by the their these generally γ:δ Vγ–Vδ classified be Fig. dETCs T-cell presence within diverse to added N-region more TdT. are receptor each sequences nucleotides population by although the 8.22), of the due

region Tγ:δ-17 a is γ:δ these One cells. fetal subset T the different later-developing programmed these when than represent of activated; second Tγ:δ-17 cells secrete a cells of IL-17 to population express Vγ that do using Tγ:δ-17 these the T-cell later-developing cells express Vγ4 region. receptors Specifically, inflammatory infections. parasitic all intestinal as skin where provide rapid the the in is and as cells response signals organs, This the lymphoid to epithelium, in Tγ:δ-17 bacterial dermis subset well and in found addition, using their T In receptors in also develop second this γ:δ region Vγ7 the in T-cell phase. cells the T to Vγ7-positive intestinal cells specifically The epithelium. home γ:δ that In epithelial well to compounds cells the gut as that to microbes barrier, the location, poised as IFN-γ. respond are are antibacterial and producers breach of important

tissues γ:δT-cell In the also and in the as that are reside intestinal T organs. to skin in cells γ:δ subsets such found lymphoid barrier contrast epithelium, during arise more lymphoid-resident region. well Vγ1 majority represent fetal–early neonatal and of a thereafter, γ:δ cells the expressing diverse the as the period T The late population as cells organs. Vγ1-positive subset IFN-γplus all as organs, lymphoid are that that homes IFN-γ-producing two groups—an the composed subset to homes T lymphoid IL-4-producing well to of as an several and major liver population (Vδ6) T-cell TCRδ chain which referred unique subset of to γ:δ are as by cells α:β expression often cells. similar Vγ1, cells, to a is cells, remarkably former NKT paired be identified therefore and that can of is The the of to their the receptor-expressing iNKT infections and functions the the Unlike repair, secondary importance resident populations, of epithelial homeostasis, innate whose cells well established, T mucosal against γ:δ γ:δ well been lymphoid still organs tissue T-cell and not defense within in understood. has is

of that synthesis triggers blocks β-chain production Successful and 8-17 gene proliferation pre-T-cell the a receptor allows a β rearranged further chain rearrangement. cell of

of return the cells. We to now T development α:β The during of Sections 8-2 closely rearrangement light-chain (see βand rearrangement through the the and of parallels development α-chain loci 8-5). loci B-cell immunoglobulin heavy-chain shown in Fig. As and the rearranging followed Jβ DJβ segments by gene rearrangement. the Vβ gene to first, Dβ this rearrange 8.24, β-chain segments is segments, to gene with from pre-T-cell not receptor be chain will this functional synthesized die. rearrangement, the If produce can will and a able cell be no to β Fig. clusters the because β-chain with unlike of nonproductive rearrangements, Jβ with can of cells which nonproductive VDJ upstream (see Cβ thymocytes two segments B of two and gene by heavy-chain rearrangements genes possible is gene rescued Dβ further However, be rearrangement, 5.13).

is locus chance productive VDJ than the 55% arrangement. the β heavy-chain productive a gene at likelihood a for join immunoglobulin therefore of The higher somewhat

pTα productive CD3 β invariant molecules Once Fig. a occurred, the the and β-chain gene with rearrangement (see expressed chain is together the has surface. cell and transported in is this the complex 8.24) to 8-3). The μ:VpreB:λ5 β:pTα development receptor Section pre-T-cell a in (see complex functional analogous the B-cell to receptor complex pre-Bcell is of Expression

Fig. rearrangement α:β The in T 8.24 stages of cells. gene of is with each place which of of indication take cell-surface gene rearrangements an molecules nature sequence the the stage receptor The at events shown, and the expressed together at the stage. β-chain expressing levels thymocytes and first, double-negative of rearranges CD44. CD4–CD8– CD25 The low locus in D V genes, DJ heavy-chain rearrange rearrange segments before panels). third gene J to immunoglobulin segments with and As (second gene to gene locus, to segments four are to make possible to with attempts β-chain at four rearrangement sets productive It up J there is chain of gene two locus the segments a with D because generate shown). each TCRβ (not associated the on levels at expressed rearranged cell low and then productively surface. The the within initially gene is cell a chains (fourth a to heterodimer forms equivalent surrogate pTα:β CD3 with α this that λ5 pTα, development, and with complex It associates B-cell in the panel). chain is 33-kDa receptor rearrangement to the β-chain expression division. the signals pre-T-cell of thymocytes halt gene developing and cycles to of multiple undergo The proliferative the and molecules now CD4 burst, α is expressed, the chain able are cycling, the to end of this CD8 undergo At the ceases rearrangement. cell and (bottom first are D, rearrangement indicating these The cells as circular chromosome, are and α-chain that although deletes δ nondividing panel). C a gene gene J, retained all DNA, the segments on these gene. δ-chain permanently inactivates the This Jα because always segments, several rearrangements the α-chain of at proceed that Rearrangements and can locus of through Vα large almost gene the productive cycles, occur. so number

chain molecules. recognize α CD3lowCD4+CD8+ the peptides selection chain, undergo ability self association with in ready a to produced efficiently When that is functional its the to self-MHC for thymocyte is β pairs with

receptor the thymocyte and exclusion pre-T-cell allelic phosphorylation thus DN3 gene induces the halting and cause stage locus. RAG-2, that of rearrangement development at ensuring degradation signals at β-chain β the of the stage, expressed. cell the also and DN4 the eventually which proliferation signals co-receptor and are occurs, CD8 CD4 proteins in These rapid induce kinase via cytoplasmic tyrosine pre-T-cell protein The Fig. constitutively kinase receptor signals (see an Src-family Lck, the ligand a but seems not require on 7.12), thymic epithelium. the to proteins. the with subsequently Lck associates co-receptor rearrangements CD4+CD8+ before arrested and mice T-cell be double-positive Lck, made. In the α-chain is genetically development stage, can deficient gene no in

of transgene: genes and containing on their expressed express their β rearrangement chain the these The be the further rearrangement rearranged strongly 100% in β-locus demonstrated T a β mice of is virtually role suppressed. chain endogenous suppressing cells, can transgenic in of β-chain TCRβ mice in allelic hundredfold locus. α:β in at which mice The cells the been of a in pTα, is T shown deficient of importance decrease in absence and pTα exclusion there β has an

pre-T-cell the During are RAG-2 the of of expression proliferation and repressed genes RAG-1 receptor, by DN4 the triggered cells (see Fig. 8.18). functional at until RAG-1 no the accumulates. complex proliferative of phase occurs locus transcribed which α-chain and RAG-2 rearrangement again, Hence, are time and the RAG-1:RAG-2 the ends, successfully many that rearranged cell CD4+CD8+ gives which been to β-chain This gene a each in has thymocytes. ensures rise single Once different of α-chain be genes, rearrange functional the independently in the can many so with α cells. a β chains cells can that chain dividing, associated its each stop them progeny thymus gene rearrangement, α:β MHC complexes α-chain on selection cells and begin. self the can by During the T-cell are of peptide:self receptors first expressed period

involved single-positive Fig. is T-cell-specific stage the gene proteins The pattern of accompanied the signaling, finally of expression (see and from to double-negative to distinct double-positive DNA progression and in rearrangement, of the by thymocytes a expression 8.18). of junctions TdT, the for receptor α rearrangement; the rearranged are and at responsible the T-cell expressed genes. N-nucleotides of β is found enzyme throughout N-nucleotides, all gene insertion early an another expressed stage in Lck are and development. from ZAP-70, both kinase, tyrosine thymocyte from important pre-T-cell signaling its as also for is the Lck γ:δ receptor, role As well T-cell key development. in stage ZAP-70, role. double-negative from signaling, related Section this which (see although is Appendix I, fulfilling gene for of the pre-T-cell the that express kinase, also onward, contrast, not In A-35) thymocytes show studies essential Syk knockout capable is receptor double-negative as expressed later, from is development single-positive thymocytes Syk thymocytes; this promote stage, the at to is required of longer expressed. ZAP-70 Instead, double-positive no similar Src-family from Fyn, to at the an Lck, stage kinase levels expressed onward. increasing double-positive is iNKT (see long present, the Lck as development of required as but thymocytes for not is α:β Section development of for is is essential cells 8-26). It the

α-chain 8-18 genes or rearrangements selection until successive undergo positive death T-cell intervenes. cell

genes been α-chain immunoglobulin gene only κ expressed. receptor rearranged that their T-cell after genes D and λ comparable segments partner and has chain they in The to have do are the not are receptor light-chain with α-chain as are at gene rearrangement genes, illustrated As the light-chain in attempts Fig. possible, repeated 8.25. gene Jα to spread and take about gene allows many place Jα Vα α-chain 80 of rearrangements alleles. of successive some The segments kilobases both DNA, over at multiple to 60 segments, Vα presence nonproductive that a much cells than cells to initial likely be nonproductive an with gene rearrangement are rearrangement rearrangement. α-gene rescued subsequent a are by means This more T with B light-chain

T assembly of immunoglobulin the B in segments is peptide:self selects leads the rearrangement and of that One the the B positively receptor Vα key the to whereas MHC gene complex a initiates below). that an gene Section cells self rearrangement difference final cell, signaling of 8-19 the of unless cells by T differentiation is further (see and cessation continues there between This two on α chains. in-frame can both and means types cells that T rearrangements have of many chromosomes so produce receptor to gene This rearrangement. T-cell in off is is shut sufficient itself of not because expression possible the to T on as different successively produced for α self as several partnership to tested MHC peptide:self the allow in developing chains recognition well rearrangements be both simultaneously same with chromosomes cell each be Continued in can and β chain. mouse gene days for dies. selection as of only positive consequence rearrangement lasts or in of 4 the when cell or This engagement, occurs the ceases a receptor when phase 3 and of predict that if the cells selection One cell is at express productively positive one low, roughly T mature in three frequency surface. will chains two sufficiently can rearranged α the T both been human confirmed for has and mouse cells. This exclusion. to subject are the allelic strict Thus, not sense, genes in α-chain receptor T-cell

cells be by with give cells receptor. the expected second to might yet the dual specificity inappropriate upon to can through cell rise act T recognized one is responses target immune activated if receptor presented MHC be likely is only However, cell only two of so a functional recognize to the molecule, by have peptide self specificity. single able will one to the receptors and T a selected has recognition, This MHC rearrangement by self peptide:self because positively ceases. is a once been thymocyte gene α-chain expressed two genes functional does specificity the a two with Thus, rearranged expressed at single challenge the existence productively cell and each the surface of cell. chains truly α-chain cells by not idea α that is

Fig. rearrangement rescue Multiple nonproductive gene events receptor T-cell 8.25 can successive α-chain rearrangements. gene previously deleting The and ‘leapfrog’ intervening the VJ segments. gene successive allows events to segments, α-chain J any rearranged over of rearrangement multiplicity locus segments V at resembles that number pathway successive Section (see The 8-5), rescue greater. is possible the the light-chain immunoglobulin rearrangements but κ genes of of α-chain cell positive selection until or gene to either productive a rearrangement α-chain dies. rearrangement the leads continues

Summary.

for microenvironment thymus the T cells. and a of development specialized architecturally The mature organized provides to the T where that Notch marrow commitment of environmental they bone from T migrate drive to cues, Precursors as the interact lineage. the ligands the for cells with thymus, such receptor, develop most cells, T very thymocytes lineages: with subsets of cells. are the α:β T-cell several diversity, of as the such T in γ:δ iNKT cells, receptors α:β conventional Developing thymus along and prominent limited T one cells

develop progenitors or along T-cell lineages. T-cell the the α:β γ:δ the peripheral several and α:β other over and of intestine, T and these cells, skin, mucosal populate T predominates production the in Early cells epithelial surfaces. γ:δ ontogeny, including cells the tissues, than cells. from subsets fetal liver, These bone stem predominantly rather marrow, develop 90% express receptors. T-cell of than α:β Later, more thymocytes γ, the are thymocytes, the and genes first β δ, developing to rearrange. In pre-T-cell a that receptor lineage and functional CD8 gene thymocyte expression. and Cells a beta of signals rearrangement, the rearrange chain α-chain form that proliferation, α:β CD4 cells. the thymic development medulla mainly steps in mature whereas take contains in place T-cell T Most the cortex,

selection and cells. Positive T negative of

receptor α:β at of is stage development to Up proteins is produced, or an MHC which antigen. T-cell the independent it α:β lineage T-cell now onward, From developmental of we the of in this and interaction receptor thymus, encounters depend in with the peptide:MHC the phase T-cell point ligands this on the consider development. decisions

the undergo proliferation stage. α:β the and precursors subcapsular committed the stage DN4 DN3 lineage T-cell the in at progress to region vigorous to they immature as These receptor CD4 and the co-receptors then through the stage double-positive of cells and cells that rapidly levels deeper become thymic into both low express T-cell an move cortex. the CD8 single-positive CD8 and transit of 3–4 by T-cell they have These cells receptor. unless rescued double-positive about a their are engagement of days life-span only from of and positive process single-positive as CD4 is programmed The their cells known double-positive CD8 into rescue cell the maturation cells selection. or death peptide:self be for survival of responses the in selected capability thus by MHC-restricted will the have 4); Chapter foreign complexes generated recognize about to and rearrangement this thymus. (see those 10–30% Only in antigens able function self that T-cell to gene MHC self are receptors undergo receptors apoptosis, eliminating cells. recognize potentially T whose peptide:self negative cells also cells self Double-positive too thus selection: complexes undergo strongly self-reactive MHC which components In section, this mechanisms interactions between these by thymic and and discuss different T-cell the thymocytes examine double-positive repertoire. we the the interactions shape developing mature

interact receptors whose can survive complexes MHC thymocytes mature. with and 8-19 peptide:self Only self

Appendix evidence the in chimeras influence Early I, MHC-restricted the A-32) and grafting repertoire. marrow provided T-cell bone Section molecules using MHC experiments (see that thymus thymic that or with CD8 peptide:self is immature the T provided T-cell naive their cell cells. complexes the for interaction rearranged and mice for first receptor MHC CD4 T the self of However, T conclusive maturation evidence survival the necessary genes of transgenic cells into A-20) a clone rearranged restriction Appendix from genes αand were cloned experiments, and these the For β-chain antigen known. MHC Section were whose T-cell specificity, (see I, origin, early they such genes are genome, development. during thymocyte introduced into expressed mouse the are When endogenous cells, to expressing of rearrangement As degrees. a transgene-encoded T of is inhibited, consequence TCRα-and in receptor the T-cell β-chain developing different functional albeit genes proteins rearrangement endogenous that incompletely. inhibited In general, only β-chain of is genes is inhibited α-chain completely but gene developing TCR transgenic of most by encoded the receptor T-cell is mouse result express that transgenes. the The lines in the thymocytes

without peptide:MHC receptor thymocytes the the specific specificity analysis directly, known immunization on with allelic variations of the introducing By MHC effect function. complex, need receptors can for known T-cell effector for in of a and of maturation studied be transgenes molecules of from clone bearing original Such from stage the MHC expressed studies T-cell to molecules which could those thymuses the in the double-positive thymocytes showed isolated. particular a was that present that receptor different develop T-cell mouse in transgenic self selected on into these which if T-cell thymocytes MHC expressed CD8 the the same original molecule thymus the only was developed that or mature However, single-positive CD4 thymocytes as clone (Fig. 8.26).

selection. T the that Such also fail fate positive discovered of cells experiments the genes the staining MHC introduced receptor were particular peptide a cell by specific molecule mouse recipient by presented transgenic for with MHC T molecule, mature into specific Rearranged thymocytes lacking for a fate and was a of antibodies from that a investigated receptor. same of CD4 at CD8, mark to Antibodies time other the the were against used molecules, T-cell development. such stages and as never 3 on the their It in MHC stage recognize the that and last or to the of division. further epithelium cells molecules die was days 4 fail within found double-positive the progress present thymic that thymus than

Positive a with inherent MHC receptors specificity T-cell for molecules. of acts selection on 8-20 repertoire

of randomly 5-7). T-cell a generated whose Section (see and acts segments determined Positive J is combinations receptors by specificity gene selection V, of repertoire on D, a before this, Despite positive exhibit receptors T-cell selection. recognition bias molecules even toward of MHC small recognize of the would be to molecule. repertoire any only very a of If completely proportion specificity thymocytes unselected random, the MHC were expected receptors has mature for inherent unselected T-cell However, MHC specificity receptor that been an by molecules represent cells repertoire. of T the detected examining generalized CD4 produced from T cells can thymuses that to antibodies MHC expression triggering of the to Such and I selection’ molecules fetal in bind ‘positive Vβ T-cell vitro receptors class using that class II MHC the by of and chain be lack co-receptor. examined, When such MHC antibody-selected cells class can CD4 are 5% roughly one II genotype. any T respond to inherent without molecules, cells reflect V MHC-specificity by reactivity selection this an must in segments. MHC Because gene germline encoded these the developed of any receptors This molecules. significantly should by specificity individual’s be that proportion MHC the can increase selected positively

acids Vβ in the amino and of regions be The Vα receptor T-cell CDR1 specific and reactivity germline-encoded regions. to due to CDR2 seems and are are highly V germline regions The and CDR2 CDR1 gene encoded the in segments

Fig. the development selection rearranged by transgenes. 8.26 of is Positive demonstrated receptor expressing cells T-cell T T-cell MHC cells depends mice haplotype α:β expressed for receptor on the In thymus. in T the the transgenic rearranged of maturation genes, mature into express the cells TCRα-chain expressing then case in haplotype (both the rearranged mice If panel), TCRβ-chain developed from which double-positive stromal green) develop from originally MHC will thymic receptor the top (pale cells the the T single-positive their the CD8+ genes (dark mature mouse green), transgenic and same transgenic cells T this as T-cell MHCa, the in cells. stage (MHCb, stage receptor genetically fail progress but the transgenic to MHC transgenes mature background cells the yellow, MHCa-restricted panel), to double-positive will developing a expressing TCR are bottom the T crossed different into If will further. then thymic interaction an on This is with absence death the no and thus MHC neglect. receptor by cortex, T-cell leading failure signal transgenic delivered, positive apoptotic of between the selection due molecules to is to the for

Fig. selection 8.27 MHC co-receptor molecules that induce determine positive specificity. The class the T an CD8 have for phenotype. In panel), mice I the MHC develop transgenic cells mature by molecule (top (red) restricted all receptors T-cell that panel), the T In class cells (blue) receptors an have phenotype. (bottom mice CD4 for restricted transgenic all molecule mature by II MHC thymocytes numbers found. blue, half are (half double-positive In of both normal red) immature, cases, the T-cell receptor T-cell only a of to MHC equipped with that determines specificity that able that The the mature pathway, ensuring is cells the as the co-receptor T bind self those of developmental are the molecule same outcome the receptor.

Section 5-8). (see variable common But among this many variability, conserved acids certain segments. V to are and amino revealed a receptor binds of numerous part a MHC has of the the interact amino structures crystal that the with specific particular peptide:MHC Analysis when region protein. complex, Vβ acids of T-cell with the example, interacts of MHC and a the a class For Vβ region at middle α1 position I CDR2 has II proteins. human and class many and of 48, this helix the in in tyrosine regions, mouse Vβ at amino other in of commonly with Two glutamic same found acids 46 the other and regions interact region acid MHC. 54) (tyrosine at MHC of interaction reduced cells positions expressing molecules with of positive Vβ to these with that at mutations the any genes regions contributes selection, development. T such showed demonstrating V T-cell

and T the potential 8-21 the of effector selection specificity functions of receptor Positive coordinates T-cell or cell. of with CD4 the expression the CD8 the

thymocyte CD8 expresses time CD4 the co-receptor both of the positive molecules. and selection, At mature expressing of have stopped T these the periphery ready to α:β export thymic for selection, By the co-receptors. cells one of end CD8 majority T-cell to these belong the cells CD4 conventional lineages. or of The a T as from cells of and cells subset such iNKT expressing thymus develop CD4 in CD4+CD8+ regulatory high CD25, abundant and Less of also the cells. subsets, levels cells that molecules express self T class almost mature recognize cells. peptides have that bound and CD4 helper to become MHC programmed receptors are T to cytokine-secreting Moreover, all II bound cells. are In CD8 become molecules contrast, that express that of programmed recognize I receptors the have cytotoxic peptides to class most and to cells self effector MHC efficient cell-surface eventual functional immune recognition appropriate positive the the determines antigen for also T differentiation mature and phenotype in of selecting for the appropriate cell, potential co-receptor program response. cell’s an selection the and T Thus, the functional

the T-cell T transgenic the which genes specificity self for complexes with receptor rearranged mice that mature of express. co-receptor a peptide:self cell for Experiments determines clearly will MHC T-cell receptor show transgenic the encode MHC If T-cell a specific I presented antigen mature express transgenes receptor molecules, are by T cells the self that CD8 receptor T cells. for class mature CD4 class express mice self with T Similarly, a that T made receptor the receptor (Fig. molecules, MHC recognizes for in that cells antigen transgenic transgenic II are cells 8.27).

thymic that on molecules to absence MHC molecules mutations importance immunodeficiency an lead this caused The is of in MHC cells. the illustrated lymphocytes by and epithelial selection human by of diseases cells in T targeted has who a gene expression disruption obtained class by result abnormal MHC been molecules similar eliminated been only few, cells; II a (see Section I, People MHC have highly T lack in CD8 Appendix has which but II CD4 A-35). class mice I that humans Likewise, molecules and lack class lack MHC mice cells. CD8 T for MHC T-cell are Thus, CD4 for I development. absolutely similarly whereas required are class required T-cell II MHC development, molecules CD8 class molecules

the mature 4-18). invariant CD8 molecules CD4 (see on to II class In cells, MHC MHC abilities Section depend and sites of and on respective bind I T functions class co-receptor their for in molecule as an experiment to the the MHC normal in section. is required binding Co-receptor positive for also discussed shown selection, CD4 next bearing In molecules. CD8 co-receptors, is of in to that associated to ensure the a CD4 receptors is nearly providing initiated thymocytes, that Lck MHC only signaling all and with mechanism T-cell thymocytes bind on appropriate the by an positive both and co-receptor. express molecule, engagement single-positive Thus, signal cells of the survival antigen this only selection and determines that co-receptor receptor of MHC the depends is and lineage Commitment receptor thymocyte it signals or CD4 the the integrates that developing seems with co-receptor. CD8 and to either coordinated the both specificity, antigen the from receptor and the co-receptor, when effectively mature signals part signals are a rather engaged Co-receptor-associated play CD4 than these CD8 Lck cell. most delivered as decision a large in is a to CD4 Lck become

of ThPOK expression CD8 the regulates lineage (see factors, Runx3 versus choice signaling transcription CD4 and of Fig. this receptor T-cell the two controlling by the 8.18). development. a of T-cell naturally in mutation was The that role loss-of-function ThPOK lacked identified mice CD4 through occurring class II-restricted thymocytes the toward lacking In redirected mice are lineage. CD8 ThPOK, MHC its is thymocytes, in stage development receptor T-cell signaling strong but double-positive at of ThPOK this not induces expression. pre-selection expressed absence genes the in CD4 the turn, and expression reinforces expression of Runx3; ThPOK, together, its typical to lead of cells. to own commitment CD4 and ability and Runx3 of of express ThPOK represses expression cytokine not is expressed. however, be strength signaling If allowed duration, and ThPOK to T-cell or is of insufficient induced, is Runx3 This the expression to of CD8 maintenance T proteins silencing target-cell CD8 involved encode cells, killing. typical in of genes of namely, expression, CD4 and genes that of leads expression,

populations discussed these While either less single-positive T of thymocytes other further into the functions; undergo in that majority generates T-cell 8-26. or specialized numerous also CD4 positive develop the thymus of double-positive selection CD8 with Section subsets be cells, will

thymocytes. of mediate cortical 8-22 epithelial selection Thymic developing cells positive

stromal cells important positive for that are selection. indicate Thymus transplantation studies positive processes undergoing web T double-positive (see contacts cells Fig. make selection with cells that These of close a cell form the be sites seen at of and clustering T-cell contact. the 8.17), MHC receptors with molecules can by mice of that an manipulation eliminated thymic evidence class (Fig. from epithelial II disruption targeted positive MHC mediate genes cells gene selection whose cortical have Direct comes ingenious been 8.28).

Fig. positive Thymic selection. cells mediate 8.28 cortical epithelial CD8 CD4 as T marrow-derived both and cells on molecules well on bone cells the cells (orange) (first (blue) epithelial express mature. MHC cells cortex the and which class (yellow), in thymus (blue) normal as thymic (red) II of medullary epithelial In panels), mice half as shown thymocytes red half blue. and Double-positive are in II mice, CD8 The T targeted cells been develop, CD4 MHC eliminated which disruption; although develop has mice expression in second few mutant normally. by class cells T panels these represent gene class on epithelial that mature. containing In cells the T of the II mice it is cells engineered MHC of expressed class MHC II-negative panels), so cortex normal CD4 (third thymic transgene only numbers an positive expressed T a II CD4binding contrast, selection if mutant defective with not is class of take a does place. (fourth site molecule In CD4 panel), MHC cells selection MHC positive with epithelial be This the that the cells cell CD4 to interact type the indicates protein. critical to able needs mediating II and that class the cortical molecule are

produce Mutant class II MHC T do molecules cells. normally lack mice CD4 not that role class the to test the of control epithelium thymic in cortical expression selection, thymic cells. II that the promoter an a gene gene’s placed positive under To was restricted of the epithelial MHC CD4 II-mutant T-cell mice, into This development and was a as was class then transgene introduced the restored. MHC the to of A effectively must the variant cells, interact CD4. this molecule epithelium T to able showed with development cortical CD4 thymic class of II MHC be the that, promote on experiment the thymus CD4 the the of to very class mutation develop. prevents when CD4, Thus, II MHC cells few T a in expressed that MHC contains transgene binding co-receptor showed binding MHC studies CD8 that the cells. necessary selection class molecules of for is Equivalent also I with CD8 interaction of positive

whether epithelium antigen-presenting selection cells. distinctive the of is question in positive of thymic the cortical the anything role The about there raises properties these critical cortex developing cells antigen dendritic to the cells closest the perform are the there macrophages and as to thymic proximity may in stromal in presentation. The be very few simply thymocytes, (see are expression in antigen 6-8). addition, Section key other II differs In of class proteases processing from the involved epithelium however, I MHC thymic and in tissues that expressed CD4 impaired L as epithelial severely L cathepsin the cells have more in mice cathepsin deficient T-cell development. cathepsin to opposed widely S, Cortical express and cells surface that mice chain-associated of on epithelial (CLIP) (see cathepsin exhibit their II Thymic high relatively lacking molecules class invariant Fig. from proportion class a retain L MHC peptide the II 6.11). also subunit, Cortical whereas express epithelial β5i. cells β5T, other a β5 proteasome cells or express unique severely β5T impaired Mice T-cell have in CD8 development. deficient mice normal development, either L repertoire Because MHC it thymic cells, that β5T peptide the is surface for the unclear. CD8 responsible molecules on is their MHC of lack mechanism altering by seem or have that still although on displayed T-cell the it cortical epithelial cathepsin is would the cells still cortical that of levels

with 8-23 self that T ubiquitous in strongly are antigens the cells react thymus. deleted

strongly of peptide:MHC produce activated the the ligated antigen-presenting T cells. is effector proliferate specialized lymphoid mature When to naive receptor T and a complex peripheral T a cell on cell by is organ, T-cell in a displayed cell a when (Fig. contrast, is ligated similarly receptor of the it apoptosis thymus, developing a thymocyte T-cell complex by in the a peptide:self by In MHC dies self 8.29). cells to by T The of negative the basis immature selection. is stimulation response antigen of they self cells. mature when Elimination thymus harmful T cells encounter peptides activation should they are the later, the prevents same T of in potentially immature their

peptides from Y the mice. and in proteins on using chromosome, TCR-transgenic Negative receptors derived male specific expressed has been only encoded thus selection demonstrated for mice T-cell self expressing mature. no developing development, population T-cell transgenic stage male mice of receptors cells double-positive and the bearing bearing in at receptors the Thymocytes disappear these the from single-positive which receptors male-specific normally. transgenic bearing By mature the lack mice, the female in T cells peptide, contrast, selection Negative of by cells. peptides has deletion also T been to mice demonstrated in occurs and nontransgenic male-specific also

for cells very frequency development but mice any have above, classic very the of mice high were earlier experiments TCR T-cell reactive than to functional and express they during normal a particular a useful transgenic receptor peptide. of negative evaluating transgenic A a only system realistic the a selection antigen. given to of β chain receptor peptide reactive involves T-cell the more expression for the In A-24). using sufficient Section Appendix (see peptide-reactive cells T endogenous α chains, chain yet with frequency pairs is mice, β such of I, detection for the tetramers peptide:MHC and or that T clonal deletion. the can encounters single-positive approaches more where stage, cell either other on showed at physiologic depending antigen the presumably These the occur causes that double-positive deletion the

that the mature thymus the repertoire bearing of complexes illustrate MHC receptors. These principle self the experiments peptide:self T-cell encountered in cells purge self-reactive that insulin, One the in tissue-specific this would pancreatic scheme obvious as to is such not expressed be many problem be proteins, with expected thymus. could intrathymic thus, it is restricted to cells stromal outside clear thymic that the the negative thymus. ‘tissue-specific’ are to expressed medulla; in proteins proteins apply that even tissues certain are selection otherwise now by However, such many is regulator). (autoimmune controlled in a all, called AIRE The but of gene thymic some, the not medulla expression tissue-specific by proteins stromal (Fig. is cells in medullary AIRE expressed proteins lengthen earlier. with that many involved transcripts and 8.30), interacts in terminate would seems to otherwise transcription, to or proteins as known dystrophy autoimmune of give I, intrathymic polyglandular role in tolerance (APECED) rise autoimmune self. type in Mutations autoimmune syndrome of the to maintaining polyendocrinopathy–candidiasis–ectodermal highlighting human important disease the AIRE tissue-specific expression and thymic take medulla cortex thymic can both cells selection developing involves and and ubiquitous in Fig. T the the tissue-restricted antigens, Negative self with of interactions (see place 8.29).

possible expressed all thymus. self in proteins that It the unlikely are is at Thus, antigens in exclusively not all other reactive appear cells self may remove are tissues thymus stages selection or to negative that the expressed in T different

Fig. the or of medulla. 8.29 occur cortex in the selection can Negative thymocytes recognition of the cell), self T-cell as selection. MHC developing (red induced by is receptor stimulated complexes thymocyte a strongly die, thymocyte process When negative on the (TCR) is to a peptide:self known cortex panel). reactivity occur when in strong on cells thymocyte to epithelial the CD4+CD8+ peptide:MHC double-positive can (left complexes selection Negative cortical has found a or also when of selection or complexes panel). receptor on recognition immature bone (right an cells cells medulla panel) or CD4 peptide:MHC on CD8 strong can epithelial occur the receives dendritic macrophages signaling T-cell marrow-derived (middle in medullary following thymocyte single-positive Negative

thymus expression in the AIRE

Fig. the the 8.30 AIRE of is promotes medulla thymus and normally of tissues. the expression proteins expressed in expressed peripheral in

medullary Expression limited where medullary thymus, a cells expressed of region the AIRE subset the epithelial-like of of by cells. it to is in is thymic epithelial MTS10 The marker is thymic of shown red. expression in the medullary a shown of is immunofluorescence, in green fraction is in expression only the AIRE and medullary present epithelial by cells. of Y.-X. courtesy Chin Photograph and R.K. Fu.

development. in can the problem in prevent operating There however, the discussed avoidance. are that are, their responses mechanisms several and in from to we consider Chapter tissue-specific when autoimmune 15, cells periphery antigens; these T of responding mature

8-24 cells. bone selection antigen-presenting driven by Negative efficiently most marrow-derived is

medulla, different throughout both and selection in several As occurs above, by likely be Fig. is discussed types cortex to the the mediated cell negative thymic antigen and so presentation development, in by (see thymocyte 8.29). There the in in a seem selection. of effectiveness does cells negative to mediating be hierarchy At and marrow-derived macrophages. are top cells bone dendritic the 9. also antigen-presenting are in tissues, peripheral Chapter as cells These activate that see mature lymphoid cells shall we in T therefore eliminated and cells to presented important be responses, the source these must self of are such most peptides the potential The autoimmune self antigens by cells in responding T thymus.

cause thymocytes thymic epithelial and of themselves deletion the addition, the cells can self-reactive cells. In the both expressing population been of shown self-antigens, epithelial one medullary selection. negative has induce a cells thus wide presenting AIRE, range that The and to are thymocyte directly of all undergoing in are mediated thymic donor patients type, where own and selection is donor, negative unrelated from antigens. in cells the recipient’s tolerance generally, critical transplantation dendritic macrophages bone cells More to epithelial by an of maintaining the thymic importance marrow

and positive must differ. specificity and/or 8-25 strength selection negative The for of the signals

cells peptide:self complexes negative interacting stromal expressed self on self-tolerance with MHC selection in the cells MHC for for undergo selection positive self restriction both T thymus. by and An peptide:self opposite interaction how these self the is complexes T-cell outcomes. of receptor distinguishes with MHC between the issue unresolved First, negatively more must specificities receptor selected. selected than be are positively no eliminated selection, the that would T negative by the Otherwise, thymic produced. selected be cells all were ever in positively cells and cortex would be complexes to differ: to lead to self cortical consequences autoreactivity induced might negative on of are recognize positive that selection confer mature, Second, receptors and those cells are induced and interactions potentially whose MHC the strong cells peptide:self whereas epithelial the must die. damaging that

positive thought strength the to negative Currently, the as binding and hinge an (Fig. the known selection of affinity self hypothesis peptide:self by between on T-cell receptor, choice idea MHC the is 8.31). Low-affinity cell from positive interactions interactions negative and selection. induce the apoptosis death to selection; neglect, high-affinity rescue thus leading by positive selection larger than complexes weakly repertoire this a negatively of more selected. cells model are explains likely than are the of Because to strongly, bind receptor positive vivo. cultures antigenic variants peptide the shown induce could thymocytes, thymic transgenic in organ in selection was of or T-cell Using that it selection induced T-cell receptor antigenic did affinity that a had lower than for variants positive the peptide. Peptide translates receptor investigation. this distinct active of qualitatively into area a How cell in difference fate quantitative still an is affinity those interactions are from by weaker biochemical induced Many signals than or of low-affinity high-affinity shorter duration the of interactions. interactions lead low-affinity However, to sustained

Fig. positive model of affinity The 8.31 and T-cell negative selection. and of expressing gene of a a chain TCRα thymocytes varied β immature Random pool generate rearrangements repertoire large specificities. and these binding receptors on to no many The MHC have peptide:self strength so sufficient to self fail of cells signals. complexes epithelium on T-cell the thymic receive die neglect. by cells These are sufficient complexes the thymocytes because positively bind immature their epithelium T-cell generate Another fraction self MHC of signals. receptor-dependent on thymic strength selected to survival with receptors peptide:self to T-cell T-cell whose From of positively to molecules with selection removes the self-tolerance mature reactivity of this excessively complexed self population. MHC peptides thereby clonal have strong thymocytes deletion), in establishing thymocytes, those self selected cohort negative (resulting receptors referred inducing cells of A agonist to than slightly small into process T signals differentiate selection. those receiving regulatory subset a cells selection negative weaker selected as positively (Tregs),

activation only interactions activation might protein activation whereas determine high-affinity differential this of MAPKs kinase the Erk, of or that to the outcome of lead of suggesting Erk, thymic transient selection. other experiments cells low-affinity ligands positive to engage showed hours to T need selection than occur. for more that for developing 24 Indeed,

cells T T regulatory thymus. in cells innate the 8-26 Self-recognizing and develop

besides they above CD4+ minor are numerically Additional discussed but populations and the from conventional cells α:β thymus; emerge CD8+ functionally important. the T unique cells have and well developmental and each the these found have the 6.18), (see Section 9-23) been subsets, Two cells requirements. (see reg iNKT T of studied, to Section

function tain to of main- T self-tolerance. a cells reg subset derived cells are T that CD4+ Thymically as from do cells. These T CD4+CD8+ conventional thymocytes, cells arise maturation, During transcription their factor the upregulate they FoxP3. signaling, IL-2 cells. a T conventional development not cytokine depends cell also on development for is that of T required signal the receptor complexes. for receptors thought affinity of self on expressed receptors to cells with high composed is of MHC:self peptide repertoire be T T-cell The mice antigen some this mice T that for when Evidence the this also transgenic large comes of T-cell generate TCR cells express receptor. studies conclusion from lines of the showing numbers supporting reporter mice they addition, likely cells and fluorescent that after express their T-cell their studies T-cell that indicating a affinity high using that receptors expressing receptor thymus, from fluorescent signal monitors during levels for strength development have shown express T the export of high the both with In reporter, self. agonist selection other selection—in termed T positive peptide:self interactions T-cell following MHC a that a to MHC has T-cell This self agonist with cell interactions a high-affinity been would mature complexes process T-cell self of normally with selection receptor. of expressing that receptor activate refers peptide:self receptor words,

commonly of subset precursors as cells on second cells. cells), NK1.1 NKT (iNKT receptor their A of found T cells that expression from lineage specialized NK on known is based a the thymocyte invariant develops CD4+CD8+ lineage are Section as from class part early cells class recognizing MHC of of many the I 6-18). CD1 II to cells than rather infections; T molecules response in molecules (see α:β or major MHC iNKT the they differ activated a receptor require cells, Unlike development other T protein with CD1 their on signal molecules the cells expressed adaptor and thymocytes a T-cell iNKT for SAP. interaction through development γ:δ cells, like in their acquire cells, T program iNKT the during a defined effector thymus. these thymus when and cells leave the exhibit Therefore, phenotype a they memory-cell

the not thymus SIP1 vessel T upregulate CD8 mature T cells the days and cells CD8 are medulla into and fully medulla, entering SIPSIPR1 CD4 CD4 blood 3–4 and After the exit the in blood

Fig. 1-phosphate by Thymocyte induced the receptor, S1PR1. emigration is signaling 8.32 through sphingosine and yet but are selection that are and positive CD8 single-positive not have the fully survived thymocytes CD4 successfully in found medulla negative mature. receptor, days, known sphingosine thymocytes which (S1P) process, the the upregulate and as CD8 of the the At takes S1PR1. maturation 1-phosphate single-positive termination CD4 3–4 the S1P. that G-proteincoupled toward the a receptor of chemotaxis promotes is S1PR1 ligand cells to T-cell in entering leave S1P to thymocytes naive levels the by high the of Due are blood, single-positive the recirculating induced they where part thymus become the the of population. blood,

and MOVIE migrate surfaces. mucosal lymphoid tissues to peripheral 8.1 to ‘agonist’ iNKT develop cells been signaling. have response to in suggested the lipid composition regulates commensal the development these microbes the revealed studies are Recent gut an life. that of the by gut early of have that antigens of CD1-binding produced the important source microbiome iNKT agonist and ligands, in in cells which of or cells the thymus to it cause clonal agonist selection interactions known lead in deletion, is not Since clonal deletion also clear yet is activating Treg to the nonconventional cells T which lead cells. immature of to stimulation and iNKT

final 8-27 occurs in The T-cell maturation thymic the medulla. stage of

complete medulla thymic in negative the emigrate lymphoid thymocytes After peripheral and then and maturation selection, to positive organs. surviving their the Their final machinery. to results maturation in changes signaling T-cell receptor stimulated by responds an T-cell or single-positive single-positive through thymocyte receptor double-positive will a undergo the mature immature proliferating. apoptosis, Whereas thymocyte thymus The days, then bloodstream competent stage and less than cells maturation into functionally takes (Fig. the the emigrate 4 from T final 8.32). lipid sphingosine molecule expressed recognition 1-phosphate their requires Emigration which receptor S1PR1, of thymocytes the the is by during maturation. (S1P) final G-proteincoupled by it. present be and to in concentration in and S1P drawn seem thymocytes blood high mature toward is lymph, T organs (L-selectin), mature also emigration thymocytes from localization lymph-node a the after peripheral homing thymus. that Mature receptor naive of lymphoid facilitates CD62L express to the cells their

or 8-28 antigens sufficient that first T for are eliminated inactivated. self of the the periphery in cells quantities time encounter

are thymus. during cells T purged the Many their development in autoreactive epithelial cells. promotes discussed antigens in of by protein, medullary process As many in the negative 8-23, selection thymic AIRE tissue-specific Section is facilitated expression the this which T self and are all to their maturation not expressed Nonetheless, periphery. cells in some migrate thymus, complete autoreactive the antigens the and understanding periphery the self-reactive the T mice of autoreactive from of transgenic for T-cell cells Our in comes of the fates receptors. mainly study In antigens reacting the eliminated. periphery self cases, are in some cells to T follows division, activation brief and so is usually cell death. activation-induced cell and of period a This as known rendered self-reactive the other may In be anergic. cases, cells vitro, studied delivered these T through prove signals receptor. cells the in to T-cell When anergic refractory

leads to naive arises: mature a antigen? to immediately self why of question this that lymphocyte the happen mature does The a antigen not a anergy, pathogen-derived encounter cell a with if or recognizes lymphocyte also death answer and of the antigen-presenting of infection up lymphocyte which dendritic that is cytokines induces expression the activation. inflammation, the co-stimulatory cells promoting on production molecules The sets conditions outcome encounter The and these to status. differentiation activation, in the the an is of antigen lymphocyte with proliferation, of effector-cell of self inflammation, any In a (tolerogenic) specific mature present absence signal receptor. co-stimulatory antigen its the and absence antigen of process the a in the and dendritic still in other from result antigens, of interaction to with cells tolerance-inducing or seems but signals, lymphocyte infection

Summary.

the of independent decision either the α:β with all development lineage—are The of to the of commitment interactions thymocyte stages γ:δ antigens. peptide:MHC pre-T-cell the up expression to the between receptor—including or interactions genes the by successful thymic the expression molecules that with of determined of With development T-cell by peptides undergo α-chain is of thymocytes the the and further MHC on the their receptors T-cell stroma. presented self α:β rearrangement receptor, cells. CD4+CD8+ or cells with whose thymic double-positive CD8 into epithelial single-positive and interact complexes eventually selected, mature are positively cortical thymocytes CD4 peptide:self receptors on will self MHC in a antigens AIRE-expressing with are marrow-derived in deleted process region strongly too cells by react that epithelial cells the of cells antigen-presenting T the the self thymus. driven medullary bone and thymus, the selection and is negative generation self-tolerant. of and is a The MHC-restricted that T-cell repertoire conventional positive outcome both of mature T-cell signaling. T-cell receptor following undergo non-conventional selection Some lineages ‘agonist’ strong selection T-cell remains problem. negative the an leads how recognition self unsolved MHC receptor Precisely of to peptide:self by positive or ligands either the

to Chapter 8. Summary

lineages the chapter stem T-cell hematopoietic an In uncommitted have from we cell. B-cell this about formation the of learned and generate the of cells early of antigen highly and marrow-derived that stages cells, B and cells— the occur T receptors—immunoglobulin repertoire gene for T-cell rearrangements the T the common of in lymphoid B somatic bone cells from development for diverse progenitor. a receptor The most in thymus. their bone fetal birth, Mammalian but T takes in in after the and, the the of undergo bone originate B-cell fetal in cells marrow; also or stem the marrow, cells from development development liver place liver of part that recombinase, somatic of are B is proteins T Much recombination the machinery, an the the common cells. V(D)J and RAG essential both to including contain at that with gene and rearrangements both loci begin segments, each D gene cells, B locus. T In and the successively proceed heavy β is step the The the chain, B-cell T for first of development rearrangement for the cells locus in the immunoglobulin chain. and cell stage translated produced the sequence either rearrangement proceed pre-B-cell pre-T-cell receptor. if development receptor the of has developing that an cell allowed to in-frame the into case, the or protein to be on a each next the expressed only can surface: is the In do chains rearrangements both successful by that die apoptosis. receptor generate not for Cells The development Fig. is course summarized B-cell in conventional of of cells Fig. α:βT in 8.14, that and 8.33.

functional lymphocyte Once cell ways. surface, has the is two appeared antigen on a tested in the receptor potential antigens whereas receptor, rendering of lymphocyte antigen tolerant cells the selection for the from the Positive selection removes self-reactive negative usefulness to body. tests it of the the repertoire, will particularly because only T cells receptors for combination antigen can it molecules with cells, MHC that important self mature. in that T-cell selection continue to recognize ensures is Positive bearing co-receptor also coordinates choice selection expression. the Positive of receptors, CD8 class harboring I-restricted receptors. and MHC CD4 II-restricted cells cells T by becomes class MHC by harboring expressed ensures receptors of to these optimal in responses use the pathogens. This selection B cells, transition For to lymphoid in the mature positive at seems occurs peripheral cells, B which final to from occur immature tissues. at continuous represent different of antigens B and by cells, Tolerance development and seems T is process. both self positive throughout negative to selection likewise the selection a enforced to stages

Fig. summary A the cells. 8.33 of human T of development α:β

receptor of expression the T-cell and cell-surface shown the development. of stages for of molecules the proteins, genes, expression some intracellular essential of are state The T-cell α:β successive some phases indicated. which antigen-driven Note only because that T-cell thymus receptor genes they further undergoing are development, actively do the during undergo not the during the are in rearrangement changes 9. of in cells and separately, CD8 detailed CD4 antigen-dependent The are phases Chapter are and depicted

cell cell T Naive V–J CD4 T Effector TERMINALDIFFERENTIATIONTERMINALANTIGENDEPENDENTDIFFERENTIATIONANTIGENDEPENDENTStem T thymocyte marker cells cell thymocyte rearrangements CD8 Memory Late gene proteinsANTIGENINDEPENDENTpre-T CD4 rearranged rearranged cell double-positive rearranged receptor Effector V–DJ rearrangements cell CD4 CD8 double-negative thymocyte T Naive T Early Germline CD8 ˜-chain Late cell T D–J °-chain cell Memory CD34? Germline T proteins thymocyte double-negative double-positive Surface Intra-cellular Early gene HSA CD2 CD8 CD8 FasL Germline CD44 ZAP-70 Lck TH1: IFN-°granzyme T-cell Lck Lck PT˜CD4 perforin RAG-1 RAG-2 CD44lo CD44 CD5 HSA Lck HSA CD8 ZAP-70 RAG-2 TH17: ZAP-70 CD8 receptor CD45RO CD4 CD4 Fas IL-17 CD44hi CD8 (type CD45RA HSA TdT Fas Lck CD44hi 1) CD45RO IFN-°TH2: CD4 CD45RA ZAP-70 ZAP-70 CD62L IL-4 FasL LKLF CD25 RAG-1 CD44hi RAG-2 CD4 CD69 Germline CD45RO RAG-1 TdT

Questions.

is B-cell γ not or 8.1 chain the True False: (γ-c). in receptor are affected development lacking that cytokine common mice

various 8.2 the successful development by B-cell stage. progression of that enable and transcription expression is new developmental gene factors the Fill-in-the-Blanks: regulated into a rearrangement which V during expression the J permits to by Rag-1 of is the then locus. the rearrangement rearrangement For heavy-chain and and __________, to Rag-2 DJ stage, D _________ successful example, induced progress expressed, __________ and As upon is locus. next to cell and signaling, the is developmental step rearrange the toward functional consequence, the a perform a instructed _________ and light-chain

turn antigen 8.3 recognition and receptor, permit order complex the this from cell. the which False: cell cross-link Self to pre-B is allows in pre-B-cell signal to to or pro-B in needed True transition

Match description: the the Matching: proper with 8.4 B-cell stage

A. chain) rearranging V-DJ i. pro-B (heavy Early cell

B. Small pre-B cell ii. rearranging chain) D-J (heavy

Immature iii. B C. cell receptor pre-B-cell Expressing

pro-B Late iv. D. cell V-J (light chain) rearranging

8.5 of E. heavy-chain prevent the Large the Short does second allelic why How of IgM Answer: locus, and this cell exclusion important? is Surface pre-B rearrangement process v. the

with cell How cells different give Answer: pre-B can to Short antigen rise multiple one B specificities? large 8.6

to Matching: definition: appropriate the terms Match following 8.7 the

editing Receptor A. i. successful after failure persistent receptor of editing of autoreactivity Result

ii. B. Isotypic exclusion either the light or chain the κ λ of Selection

deletion C. Clonal iii. cross-linking peripheral weakly of of Result antigen a a or encounter low-valence

Anergy D. iv. receptor is the rearranged in Process to which by order light-chain a nonautoreactive produce locus

for False: ignorance for and Immunological cells v. affinity have not it respond CD4 do are various E. All T or that 8.8 CD8 True double-negative B immature thymocytes self-antigen but a to cells. reasons

status the the rearrangement with receptor T-cell and the locus and T-cell DN Match stage: CD25 appropriate correct 8.9 of expression CD44 Matching:

TCRβ-chain D to CD44+CD25+, DN1 locus i. A. rearrangement J

ii. DN2 B. germline T-cell locus receptor CD44+CD25–,

C. iii. DN3 β-chain DJ V locus CD44lowCD25+, rearrangement to

DN4 iv. D. rearrangement CD44–CD25–, permits the function the formation in receptor, the DN__ structure and the to Fill-in-the-Blanks: rearrangement β-chain stage which pre-B-cell functional the is of analogous 8.10 ______ during pre-T-cell Successful receptor. of of _______, of TCRβ cross-linking pre-T-cell ligand-independent receptor, of which expression further The the allows arrest the ________ with __________, causing the gene the and rearrangement, chain associates _______. both itself produce the _________ light-chain B-cell functional protein. the As with can multiple a undergo rearrangements locus, to

γ:δ description: cells subsets appropriate following 8.11 murine Matching: with the of the T Match

i. Dendritic A. be T epidermal divided and IFN-γ producing, groups: subsets two IFN-γ IL-4 cells producing Can and in

Vγ4+ ii. B. tract, to and that produce reproductive the home upon lung, dermis; inflammatory can stimulation these cytokines Cells

T Vγ6+ iii. cells C. population programmed secrete organs, well as A be developing to can later as cells in dermis and T IL-17 lymphoid found of the all γ:δ activated, when

iv. cells Vγ1+ D. T as pathogen and promote to a T-cell use that, their a response the factors; Cells can segment growth characterized Vγ5 receptors’ by wound or induce wound, also a inflammation, produce of healing,

intestinal Choice: of between following 8.12 Specifically receptor B-cell to options home describes cells Which Vγ7+ the T-cell v. Multiple the and difference the receptor? E. T a the epithelium correctly

after receptor light-chain rearrangement T-cell VDJ chain T-cell which B-cell the VDJ development, rearrangement first undergoes in VJ β receptor, the A. as of rearrangement. occurs to opposed

require through formation require undergo order to B as T pre-B-cell advance in to receptor do not to development. allelic receptor and of their pre-T-cell the which the continue B. cells in exclusion order a signaling development, cells, opposed

the while alpha does two restrict there B-cell TCRα is of receptor chain C. enforces cells binding, rearrangement light-chain strict of until that Expression in the receptor resulting exclusion, peptide:MHC T-cell rearrangements stops many expression allelic through signaling different T further not express of chains. further the and

undergo which successive through the of receptors, chains receptor editing. process TCRα D. cannot as go rearrangements, to B-cell opposed

cells)? 8.13 regulatory T Multiple of the describes Which correctly cells (Treg Choice: following

pathogens. Treg by express cells intracellular are of CD8+ a cells cytotoxic activity cells that T against subset infected A.

B. MHC self by mediated. self-tolerance for so is its weak T-cell characterized can The Treg receptor that affinity be

cells FoxP3. express C. Treg

the autoimmunity many of product cells. cases, T In D. overactive is

references. General

in and Loffert, by mouse—insights mutations Rajewsky, Muller, R.R., S., targeting. gene Zou, Hardy, introduced Y.R., from B-cell Schaal, W., K.: D., development Ehlich, Early the A., Immunol. Rev. 137:135–153. 1994,

B-cell B-cell Onishi, genetic control Repertoire E., Melchers, cells. T., and by ten T., and development receptors B selection immature J.: of from A.G., and T., mature Boekel, X.C., Rolink, F., Shimizu, Seidl, pre-B-cell to Yamagami, Kong, receptors, Andersson, K., Immunol. Rev. 2000, 175:33–46.

Jameson, K.A. S.C., Hogquist, T.K., Starr, and cells. T negative : of Positive selection and Annu. Rev. Immunol. 21:139–176. 2003,

H.: The T developmental lymphocytes. Boehmer, von of biology Annu. Rev. Immunol. 6:309–326. 1993,

Cancer, ed. 2nd The R.A.: Weinberg, Biology of 2014. York: New Garland Science,

references. Section

Lymphocytes stem derive the in marrow. bone hematopoietic from 8-1 cells

M.: control Busslinger, cell Transcriptional of development. B early Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2004, 22:55–79.

I.L. M.P., J., Chao, Weissman, Seita, and normal hierarchy. leukemia and : a hematopoietic Establishment of cell stem Cold Harb. Spring Symp. Quant. Biol. 73:439–449. 2008,

P.E., Kincade, and Witte, Funk, P.L. P.W., aggregates. in and of : hematopoietic associations early stem-cells cell Native bone-marrow cells isolated stromal Blood 83:361–369. 1994,

P.W., K., and Osmond, J., D.G. Kincade, Kravitz, Jacobsen, stromal vivo : cells and cell on γ-irradiated mice. reticular endothelium receptors adhesion of expression vascular Adhesion molecule-1 normal sinusoidal and bone-marrow cells—in in by 1996, Blood 87:73–82.

in Which Multiple would following 8.14 in CD8+ the Choice: T-cell lead of defect not a thymus? to the development

A. deletion of cathepsin. Genetic

B. the for the in transcription An mutation inactivating Runx3. factor gene

transcription Overexpression ThPOK. the of C. factor

genes. I MHC of D. Genetic class deletion

deletion Genetic subunit proteasomal β5T. of the E.

of MHC mature explains best the of 8.15 cells? Which following T Multiple Choice: restriction

exhibit germline-encoded TCRβ and a A. MHC. TCRα CDR1 bias and regions to recognize CDR2

in is signal. a B. thymocytes receptor receive Apoptosis when T-cell strong induced they

C. Lck. CD8 up intracellular all of and CD4 bind almost all

tissue-specific cells Medullary expression epithelial which of express proteins. promotes D. thymic AIRE, the

effective at cells epithelial much thymic mediating negative of more than macrophages themselves. dendritic marrow-derived selection Bone E. and thymocytes cells are and thymocytes

is for Answer: Short the thymocyte What development? affinity hypothesis 8.16

Morrison, M.J., S.J. and Kiel, haematopoietic maintain the cells. stem in : Uncertainty niches that Nat. Rev. Immunol. 8:290–301. 2008,

rearrangement locus. the by of 8-2 begins B-cell development heavy-chain

R.R. and Hardy, J., Allman, D., Li, B Commitment the before to recombination. lineage lymphoid : occurs DH-JH Exp. J. Med. 189:735–740. 1999,

Hardy, Allman, Shinton, R.R. DeMuth, D., K., S.A., Rudd, W., Lindsley, and R.C., : three points maturation. B of during splenic B immature cell peripheral selection reveals subsets Resolution cell nonproliferative multiple J. Immunol. 2001, 167:6834–6840.

stages pre-pro-B bone of Kemp, Shinton, mouse cell Hayakawa, K.: normal Carmack, pro-B and Resolution R.R., characterization and J.D., Hardy, and marrow. in S.A., C.E., J. Exp. Med. 173:1213–1225. 1991,

D.G., Osmond, unified a Melchers, Rolink, Murine F.: model. and lymphopoiesis: B A., towards Immunol. 19:65–68. 1998, Today

Sigvardsson, J., of point Ahsberg, no and M.: B-lymphocyte the return. Welinder, commitment: E., identifying Semin. Immunol. 2011, 23:335–340.

successful tests the pre-B transition the and of stage. pre-B-cell 8-3 cell a to heavy from pro-B cell The chain production receptor for signals complete the for

Bankovich, S., Juo, and Garcia, T., M.M., Z.S., Davis, Raunser, A.J., K.C. Walz, function. pre-B : into Structural cell insight receptor Science 316:291–294. 2007,

Melchers, Winkler, and Werner, F., Schatz, Rolink, D.G., T.M.J., A.G., T.H. Grawunder, A., Leu, U., expression pre-B gene rearrangement. of immunoglobulin in Down-regulation after Rag1 functional and heavy-chain : Rag2 cells 1995, Immunity 3:601–608.

J.G. Monroe, pre-BCR : signalling ITAM-mediated tonic and complexes. BCR through Nat. Rev. Immunol. 6:283–294. 2006,

8-4 allelic locus signaling heavy-chain inhibits exclusion. enforces receptor further rearrangement and Pre-B-cell

J.K., Geier, and M.S. Schlissel, Ig control of the Pre-BCR gene : rearrangements. signals and Semin. Immunol. 2006, 18:31–39.

expression early D., during Muller, Ehlich, exclusion allelic to development. Rajewsky, and light-chain Surrogate B-cell W., establish A., required is Loffert, K.: heavy-chain immunoglobulin 1996, Immunity 4:133–144.

allelic roles in cell and of preB ten chain receptors T., F., of Melchers, Andersson, Boekel, exclusion the and IgH The B A.: loci. E., L J., and Yamagami, Rolink, stepwise mouse gene Semin. Immunol. 1999, 11:307–317.

locus the rearrange 8-5 and light-chain cell-surface immunoglobulin. Pre-B cells express

S.: productive of probabilities Arakawa, the λ-loci. T., for on rearrangements and Reevaluation the Takeda, H., and κ-loci Shimizu, Int. Immunol. 8:91–99. 1996,

der J.R., Gorman, van Alt, N., M., R., F.W. Cogne, and Monroe, Davidson, Stoep, L., enhancer lymphocytes. Igk of IgλB the The ratio versus Igκ 3’ : influences 1996, 5:241–252. Immunity

D.G. and Hesslein, D.G., Schatz, recombination. and forces controlling Factors V(D)J : Adv. Immunol. 2001, 78:169–232.

Murre, B of and commitment. factor lineage Kee, Transcription B.L., C.: regulation Curr. Opin. Immunol. 2001, 13:180–185.

J.R., B.P., Alt, and Sleckman, F.W. Gorman, of assembly—role elements. : control antigen gene Accessibility variable of receptor region cis-acting Annu. Rev. Immunol. 14:459–481. 1996,

S., of B cells. Arakawa, The κ–λ and H.: E., ratio Sonoda, immature Takeda, Immunol. 17:200–201. Today 1996,

Immature 8-6 marrow. for leave cells bone B tested they autoreactivity before the are

Nemazee, M.C. Rakonjac, J., D., Casellas, Nussenzweig, T.A., K., and Kleinewietfeld, R., Shih, M., Rajewsky, of : Contribution receptor repertoire. the editing antibody to Science 291:1541–1544. 2001,

and site B-cell anti-DNA of deletion. Weigert, M.: Hardy, Camper, R.R., Huszar, C., M.Z., The stage Chen, S.A., Z., and Radic, Nagy, D., 373:252–255. 1995, Nature

Goodnow, C.C., Cornall, J.G. R.J., and Cyster, cells. self-reactive The : of regulation B Curr. Opin. Immunol. 7:804–811. 1995,

and tolerance Developmental Cambier, of receptor selection regulation Melamed, D.: B immune selection. R.J., J.C., compartmentalizes clonal Benschop, from Nemazee, lymphocyte D., 92:173–182. Cell 1998,

Nemazee, and lymphocyte central Receptor tolerance. development editing in D.: Nat. Rev. Immunol. 6:728–740. 2006,

model antibody new replacement—a rearrangement. M.: E.L., gene Light-chain Prak, and for Weigert, Exp. J. Med. 182:541–548. 1995,

in 8-7 self quantities of Lymphocytes sufficient are eliminated inactivated. antigens for first time the the or encounter that periphery

Hartley, Goodnow, C.C. S.B., and J.G., Cyster, B-cell Competition : excludes recirculating for niches the self-reactive from repertoire. cells follicular 1994, 371:389–395. Nature

in H., lymphocytes. of C.C., Goodnow, peripheral A.: Jorgensen, R.A., Basten, B Induction and mature Brink, self-tolerance Crosbie, J., 1989, 342:385–391. Nature

K.: on Kuhn, targeting cell and in vivo by cells rapid immunoglobulin ablation gene death. of results R., mature Rajewsky, B surface K.P., inducible Lam, In 1997, Cell 90:1073–1083.

K., deletion Burki, B Morahan, G., Peripheral and self-reactive Nemazee, cells. D.M., Russell, of J.F.A.P., Z., Dembic, D.: Miller, 354:308–311. Nature 1991,

Steinman, Nussenzweig, M.C. R.M., and the dendritic horror peripheral autotoxicus: : cell cells tolerance. T of Avoiding importance in Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 2002, USA 99:351–358.

the spleen B-cell signals positive B 8-8 for cells in arriving cytokines maturation through rapidly over require turn and the and survival. and receptor Immature

V.M., Allman, M.P. S.E., D.M., and Lentz, Ferguson, Cancro, Peripheral : B maturation. cell II. are B long-lived marrow-derived antigenhi developmental an cells production B splenic in the of intermediate cells. Heat-stable immature Immunol. J. 151:4431–4444. 1993,

B.L., C.E., Lentz, Cancro, and Sah, M.P. Harless, V.M., S.M., D.M., K., Hilbert, Hayes, Clise-Dwyer, Hsu, A.P., numbers. for BLyS-mediated through Competition lymphocyte signaling regulates Bcmd/BR3 : peripheral B Curr. Biol. 11:1986–1989. 2001,

L.G., Cancro, differentiation. M.H., D.B., B-cell cell A.M., B Shlomchik, Sant’Angelo, mature step A receptor-specific to Haberman, M.P., Jr., immature Janeway, C.A., selection and Hannum, governs M.J.: Levine, Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 2000, 97:2743–2748. USA

determined cell spleen Sideras, the R., development Mutschler, signals. P., F., in Lamers, Paige, receptor-derived B C.J., Carsetti, R.J., Torres, B takes M.C., of steps Ray, R.: discrete in and and by place B., Loder, quality cell is the Exp. J. Med. 190:75–89. 1999,

and Schneider, maturation cells. mouse survival BAFF B for J., a and is F.: Rolink, factor Tschopp, P., A.G., Melchers, Eur. Immunol. J. 32:2004–2010. 2002,

B., Cachero, Vora, M., Schiemann, Dobles, M.L. K., Gommerman, E., and Scott, Frew, T.G., Shulga-Morskaya, S., J.L., of essential An pathway. in a through BCMA-independent development the role : for BAFF B cells normal Science 2001, 293:2111–2114.

Stadanlick, M.P. J.E., Cancro, and and tolerance. BAFF B plasticity of : cell peripheral the Curr. Opin. Immunol. 2008, 20:158–161.

Evidence R.R., selection K.: Hayakawa, Brill-Dashoff, and Shinton, cell-positive M., of S.A.,Asano, B Hardy, in L., marginal-zone Wen, spleen. J., 23:297–308. Immunity 2005,

lymphocyte B-1 development early subset B cells are arises 8-9 that in innate an

K.: and the B E., Montecino-Rodriguez, in fetus adult. cell development B-1 Dorshkind, and 36:13–21. Immunity 2012,

bone originate but progenitors the in the T-cell development in important in the marrow, their thymus. 8-10 occur all events

Anderson, and E.J. Moore, G., Jenkinson, Owen, J.J.T., N.C., Cellular in thymocyte interactions : development. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 1996, 14:73–99.

Zúñiga-Pflücker, Carlyle, and lymphocyte in J.C.: for commitment. the thymus Requirement J.R., α:β lineage T Immunity 9:187–197. 1998,

Blair, L., A., Sheridan, Farley, N.R., Gordon, V.A., J., J., Manley, Wilson, C.C. Blackburn, and Wilson, N.F., evidence a for : single for thymic endodermal the origin epithelium. Functional Nat. Immunol. 5:546–553. 2004,

differentiation steps M., Waldschütz, Smith, Messerle, A.J.H., and Nehls, B., M., thymic in of the Boehm, epithelium. Kyewski, Two K., T.: R., separable genetically Schüddekopf, 1996, Science 272:886–889.

Rodewald, H.R. organogenesis. : Thymus Annu. Rev. Immunol. 26:355–388. 2008,

W., thymocyte C., regulated and of subsets. Terhorst, Stepwise in Ewijk, vivo development is by van B.: microenvironments thymic Wang, Hollander, G., 127:1583–1591. 2000, Development

the T-cell signaling. 8-11 to lineage thymus occurs in the Notch following Commitment

Hardy, Karnell, et J.C., J.C., Kadesch, Bakkour, L., S., Aster, S., D., Xu, Pui, R.R., Allman, F.G., al. J.Y., DeRocco, T., Lee, determination. early versus Notch1 lymphopoiesis lineage in influences B : T expression 1999, 11:299–308. Immunity

N., Macdonald, Fasnacht, Radtke, H.R. F., and : signaling the Notch immune in system. 32:14–27. 2010, Immunity

mice an van A., fate J., M.: specification F., Aguet, Notch1. M., Bauer, H.R., in MacDonald, and Meerwijk, of with Radtke, T Stark, G., inactivation Deficient induced Wilson, cell 10:547–558. Immunity 1999,

Rothenberg, E.V. the of T-cell program. Transcriptional : lineage drivers Curr. Opin. Immunol. 2012, 24:132–138.

but the proliferate in T-cell there. extensively precursors 8-12 most thymus, die

G.J., Scollay, and R.: fate Egerton, K., The generation of Spangrude, thymocytes. M., and Shortman, Semin. Immunol. 1990, 2:3–12.

apoptosis negative selection during T-cell and and situ J.: in Sprent, detected Surh, positive the C.D., in thymus. 1994, Nature 372:100–103.

Successive changes thymocytes molecules. cell-surface in 8-13 marked stages of by in the development are

becoming F., brink Boehmer, L., H.: C., cell. Gounari, von Borowski, F., Haughn, Aifantis, and Martin, of T On a I., Grassi, the C., Curr. Opin. Immunol. 14:200–206. 2002,

La S.S., Berry, N.K., Gruta, et M.A., Wang, Kjer-Nielsen, Chen, G.F., al. L., S.H., Chew, Perugini, Pang, R., King, Z., Williams, N.L., C., autonomous antigen structural : of dimerization pre-T-cell receptor. The basis for the 2010, 467:844–848. Nature

Analysis and L., gene. Fehling, Saint-Ruf, and M., a H.J., of von H.: Groettrup, Ungewiss, Boehmer, pre-T-cell receptor C., K., cloned expression Bruno, 266:1208–1212. 1994, Science

L.: K., lymphocyte Wu, Early Shortman, T progenitors. and Annu. Rev. Immunol. 14:29–47. 1996,

Thymocytes the developmental found at are in parts distinct thymus. of stages different 8-14

Heinzel, Benz, and Bleul, K., C., C.C. the immature within the microenvironment cell development. thymocytes subcapsular not : for Homing absolute thymus T is to requirement an of Eur. J. Immunol. 34:3652–3663. 2004,

microenvironments distinct and Bleul, define in thymus. the developing Boehm, C.C., Chemokines T.: Eur. Immunol. J. 2000, 30:3371–3379.

Thymic T., T., Ueno, formation. T-cell S., for K., and Tanaka, Takahama, Y.: Nitta, Murata, microenvironments repertoire Adv. Immunol. 99:59–94. 2008,

K., essential T., Ueno, signals cortex– M., R.L., Lipp, Y.: Boyd, S., CCR7 D.H.D., developing thymocytes. medulla Takahama, and Saito F., T., Kuse, Gray, migration H., are of Kakiuchi, Nakano, Hieshima, for Exp. J. Med. 2004, 200:493–505.

a with or 8-15 cells T common progenitor. γ:δ receptors arise from α:β

thymus and S., genetically normal manipulated lineage Fehling, Gilfillan, H.J., the mice. R.: in αβ/γδ and Ceredig, of commitment Adv. Immunol. 1999, 71:1–76.

N., E.S. Hayday, Barber, Hoffman, A.C., D.F., and Douglas, αβ : lineage T T commitment. cell γδ cell Signals versus in involved Semin. Immunol. 1999, 11:239–249.

Love, S.M., P.E. Hayes, and and potential signaling of the Distinct complex. γδ structure : TCR 16:827–838. 2002, Immunity

that Raulet, of and precursor. Events cells from a differentiation regulate J., Kang, T TCR+ common and αβTCR+ D.H.: γδ Semin. Immunol. 9:171–179. 1997,

and single-cell Boehmer, A.I., analysis. γδ T T., cell by receptor-instructed Krueger, Kreslavsky, lineage αβ versus revealed commitment von Garbe, H.: A., J. Exp. Med. 205:1173–1186. 2008,

Lauritsen, J.M., Lefebvre, and M.C., Haks, Kappes, D.J., J.P., Wiest, D.L. : Recent control that signals αβ/γδ-lineage fate. insights into the Immunol. Rev. 209:176–190. 2006,

Petrie, F., I.N., Schatz, Livak, and Crispe, H.T., D.G. In-frame αβ/γδ a role decision. cell TCRδ play gene critical lineage : T the rearrangements in 1995, Immunity 2:617–627.

and Raulet, cells. selection Xiong, N., and D.H.: of γδT Development Immunol. Rev. 2007, 215:15–31.

arise in T-cell 8-16 γ:δ development. two T cells during receptors phases distinct expressing

P.J. S.R., and Carding, Egan, heterogeneity. plasticity : cells: T γδ functional and Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2:336–345. 2002,

and von Wiest, M., H., Zúñiga-Pflücker, the α:β and Stage-specific γ:δ T at G.C., notch and lineage D.L., differential J.C.: Knowles, bifurcation. Ciofani, dependency Boehmer, 2006, Immunity 25:105–116.

Dunon, Imhof, J.P., B.A. D., D., Vainio, Six, Chen, Dangy, C.H., Courtois, A., and M.D., Cooper, O., to system: migrate in alternating periphery immune thymus α:β γ:δ : and of cells T from the the waves. Ontogeny Exp. J. Med. 1997, 186:977–988.

Gamma/delta S.: cells. P., Haas, and Pereira, W., Tonegawa, Annu. Rev. Immunol. 1993, 11:637–685.

Tigelaar, M., Barbee, and S.D., Lewis, J.M., S.J., Girardi, R.E. Roberts, A.C., Hayday, repertoire stromal intraepithelial cutaneous of determinant. : thymic T γδ+ the Selection a cell by Nat. Immunol. 2006, 7:843–850.

Brenner, et N., Xiong, H., Sylvia, Vallerskog, K., Narayan, T., K.E., Yin, M.B., Kornfeld, Malhotra, Cohen, Martens, G., N., al. N.R., C.C., three programming cell effector in fates distinct of : Intrathymic gamma:delta T molecularly subtypes. Nat. Immunol. 13:511–518. 2012,

new and Tigelaar, R.E., order? cells—a J., Skin Hayday, immune T Strid, by A.C.: surveillance Semin. Immunol. 21:110–120. 2009,

Successful production chain β of gene rearranged rearrangement. β-chain a of 8-17 the allows synthesis

Borowski, Pre-TCRα and during Li, Boehmer, H.: partners are not F., X., C., T I., development. von Gounari, interchangeable of TCRβ TCRα Aifantis, and lymphocyte J. Exp. Med. 199:607–615. 2004,

thymocyte chain E.C., development adult M.J., Shah, selection gene Petrie, Owen, Dudley, during and receptor in L.M., T-cell A.C.: and β mice. H.T., Hayday, rearrangement Immunity 1994, 1:83–93.

Chae, Kay, congenitally Hayday, in lacking E.M., T Lymphoid mice Philpott, G., αβ-expressing Rastan, development M.J.: and cells. S., K.I., Owen, receptor J.L., S., Viney, Gardiner, cell A.C., 256:1448–1453. 1992, Science

(TCR) TCRβ γ:δ receptor I., and lineage J.: von H., selection, TCRβ Aifantis, the commitment. C., Azogui, Buer, C., Garcia, α:β function Zober, Feinberg, Saint-Ruf, and allelic in exclusion Crucial O., versus Boehmer, C., of pre-T-cell J., Immunol. Rev. 1998, 165:111–119.

8-18 rearrangements successive α-chain undergo cell genes positive intervenes. selection or death until T-cell

K.: F., receptor I., escape of T., Rajewsky, thymocytes and Rieux-Laucat, editing. by selection to Failure negative Buch, Förster, HY-specific Immunity 16:707–718. 2002,

J.L., receptors. F., functional Janeway, antigen-specific Jr.: T Baron, C.A., with two cells Hardardottir, and Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 92:354–358. USA 1995,

Revision lymphocyte for Sleckman, O.: receptor C.-Y., of chain Huang, cell T α Kanagawa, T required normal is B.P., development. genes and Proc. Acad. Natl Sci. 2005, 102:14356–14361. USA

bearing α:β T thymocytes cell P., selection of Marrack, and Kappler, Positive J.: receptors. Curr. Opin. Immunol. 1997, 9:250–255.

of A.: and T-cell Expression Brockhaus, dual receptor receptor cells. α Casorati, P., E., G., M., Lanzavecchia, chains: Padovan, T Meyer, two S., Dellabona, Science 262:422–424. 1993,

K.: Petrie, Livak, F., Schatz, I.N., in Strasser, of and T-cell α-chain A., H.T., production D.G., thymocytes. rearrangements maximize Crispe, receptor useful Multiple the genes Shortman, J. Exp. Med. 178:615–622. 1993,

mature. survive 8-19 can self with MHC thymocytes Only whose interact peptide:self and receptors complexes

M.A., McGargill, occurring Jameson, positive selection. Tomlinson, W.C., Naylor, Hogquist, and naturally M.C., for thymic A.J., a Kieper, Identification S.C.: Hart, ligand K.A., S., of 1997, 6:389–399. Immunity

Blüthmann, P., of Positive MHC thymus and restricting H.: in antigen-specific selection von Kisielow, cells molecules. Teh, by H., H.S., T Boehmer, 335:730–733. 1988, Nature

with on specificity inherent Positive T-cell a selection MHC acts for receptors molecules. repertoire of 8-20

and P., Gapin, J.W. L., J.P., Dai, Kappler, Scott-Browne, Marrack, S., control : amino interaction. Evolutionarily that conserved acids TCR-MHC Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2008, 26:171–203.

Graf, M., A.G.: many thymocytes How Merkenschlager, R., for Zamoyska, Bommhardt, audition U., Lovatt, D., M., Fisher, selection? and Exp. J. Med. 186:1149–1158. 1997,

control αβ Germlineencoded in Scott-Browne, J., acids Marrack, selection. White, Kappler, amino P.: T-cell J.W., the receptor J.P., L., thymic Gapin, and 458:1043–1046. 2009, Nature

Raulet, to and prior J., repertoire D.H.: Held, T negative cell MHC W., selection. The of Zerrahn, positive the reactivity and Cell 1997, 88:627–636.

the functions the selection CD4 the or with the potential of and effector coordinates 8-21 of T-cell T specificity Positive cell. the CD8 of expression receptor

Egawa, Littman, D.R. and T., specification of and cell in to suppresses cell T late : cytotoxic lineage ThPOK lineage. T helper Runx-mediated the acts commitment the Nat. Immunol. 9:1131–1139. 2008,

W., Y., Kappes, H., Nicolas, X., He, Xi, V.P., X., E., Xu, Hua, Roe, B.A., Zhang, and D.J. Dave, regulates finger transcription lineage Th-POK factor : commitment. The CD8 CD4 zinc T-cell versus 2005, 433:826–833. Nature

S., A., J.H. and Singer, Adoro, Park, CD8-lineage CD4versus of mechanisms myths, : intense and and Lineage debate: fate models choice. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2008, 8:788–801.

B., Kisielow, Teh, Boehmer, and H., Lishi, H., von P., H.S. Scott, Borgulya, P., on expression accessory The the specificity is : of and antigen. for CD8 CD4 but with T random correlates molecules receptor mature the cells not of α:β Immunol. Rev. 109:143–151. 1989,

selection epithelial 8-22 Thymic positive thymocytes. of cortical developing cells mediate

Benoist, Mathis, compartment of C., thymic for D.: D., Waltzinger, T and positive responsible Cosgrove, Chan, cells. C., selection The CD4+ S.H., Int. Immunol. 1992, 4:707–710.

selection to reaggregation cells C.D., thymus cultures. J.: Bone Sprent, marrow-derived in Ernst, Surh, fail positive and B.B., induce J. Exp. Med. 183:1235–1240. 1996,

CD8+ Murata, proteasomes. T., Y., Kishimoto, by Niwa, Tanaka, and Sasaki, Regulation K., development S., T H., S.-I., K.: thymus-specific cell Takahama, Hayashi, of 316:1349–1353. Science 2007,

A., Nelson, Wong, J., C., Ploegh, Rudensky, Peters, J.A., P., Villadangos, Roth, and T., W., Deussing, Farr, Nakagawa, A.Y. A., H., L: Cathepsin and degradation T cell in in selection critical Ii thymus. : CD4 role the Science 1998, 280:450–453.

thymus. in react ubiquitous the deleted T self 8-23 antigens cells strongly that are with

Benoist, Bronson, M.S., H., Turley, Chen, Berzins, Venanzi, et von C., al. L., Klein, A., R., S.J., E.S., Z., Dierich, Boehmer, Anderson, S.P., the thymus : aire within of shadow self the Projection an protein. by immunological 298:1395–1401. Science 2002,

J.: semimature thymus the cells. and Negative H., Kishimoto, T includes in selection Sprent, Exp. J. Med. 185:263–271. 1997,

self Mechanisms class B.: complex Stockinger, tolerance II-restricted major Zal, T a cells blood-borne Volkmann, specific and induction A., histocompatibility for of in T., antigen. Exp. J. Med. 1994, 180:2089–2099.

is driven bone by Negative antigen-presenting most marrow-derived efficiently selection cells. 8-24

M.A. M.S., Su, and Anderson, Aire T cell : development. and Curr. Opin. Immunol. 23:198–206. 2011,

McCaughtry, T.M., K.A. and Baldwin, T.A., Hogquist, M.S., Wilken, can no thymocytes the in cortex the with of Clonal deletion involvement medulla. of occur : J. Exp. Med. 2008, 205:2575–2584.

J., S.R. Sprent, Webb, and T extrathymic : of Intrathymic and clonal cells. deletion Curr. Opin. Immunol. 1995, 7:196–205.

S.R., of and thymic Webb, epithelium. Tolerogenicity Sprent, J.: Eur. J. Immunol. 20:2525–2528. 1990,

must 8-25 negative and/or strength differ. selection positive of The signals the specificity and for

Perlmutter, R.M. Bevan, and M.J., J., Alberola-Ila, K.A., Swan, Hogquist, K.A., signaling invoke pathways. Positive negative selection distinct : and Exp. J. Med. 184:9–18. 1996,

model Zinkernagel, A., the thymus. for a Bandeira, Delaney, H.P., J.R., in and avidity Evidence Ashton-Rickardt, P.G., T-cell L., Pircher, R.M., differential of selection Tonegawa, Van S.: Kaer, 1994, Cell 76:651–663.

and T.: C., activity MEK selection of Scheuring, U., regulates Hunig, R., Y., Bickel, Zamoyska, thymocytes. immature Bommhardt, CD4+CD8+ negative J. Immunol. 2000, 164:2326–2337.

Heath, J.L., S.C., Jameson, and Hogquist, Carbone, W.R., Howard, Bevan, K.A., M.J., F.R. induce positive peptides antagonist selection. T-cell receptor : 1994, 76:17–27. Cell

cells the in 8-26 develop cells thymus. innate regulatory T T and Self-recognizing

A., Reed, A.J. A.L., Jordan, and Boesteanu, M.S., Lerman, Naji, A.J., Holenbeck, A.E., Petrone, A., Caton, M.A., self-peptide. CD4+CD25+ an T : by selection Thymic agonist cells induced of regulatory Nat. Immunol. 2001, 2:301–306.

Moran, A.E., K.A. and Hogquist, : T-cell thymic development. receptor affinity in 135:261–267. Immunology 2012,

Rudensky, Zheng, A.Y. Y., and of in Foxp3 the regulatory : lineage. cell control T Nat. Immunol. 8:457–462. 2007,

in occurs of T-cell final thymic 8-27 the maturation medulla. The stage

Cinamon, Brinkmann, M.L., R.L., Lesneski, Proia, M.J., V., C.G., Allende, Y., Cyster, G., Xu, Matloubian, Lo, J.G. M., and Lymphocyte 1. organs thymus dependent : on lymphoid egress and peripheral is S1P receptor from 427:355–360. 2004, Nature

J.G. Zachariah, and M.A., Cyster, egress : at corticomedullary mature Neural pericytes junction. of promote crest-derived thymocytes the 2010, 328:1129–1135. Science

8-28 first sufficient time quantities the or of in are antigens self eliminated T cells periphery inactivated. that for encounter the

individuality. P.J., their assert and young Post-thymic T maturation: D.W.: Fink, cells Hendricks, Nat. Rev. Immunol. 11:544–549. 2011,

R.M., M.C. and Steinman, Nussenzweig, tolerance. horror cell the peripheral in T Avoiding : autotoxicus: importance of cells dendritic Proc. Acad. Natl Sci. 99:351–358. 2002, USA

and Hogquist, Xing, K.A. Y., and central tolerance: : peripheral. T-cell Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. 4.pii:a006957 2012,

response initiated An is mechanisms. adaptive pathogen immune innate a when overwhelms defense response. pathogen replicates accumulates, become the cells As the adaptive trigger of activated immune sensor innate and to antigen the immune system of definition, most dealt by discussed 3, immunity. adaptive 2 immunity, Chapters defense host some and against almost be requires While recruitment solely as in by pathogens, may innate infections with be is the This by immune of adaptive failure in of immunodeficiency the that are associated with particular 13. parts these will discussed shown Chapter syndromes response; T and how cells learn cells response deployed. adaptive initiated we immune chapters, is the will antigen-specific B and three In involving next the or considered first, considered 10. will that humoral, lead immunity that be responses this in immunity cellular and be lead will T-cell to in chapter; responses B-cell to antibody-mediated, Chapter T-cell innate of the most important the and how with the integration of context memory. responses of in in one consider their and B-cell of immunity culminates features 11 Chapter dynamics immunity—immunological adaptive this In we will

in bloodstream. T the they have Once cells thymus, the development their completed primary enter returning between lymphatics to and organ, reaching secondary blood the they tissue, tissues. lymphoid via On bloodstream the leave the lymphoid through the to a migrate recirculate lymphoid blood to secondary specific antigens naive recirculating have that are Mature not cells encountered cells. yet their T known as T response, and cell, To to meet on antigen, must induced be cell of differentiate an to activities proliferate new complex contribute to T antigen. progeny as into surface participate presented antigen-presenting removal an adaptive the that specific in it naive its a immune peptide:MHC of and a with as organs—sites development cells functions unlike of cells of T responses. and, These initiation soon effector naive progeny for immune the lymphoid adaptive secondary encounter called as they are their perform function cells, and T

dendritic by cells naive of cells. pathogen-activated T priming

General effector their T cytokines. properties and cells of

cytotoxicity. T-cell-mediated

their on without cells—generally specific antigen for other further requirement differentiation. host recognize pathogen act other requirement cells, their by peptide cells the of molecules, MHC not presented T on all Because antigens effector to itself. on T to be will which act cells. as cells referred The target cells effector their on

T for functional different T On naive that antigen, effector cells into classes several cells activities. specialized of differentiate are recognizing molecules, peptides into that cells pathogen kill class recognize MHC cells. differentiate recognize infected cells CD8 naive effector presented I T by cells cytotoxic and T and CD8 T CD4 a activities. repertoire of more have effector flexible cells T CD4 functions. immunological down with subsets generate peptides distinct class differentiate After different effector naive presented recognizing by cells molecules, T that MHC can pathogen pathways II TH2, CD4 cells; immune target TFH, cells, the cells, main T The TH1, and inhibit and regulatory which activation. extent activate TH17, or which of effector Treg their subsets are

in encounter equip ways from antigen to on their efficiently naive and differ precursors when quickly them specific cells that they cells. respond T Effector target have to directing to or sites where lymphoid tissues, alter pathogen-specific T that they migration lymphoid molecules are tissues Among secondary them cells, the of the occur within expression where surface generate to in of move zones effector pathogens the of of B-cell antibodies. help alterations inflammation entered, the secondary and changes that patterns exit on locally cell antigen. of can a which T-cell–target mediated with are these direct interactions release distance at and the both cytokines, clearance target cells cells; sites of to orchestrate target and the contact by in act The considered the will chapter; effector Chapters be heightened context others immune innate in will for and 11 system. of effector cells cells be and functions in Some of T-cell B this discussed 10 in activation cells help the T of of the of

is primed responses to the often The with antigen on to their and activation process of and distinguish effector of cells the this called T from encounter responses on T priming, naive its cell of expansion T antigen clonal initial a cells. cells target memory of one the immunity is adaptive The immunology. of most in narratives initiation compelling T by As will controlled activation learn, a naive we signals. variety of is the of cells in specialized form of surface Chapter a on recognize complex primary the discussed a T is antigen in cell the must signal that antigen-presenting peptide:MHC 6. a naive cell, as of The molecules are it also that cell the cells. requires by recognize co-stimulatory displayed Activation antigen-presenting naive of T that are cell. that effector control cells delivered types of Finally, naive differentiation activated the different into cytokines T to detection set events that by immune of in initial innate the system. the from these by motion signals arise pathogens earlier are All the or microbe-associated cells 2 signify MAMPs, delivered Chapters Toll-like immune to patterns, nonself recognize system (see presence the by receptors receptors the signals as that of (TLRs), 3). are the molecular such and Microbe-derived innate which of turn, naive essential are in chapter, these activate cells As so in cells. are we that they activate this T signals antigen-presenting will to able, to see

major cells, function in By far T and cells antigen-presenting dendritic the activation of important to cells present is ingest naive the are most antigen. whose and sites as activated cells Tissue part take up of of at dendritic innate the are infection immune antigen response. are into local at maturation their antigen presenting cells. This induces tissue T to to and recirculating highly cells effective that their migration lymphoid naive sites discuss secondary to adaptive initiate dendritic chapter and part of consider first we the and in T lymphoid tissues this how cells will the of development In these and cells immunity. naive organization meet

for function initiation secondary of lymphoid responses. Development organs—sites the of immune adaptive and

and lymphoid in receptor As marrow—are primary sites Chapter of 8, B repertoires the cells, tissue respectively, the organs—the are discussed and bone where antigenic selected. T thymus initiated in Peyer’s nodes, the responses Adaptive patches spleen, lymphoid gut. organs—lymph immune the mucosa-associated in and such lymphoid tissues (MALTs) the as secondary are the in structured of rare free for the with and dendritic precursors The B B in of interaction clonal cells. these their as is the by of a is recirculating T case antigens—whether of cognate similar cells delivered the cells the architecture crossroads cells, body T or case throughout of tissues antigens provide to and entry infectious peptide:MHC cells the million mouse—and organs which of or from itself, in facilitate derived entire T can In recognize in complex—roughly instances in secondary be 100 brought of their by pathogen, over that lymphoid some agent large the area 50–500 recognition a rarity approximately the invade, view cells the lymphocytes. sites the antigens T must to pathogen immune of to specific an cells naive the the from of repertoire secondary chapter lymphoid consider of In these we structure the that part and shall enable development of the this first interactions. organs enter to the shall cells and organs. T lymphoid directed then exit We how blood the discuss are naive and be travel where and to to them. how activate cells antigen present organs, dendritic local This cells will antigen T pick both by lymphoid followed they up can considering

tissues. and B in secondary distinct lymphoid locations in found lymphocytes T are 9-1

cells cells Chapter organized with distinct B-cell in roughly (see B concentrated—the zones. lymphoid which areas 1), and are secondary the various lines T The are along T-cell same and organs contain and cells. stromal cells, nonleukocyte They macrophages, dendritic also case the In white which specialized tissue the that lymphoid bloodstream, the of component for enter the pulp is the antigens is capture (Fig. the called spleen, of 9.1).

Fig. 9.1 lymphoid anatomical for antigens Secondary and crossroads tissues as of lymphocytes. serve interactions serve specialized interactions facilitate sites to that as tissues are between and lymphocytes antigens. secondary lymphoid the as In dots) by cargo (upper dendritic is the panel), lymph either of free lymph or delivered (denoted in nodes up in lymph tissues cells taken antigen that antigen have the drained by red node. cells; T-cell can recognize the cells, afferent is detected The the surface subcapsular a of the zone on it T to at B-cell the free from cells as to the conducted B it antigen where zones, dendritic of or, border case of delivered which it in T-cell antigen is via is follicles. and sinus, lymphatics into and the cells (hevs) then high and and in B zones. diverge via T-cell node enter T B-cell endothelial venules zones, lymph T-cell central white the antigen via which pulp, and the from which the that boundary delivered sinus, to is pulp the marginal branch sinus arteriole marginal red communicates. is the the arterioles between In spleen (middle with panel), dendritic can marginal or transport antigen or In macrophages, taken T-cell zone be either B-cell lymphoid into sheath, or which marginal paLs) the cells, antigen zones up sinus, follicles. by cells, (periarteriolar B can leave sinus travel same the the the T or enter B-cell B and via to follicles. cells the spleen paLs to either route antigen, as and marginal the patches—to overlays (lower transported intestines panel), the antigens the lumen from are cells—specialized the or in peyer’s epithelium the dendritic via In M subepithelial microfold that reside cells that dome. antigen-loaded cells then further cells antigens zones, bear are be locally, not dendritic cells T-cell are the by migrate if recognized T and to in lymph surveyed. nodes mesenteric by T they dendritic can cells to surveyed the patches for cells nodes, and B hevs via the the T peyer’s lymph T-cell in as enter zones.

the that formed arteriole. from a is network from pulp by central of marginal sinus, pulp demarcated the white branches Each red is vascular of a area B initially cells viruses of Circulating are T to a capture region specialized is microbes, bacteria. for cells that which blood-borne or highly and antigens sinus, such the organized as of marginal intact delivered is and the marginal a cells, is macrophages rich not zone do B the of cells, and which B population unique in It contains recirculate. it adapted reaching Pathogens such pathogens. efficiently the provide zone by zone trapped B be responses the that are in to are the marginal to could cells bloodstream marginal and first macrophages,

T centrally that that and follicles, or (PALS)— T-cell zones, are the and clustered sinus, the central From peripherally. periarteriolar located arteriole—the bifurcate marginal lymphoid sheath toward central cells they more migrate into zones arteriole, the B where so-called around B-cell are adaptive in cells hypermutation in involved are and somatic (see immune Some which an centers, germinal follicles contain proliferating may response Section undergoing B 1-16). centers The antigen-driven in will be described detail we when responses in consider of B-cell production Chapter 10. germinal

and T-cell B-cell of areas. types are within Other cells found the distant the of in from cells concentrated B-cell contains follicle central The area (FDCs), the the are network a follicular which dendritic most mainly zone arteriole. of have are in long cells. with that B FDCs processes contact leukocytes and previously that in derived are not II the express and of precursors; FDCs are in marrow type they not Section do addition, not dendritic cells bone we are cell 1-3), from a distinct phagocytic (see not encountered from they class are proteins. MHC complement. are for of of of the complexes—complexes antibody, antigen the antigen, and immune FDCs in capture form specialized the B recognized remain immune internalized on time, but by of are intact the FDC cells. periods where not of antigen prolonged for complexes the can be The surface B-cell of the important in FDCs development are follicles. also

bone way which their dendritic of known among T-cell interweave zones marrow-derived cells. the interdigitating cells from a T sometimes network dendritic as in contain cells, processes are of proteins: an by is α also characteristic CD8-negative cells, expressed CD8, that the two one major by macrophages. the subtypes dendritic but distinguished expresses other these chain expresses CD11b:CD18, of is There whereas cell-surface integrin

Fig. and are T the B into and cells in spleen, the lymph As discrete cells nodes T-cell (see areas in organized B-cell 9.1). follicles located are the just lymph have of and and those under a the the similar composition capsule to node. structure spleen in outer B-cell the T-cell the follicles areas. surround zones in paracortical the to lymph and Unlike have the nodes system system. spleen, both blood connections lymphatic the to and the from lymph the lymphatic Lymph conducted nodes known by the tissues. antigen into afferent in sinus, also as cells subcapsular which dendritic and vessels enters marginal antigen-bearing space, brings is are zones, B high found T that in venules vessels as will in Section lymph (HEVs) T-cell blood further called 9-3. be the specialized cells and endothelial discussed node enter via

provide physical mucosa-associated The against surfaces, (MALTs) which the body’s barriers are associated with tissues lymphoid infection. epithelial intervals interspersed and Peyer’s part just epithelium. of the node-like the lymph structures are at beneath gut MALT patches are They follicles Fig. zones B-cell (see T-cell have and Section (see the specialized contains antigens directly them 9.1), underlying cells to 12). lumen M from channel and to the 1-16 gut overlying tissue pathogens epithelium lymphoid the Chapter and adapted are that and become patches the tissue can tonsils the to provide Peyer’s cells present synthesis similar sites specialized IgA. B of and in where committed system The Chapter is in detail 12. immune mucosal in more discussed

and factor The family. tissues development tissue by is cells lymphoid of controlled the secondary tumor proteins necrosis inducer of lymphoid 9-2

how Before respective the organs, T B cells how place. organs discussing lymphoid first zones briefly in and cells their in into these become secondary we at develop look partitioned shall during originate that cells in from Lymphatic are vessels. endothelial formed blood embryonic vessels development to Some system begin in transcription cells express Prox1. endothelial the factor the homeobox venous early away, cells from and vessels. parallel form network a vein, migrate of reassociate lymphatic bud These the to identity showing and have veins, to Mice in critical lymphatic lacking arteries to but normal factor Prox1 of establishing this a fail the endothelium. system, be form lymphatic called lymphoid prospective nodes inducer fetal the the As hematopoietic in and the of to cells carried lymphatic are form, in arise lymph cells liver bloodstream Peyer’s patches. (LTi) tissue vessels and sites by and lymph Peyer’s lymphoid cytokines and sites. formation inducing patches cells which the with chemokines, interacting recruit cells production and of stromal LTi nodes to cells of the other these initiate stromal (TNF)/ the cytokines and cells family in TNF receptor turn (TNFR) LTi between Members cells. factor of necrosis critically involved to tumor of be out the interactions

in was of the demonstrated ligand family of its either role The secondary a series involving cytokines inactivated been has this the organs which knockout mice lymphoid in studies formation TNF-family of receptor in (Fig. or of 9.2). knockout phenotypes, that individual proteins to the conversely, have and, can can due partly mice fact to which many These multiple is than one receptors receptors ligand. bind more complicated bind TNF-family function proteins. it overlapping TNF-family seems there is or addition, that some In between cooperation clear be can drawn. Nonetheless, general conclusions some

depend known (LTs), lymphotoxins lymph proteins of on signals LTs. types TNF-family as depends development on and the Lymph-node the expression nodes different of different from and supports of development lymph and chain, mesenteric soluble nodes, sacral lymph nodes. cervical of homotrimer LT-α and lumbar possibly the a the LT-α3, nodes mucosal All drain lymph sites. these TNFR-I. to LT-α3 probably effects exerts by binding its known and LT-β membrane-bound to binds and other supports heterotrimer the of consisting the lymph only is, two of protein the one often molecule as the LT-α2:β1), receptor distinct LT-β The LT-β, development nodes. transmembrane of all LT-α of (that molecules LT-β. do the Peyer’s in form absence not of patches also of knockouts absence the which prevent of will not lymph developmental adult reversible are critical development or The in nodes proteins and inhibition effects are LT permanently there the periods animals; of the Peyer’s certain these patches. during LT-family

which LT-β, NFκB receptors on pathway cells the express LT-β site, stromal engages activating prospective the cells LTi the lymphoid non-canonical in

Fig. of family The TNF of 9.2 lymphoid development role organs. the members in peripheral TnF TnF-family members or ligands of lymphoid in The development organs has deduced mainly role peripheral from the family study of knockout the mice receptors. one been of or deficient in more the of bind receptor, one deletion. of some receptors elucidation some ligand, one bind and effects more their than complicating more than ligands the receptors first bind to known them.) ligand that are for (note named two receptors, organized the are lymphotoxins The receptor, TnFr-I the defects respect ligands, their the LT-β and main to TnF-α and (LTs). and here with losses the that note of indicated several individual that some same figure. of receptor respective cases, as to bind lead in different ligands the out the phenotypes, in different is sets ability receptors. due bind This different ligands to the of the of to LT-α two ligands, protein heterodimer a receptor. and trimer The of each the the contributes distinct LT-α3 to chain LT-α2:β1, acts distinct through which FdCs signaling for for is follicular TnFr-I dendritic development cell for general, signaling development. through LT-β also and architecture normal required normal through receptor lymph-node not is the for lymph-node whereas but In splenic architecture, and required and (FdC) splenic

Fig. chemokines. development 9.3 secondary by orchestrated is lymphoid The of organs organization lymphoid vascular initiated cells, endothelial CCL21 organs cellular cells secrete of the by chemokine which panel). is The stromal (first and dendritic development for later the of CCr7—a is lymph panel); by with bloodstream stages the cells earliest whether of attracted via they as or the developing not cells at do from to site in (second life. enter CCL21—are the CCL21 known it node immature lymph-node lymphatics, dendritic receptor the node, cells bound lymph is also express by dendritic chemokine which once CCr7. the the CCL19, in the chemokines dendritic cells secreted the developing to T attract node by the cells Together, cells (third panel). and lymph stromal node (fourth the also The into lymph B combination same of panel). cells chemokines developing attracts distinct into of lineage to a dendritic their are direct FdCs from nonleukocyte the or the either differentiation lymph recruitment cells) induce B are bone the able marrow-derived node. The the cells (which once present, for FdCs chemokine a secrete a the is cells. B chemoattractant CXCL13, that the areas production the the cells FdCs B-cell lymph node further (fifth cells The from into organization circulation of contributes of around B CXCL13 into to of drives the and recruitment panel). B discrete (follicles) the

Section (see 7-23). adhesion molecules, to cells of Peyer’s chemokine, which clusters in cells, such for nodes induces receptors (B-lymphocyte will lymph have as patches. more these turn This eventually the CXCL13 or recruits express molecules generating and which chemokines stromal that BLC), large become LTi cells cells attract populate and The receptors also appropriate forming cells hematopoietic-lineage with to organ. as lymphocytes the chemokines lymphoid other such the fetus The molecules, of similar that organs organs the next some of development underlying maintain shall we those the of in lymphoid the very the and to even lymphoid adult, section. are as organization secondary in the in principles, see

Fig. abnormal mice be of will Although deficient will TNFR members, known of family develop the architecture in mutants in many any the its (see spleen these TNF in or 9.2). normal B-cell spleen. is (most membrane-bound the required in of the for and zones LT-β) T-cell the LT probably segregation well zones discrete ring organization binding are TNF-α, marginal than follicles, in of TNF-α forming B white to are to defined. and also when cells rather contributes surround the disrupted, the the signals T-cell pulp: a zones not TNFR-I,

FDCs, development Perhaps in in and role development TNFR-I the cells Fig. lymphoid important lacking is (see TNF-α most TNF-α or TNFR-I of the of in mice are either with of organ knockouts these as 9.2). FDCs. do nodes mice lack patches, because but have they The knockout and LTs, lymph these express structures Peyer’s form the in normal residual mice required any is lymph receptor cannot its lack FDC for also signal spleen and LT-β through nodes. development: FDCs LT-β or that member the TNF-family Unlike spleen development, lymphoid the restored. if the reversible the missing is in is lymph-node disruption of disorganized architecture FDCs normal follicles lymphocytes). the source restore the are cells to lack of transferred and B recipients can (which RAG-deficient likely cells LT-β, because when B

of of and chemokines. into by regions secondary actions lymphoid 9-3 the cells T B partitioned distinct tissues are

the under (Fig. are distinct compartments then by from produced 9.3). cells respective Circulating seed that chemokines Tand in of both route, common control marrow-derived B-cell a zones into stromal tissues resident and bone are blood lymphoid B the and T cells the by their but cells secondary directed zones (secondary (MIP-3β) two T involves lymphoid chemokine, SLC). of T-cell and CCL19 localization CCL21 into cells The chemokines, by bind of the receptor do normal and primary T-cell cells; zones impaired T CCR7, that immune Both mice expressed have responses. which form is not CCR7 lack these high of lymphoid produced cells T-cell endothelial cells by tissues, venules and endothelial stromal of displayed secondary is zones (HEVs). in CCL21 is on dendritic interdigitating in T-cell also zones. CCL19 of is produce Another CCL21 source and prominent which cells, are T-cell and RAG-deficient cells express Indeed, to lymphocytes tissues in themselves lack CCR7 mice, which even will zones. lymphoid dendritic and localize secondary therefore defined produced CCL21 the during cells cells be might T by development, normal cells. Thus, by first stromal through of attraction the and T-cell organized lymph-node zone dendritic reinforced and more resident would in CCL21 then CCL19 and cells, organization secreted which T cells. dendritic by migratory cells This be by dendritic attract turn

initially node lymph cells B cells chemokine dendritic in cells, CXCL13 developing secrete cells attract attracted by which same chemokines into induce to turn more differentiation the the CXCL13B follicular the are the B of

lymph them across B circulating CCR7, which into express the initially cells, Like node cells T directs HEVs. chemokine attracted for to they constitutively follicles CXCR5, this the also CXCL13. Because receptor then ligand they the by the are receptor, express CXCL13 is of FDC, source with other cells. possibly the along most stromal likely follicular The expression of (Section the the formation stromal 9-2). This reminiscent is during of of by lymph node CXCL13 cells the cells for stromal in B LT activate expressing reminiscent of the the required source FDCs, cells of that the is which turn, LT cells. are, LTi is required the development to of of stromal FDCs, dependence The web reciprocal organizes the and and LTis of tissues. complex interactions cells, illustrates cells and that B secondary lymphoid of of CD4 T 10). activation CXCR5 A express participate antigen, enter in following cells TFH, their by subset or allowing B-cell formation T also germinal centers Chapter them cells follicular to can helper, follicles called to (see the

cells. through sampling Naive cells T tissues, on secondary dendritic complexes lymphoid migrate peptide:MHC 9-4

back tissues spleen, from and to mucosa-associated (see the perpetually bloodstream lymph Naive nodes, Fig. T cells lymphoid and into circulate blood the 1.21). and on complexes peptide:MHC cells. the allows sample to surfaces contact dendritic thousands This of of these day the every them cells any antigens probability dendritic pathogen incoming dwell, their has in cell of high anywhere (Fig. and concentration T from high Because each that zones infection rates body T-cell a up in of where derived encountering an set has of their recirculation the cells 9.4). lymphatic MALTs, directly lymphatics with the where specific in the tissue antigen to hours back the T encounter blood do connection naive their the and the exit of no not or has reenter nodes system. their spleen, arrival, they in bloodstream, which cells continue the recirculate—via lymph or to efferent lymphoid that Within from

surface recognizes it the T on cell, antigen migrate. dendritic to of specific an activated however, its ceases When a cell naive It in zone, T-cell remains the

Fig. 9.4 cells recirculation antigen encounter their Naive through peripheral lymphoid organs. during T endothelial arterial high venules endothelium (shown via blood through T naive (hevs). node recirculate lymphoid the vascular specialized such entering peripheral cells organs, as here), a the of lymph from panel). lymph paracortical is wall chemokines the the shown) areas, the T encounter into through hev direct into where node regulated cells dendritic and migration the the T by cells’ entry (top (not cells that mature return green IL-7, antigen; interaction and their a through the T receive and leave in their with not complexes node Those (second signal the through they to specific lymph cells panel). the self lymphatics to survival shown MhC encounter peptide:self do circulation blue cells to activated to become surface to encounter from cells; shown and and (third lose cells effector on they exit antigen into their T specific ability panel). proliferate the node dendritic differentiate of mature the T in their after from node, needed lymphatics, receptors cells increased (bottom days, in via the efferent the circulation the enter several panel). these to regain expression T antigen-specific greatly the and exit leave of effector numbers

cells Antigen-speciÿc in ActivationTrapping viral 6 they lymph where T in Time detained cells the after 20 cells efferent 8 of of 4 Number transiently are lymph antigen-speciÿc infection effector activated become Emigration (days) node, T

Fig. 9.5 and naive Trapping lymphoid cells T antigen-specific tissue. activation of in zones. encounter blood antigen-presenting cells cells T lymph from in entering T-cell the the node dendritic naive to through the bind antigen cells activated that T-cell are develop node their the resulting cells. lymph cells in into dendritic their receptors, stably they T recognize within specific as effector their retention T and effector arrival numbers days after 5 are the node By cells leaving antigen, in efferent lymphatics. large activated the the lymph via T of in node in the can T specific that so are circulation for trapped a particular cells 2 that and naive the days. Lymphocyte by peripheral within be antigen recirculation antigen effective one recognition all

Fig. node entry chemokines, adhesion receptors. the in the Lymphocyte molecules, activity from distinct and blood stages chemokine lymph occurs involving 9.6 of into a membranes. by naive on venule with endothelial addressins the of cell along T cells (hev) the cells a T by expressed high selectins endothelial to of surface are vascular interactions roll the the induced chemokine T at leads increase on to hev the in the on molecules surface hev. of the for cell activate adhesion the signaling and integrins an affinity the T Chemokines cell, present receptors on the expressed receptor adhesion. strong induces This chemokines after cells into adhesion, wall T the the through paracortical hev of of node. lymph pass region the to follow gradients the

to antigen clonal for effector differentiation memory proliferates identical several give and cells where specificity. rise of cells it expansion to days, T undergoing and effector to exit the Chapter period, most lymphoid organ the T end At migrate this 11). the of they bloodstream, (see cells reenter infection sites through the which and of instead B where that effector to to center in the 10). with (see B-cell T Some cells response they migrate interact are germinal Chapter fated cells participate zones,

is screen hours, be be in high, containing T the injection by antigen-presenting in cells trapping node which trapped cells very as lymph all lymph within the a lymph the The site T of cells seen in in antigen-specific rapid (Fig. nodes node T antigen efficiency can 48 can draining a body single cells antigen-specific with of antigen; 9.5). these is cells. T adaptive the an likely is only cell depends be one 105–106 initiation immune for efficiency crucial adaptive of as antigen, activation for immunity and Such the to naive a and specific of on in response, particular expansion rare

lymphoid on Lymphocyte chemokines entry depends molecules. adhesion into 9-5 and tissues

endothelial venules cell-adhesion tissues secondary high naive antigen-specific to Migration depends through interactions not are their binding cells by on of into (HEVs) that lymphoid but are T molecules. governed cell–cell Fig. main The of the lymphocyte in and the are some interactions adhesion of molecules superfamily, (see the classes selectins, members molecules involved mucin-like integrins, immunoglobulin 3.30). lymphocytes rolling diapedesis Entry layer the and (Fig. of into endothelial in of across lymphocytes endothelial of zones areas, into initial the occurs integrins, lymph that the adhesion, or include transmigration stages paracortical distinct activation firm T-cell surface, along the nodes 9.6). coordinated regulated adhesion that These a leukocytes recruitment and (see by sites molecules of of Chapter stages chemokines the inflammation of resembles to are interplay 3). have in (see naive cells being fairly T cells not Section immune broad migration in Adhesion lymphocyte molecules but antigen-presenting in and involved interactions 9-14). between roles only also responses,

The selectins (Fig. tissues, leukocyte leukocytes to particular important a as known specifically phenomenon are 9.7) guiding homing. for whereas (CD62E) 3-18). expressed (CD62L) P-selectin are endothelium and (CD62P) on on vascular leukocytes, expressed L-selectin E-selectin is Section (see from initiating HEV endothelial the guides blood a the (see that T secondary into attachment the along of surface by cells the light cells’ T tissues on rolling exit in Fig. results lymphoid their to wall the L-selectin naive 9.6). at E-selectin to cells are infected the serve tissue. recruit expressed infection, of sites P-selectin and the and into on effector endothelium vascular molecules the common by are core cell-surface Selectins from presence distinguished lectin-like in other with and structure their each portion. are of a extracellular different domains groups, bind selectin particular a and sugar to lectin to domains binds carbohydrate. The cell-surface each expressed molecules surface moiety—sulfated which the mucin-like addressins, vascular are L-selectin binds to the sialyl-LewisX—of cells. carbohydrate endothelial on of called vascular addressins, of these CD34 and GlyCAM-1 (see Fig. Two high expressed in 9.7), endothelial on are lymph venules nodes. third, the into Peyer’s is entry expressed the and such lymphocyte mucosal A tissue endothelium as in patches gut. on mucosae, guides MAdCAM-1, in lymphoid

specific to vascular and lymphoid between organs. the homing addressins The L-selectin is naive of for responsible interaction T cells the the own, cross however, to the On cell does lymphoid barrier not endothelial into its enable it tissue. the requires concerted chemokines of integrins. action This and the

for lymph chemokines into integrins cells is naive of of by T entry nodes. responsible 9-6 the Activation

to two endothelium superfamily. selectins on members secondary and enter rolling HEVs molecules integrins, of lymphoid the cell-adhesion additional of the T cells types of via require organs— immunoglobulin Naive induce Integrins signals tightly change receiving their conformation. a that to after bind their ligands in leukocytes of in 3-18). into wall to for on by of to bind Section inflammation activates the chemokines integrins the preparation migration vascular Signaling the sites (see leukocytes tightly the lymphoid HEV surface migration organs cells chemokines at (see T of into the integrins Similarly, expressed naive present activate luminal during on Fig. 9.6).

with molecule pairs that An noncovalently large chain. of a α chain consists smaller integrin a β common There chains. by β defined broadly their subfamilies, several integrin are be common We chain chains will concerned here a paired integrins, distinct have chiefly β2 (Fig. leukocyte with with which α the 9.8). cells leukocyte integrin antigen-1 known better All functional the T (LFA-1). express αL:β2 as (CD11a:CD18), cells blood. It out both enables T effector the and of naive of migration recruitment 3-18). This present of involved is (see macrophages on is their in neutrophils, and to infection integrin sites and Section also

to important cells. LFA-1 is of also cells adhesion their and the in naive target both T effector individuals in normal responses β2 can chain lacking β2 the integrin genetically integrins, and all Nevertheless, T-cell be hence

Fig. binds L-selectin to mucinlike addressins. vascular 9.7 motifs. recognizes on is naive cells expressed L-selectin carbohydrate and T and moieties vascular sialyl-LewisX Cd34 hevs the lymphocyte binding the to binds sulfated on Its on to GlyCaM-1 the addressins endothelium. weakly unclear. of The and interaction in importance GlyCaM-1 Cd34 is this relative only anchor other cells, and on forms glycosylated a appropriately form it endothelial hev is in has on transmembrane in although other Cd34 expressed cells. is found but hevs the transmembrane is into may GlyCaM-1 secreted hevs. and on expressed region be no has MadCaM-1 lymphocytes on guides tissue. mucosal mucosal addressin to The endothelium expressed is and lymphoid to membrane; MadCaM-1, elongated which and Iga-like mucin-like MadCaM-1 represents shown the Iga-like cell an domain lacks The an has the closest human domain. contains mouse domain configuration

Fig. 9.8 adhesion. T-lymphocyte important Integrins are in chain, defines containing chain, α Integrins different integrins which proteins a which β heterodimeric integrin, class of and a are defines the within the an class. contains β for sites chain cations is signaling. and larger the α in chain important divalent be may binding The that than αL:β2) expressed LFa-1 all (integrin on leukocytes. is T the levels it T in target important higher cell antigen-presenting and at cells on binds ICaMs or interactions cells; of (apCs) with and in than is migration cells cells cells. is It effector naive expressed T on Lymphocyte T tissues into patch integrin cells naive lymphoid addressin lymphocyte adhesive adhesion of (LpaM-1, vascular α4:β7) to or supporting by peyer’s molecule expressed MadCaM-1. interactions subset by a contributes entry and mucosal is with strongly expressed is after vLa-4 T-cell activation. α4:β1) (integrin activated important vCaM-1 into effector T to on for and of is binds It cells infection. sites recruiting endothelium

Fig. in 9.9 superfamily molecules Immunoglobulin leukocyte involved interactions. adhesion other superfamily immunoglobulin adhesion and adhesion to the of integrins [the interaction]. bind immunoglobulin molecules including (LFa-3) superfamily various Cd2–Cd58 vLa-4) and (LFa-1 molecules members types, of see a have role homing, interactions These Fig. cell–cell migration, lymphocyte in and interactions; other the here. 3.24 for listed molecules

LFA-1. including and superfamily is also because other the LFA-1. probably CD2 the which immunoglobulin molecules, β1 may member adhesion absence including This cells compensate T for express of integrins, the cells antigens; inflamed significantly and integrins effector are of β1 Expression to tissues. T often activation target late in are increases they late thus important called directing activation, T-cell they in very for VLAs, at a stage

the of are immunoglobulin five members At especially superfamily activation (Fig. important least in T-cell 9.9). and ICAM-2, (ICAMs)—ICAM-1, adhesion very LFA-1. similar the molecules ICAM-3—all bind integrin to T-cell Three intercellular through walls. as are lymphocytes enables to expressed ICAM-2 molecules antigen-presenting and ICAM-1 migrate vessel on and to blood binding cells, these endothelium on well as in of important the LFA-1 to an naive have is cells. T expressed and adhesion by dendritic thought role expressed to T binding antigen-presenting cells to only cells is on on ICAM-3 cells synergizes as LFA-3) cell, immunoglobulin with molecules, ICAM-1 the LFA-1. of (formerly on this CD58 on or that interaction superfamily ICAM-2 to T each CD2 antigen-presenting with two other; and bind adhesion the cell remaining known The

zones attracted in T-cell T by the the 9-3), cells context into naive Section tissues discussed specifically lymphoid As of of are above tissue secondary chemokines. lymphoid development (see and the forming chemokines recognized in cell. proteoglycans and are endothelial by matrix a on bind gradient, chemical to receptors the high naive venule T wall, The extracellular of by CCL21, T expressed dendritic stromal by the zones. is by cells lymphoid endothelial is that and cells chemokine well high cells cells reside vascular the which in T-cell as tissues, naive extravasation prompted of as The binds cells, It receptor CCR7 of stimulating on the chemokine G-protein the naive T intracellular subunit Gαi. activation receptor-associated to signaling binding 3-18). affinity intracellular resulting Section integrin of the (see The rapidly increases

Fig. enter the lymphoid tissue of LFa-1. by to blood Lymphocytes activation in 9.10 the T bind high tightly to walls the causes venules. cell endothelial the crossing This of on lymphocyte the L-selectin across endothelium. of allowing the endothelial carbohydrates to cell, on the is migration first ICaM-1 sulfated step the The to binding Fig. the neutrophil case in (see migration as of of GlyCaM-1 on hev. and sialyl-LewisX) Cd34 the (sulfated 3.31), to chemokines metalloproteinases lymphocyte Local CCL21 basement enable surface on matrix penetrate proteoglycan to on such shown) matrix a membrane. the the the as the bound lymphocyte (not on cell, receptors surface chemokine stimulate leading hev T the

T node in detail entry of a The a naive shown cell is in into Fig. lymph 9.10. rolling Initial the cell is T of surface of mediated by L-selectin. HEVs along the on surface cell CCL21 endothelial causes its HEV T to and CCR7 ICAM-1. become Recognition activated, affinity LFA-1 the increasing on of ICAM-2 the for the by of is only inflammation, ICAM-1 high tissues. secondary of whereas the endothelial endothelial constitutively lymphoid on in is the cells, of expressed expressed cells all absence on ICAM-2 of become cell–cell in they that stimulation, molecules altered organization the LFA-1 such by also areas membrane The in is chemokine contact. concentrated T-cell of enter the T tissue. lymphoid arrests which produces endothelial binding, to cell the This enables stronger on surface it and the thus

location, produce arrived via zone zone. high in that this venules, attracted T CCR7 cells retention have cells CCL21 the T-cell dendritic directs Once the CCL19 as naive and to endothelial in their in are they T-cell and lymph dendritic trapped and antigen find The peptide:MHC surfaces are cells they bind if scan it, for of the specific in the they T cells their to node. complexes, naive cells leave by are node activated they naive not T Fig. soon (see lymph If antigen, the 9.4).

a of cells T controlled by from is exit The lipid. 9-7 nodes chemotactic lymph

then lymph cells T which a the sinus sinuses, and vessel. into cortical node lead lymphatic the exit the efferent via from medullary lipid involves (Fig. lymphoid molecule sphingosine cells of egress 1-phosphate (S1P) T The secondary the from organs 9.11). G-protein-coupled This that those receptors. properties chemokines, to for receptors similar has lipid are of and chemotactic activity in signaling the S1P from to lymphoid back blood of concentration circulation. an and lymph gradient into lymphoid away draw and unactivated T S1P cells S1P expressing tissues between tissues receptor A or acts the naive the

Fig. egress lymphoid by mediated lymphocytes sphingosine 9.11 of The (S1P) gradient. tissue from is 1-phosphate a low (indicated an (s1p) gradient within forming of sphingosine lymphoid 1-phosphate with is level tissue The lymph, thereby efferent by s1p shading). compared The (s1pr1) s1p receptor s1p gradient. responsive naive to is expressed 1 T the on cells absence T-cell vessel. signaling T-cell the egress zones from In the recognition, of efferent s1pr1 into promotes lymphatic the antigen in causes upregulate by T-cell which s1pr1 retention cell zone. T activated decrease antigen-expressing and a in Cd69, dendritic the expression cells an lymph and thereby Cd69 as expression egress eventually decreases, the s1pr1 cells effector from T node. reexpress junctional of internalization expression contacts ligand-induced egress inhibits egression of by closure of s1pr1 by endothelium by enhancement by the downmodulating (not ports s1pr1-mediated shown). FTY720 on and T-cell

lymphoid receptor, expression the S1P T days. by for activated cells downregulate of the organs surface S1PR1, in antigen several by receptor protein by is is acts of internalize caused surface T-cell and surface expression This to which CD69, induced expression whose a S1PR1 loss signaling S1PR1. and cannot this cells period, organ. gradient the lymphoid the T respond not exit During do to S1P of effector of expression and gradient. of After the T-cell out S1P on to to CD69 the reappears activation allowing as response decreases surface the proliferation, S1PR1 T days wanes, migrate tissue cells, in several them lymphoid

exit for and (fingolimod). immunosuppressive by FTY720 a kind organs basis both regulation new The naive is of lymphocytes of from effector drug, of lymphoid secondary potential S1P the the lymphoid from rapid thereby to in them the lymphocytes lymphocytes circulation, by of returning tissues causing blood). lack sequestering the immune onset and in responses FTY720 lymphopenia preventing inhibits (a of becomes mimics In S1P and agonist as at an S1P phosphorylated receptors. vivo, FTY720 S1P on formation or Phosphorylated receptors, endothelial cells that by increase lymphocyte to close portals, exit junction the inhibit FTY720 tight and inactivation exit receptor. of of leading effects by may activation chronic and downregulation

initiated responses dendritic cells. activated by secondary T-cell organs are lymphoid 9-8 in

so by experiments were that wall blood body of initiation responses adaptive in Secondary immune circulation drainage. lymphatic in first the important isolated from a flap ingenious of lymphoid which organs shown but it the had no to be was skin placed do become tissue a flap response, did the not T Antigen in in itself. not the that sensitized showing infected cells elicit T-cell must tissues. transported be pathogens lymphoid Rather, to products and their antigen-presenting by in introduced into the picked bloodstream up Antigens are directly cells the spleen. a lymph vessels infecting lymphatic as the other sites, skin lymph via wound, in transported nearest are nodes and such trapped in Pathogens

Fig. are of specific node. in distributed lymph 9.13 areas the type Antigen-presenting cells by cortex T-cell cells of the the found dendritic areas. the in are throughout lymph node cells, Mature are here. cells as such present antigens many pathogens, T shown from by activators bacteria as naive of far of dendritic or strongest the viruses and can types collects the sinus, marginal where the distributed afferent but lymphoid are Macrophages via blood. lymph mainly into throughout the in in the before the the efferent medullary also the tissue, lymph through efferent node the where percolating before lymphatics passing are collects cords, and lymph concentrated are found and neutralizing soluble can toxins. to follicles in antigens the mainly such contribute B as cells

other produced receptors by can and Dendritic 3), damage, be Chapter activated response. cytokines during or (see via TLRs their cells by the tissue inflammatory pathogen-recognition addition of cells. required, migrate that cells lymph the dendritic for naive the molecules the Activated in node co-stimulatory activation express antigen, and to T to are effector and lymphocytes tissues, naive that to divide the cells reenter lymphoid T these antigen into circulation. antigen-specific the mature dendritic and cells present prime In T to cells

cells. tissues pathogen-recognition in receptors antigen-presenting as co-stimulatory in are most tissue, tissue, are found lymphoid cells, including lymphoid express and Macrophages, act by B which be and activated located primarily which molecules can to similarly dendritic and B node in The Fig. shown cells, is in distribution of a macrophages, cells schematically lymph 9.13. T efficiently only cell Only express the they molecules cells, to and activate when context infection. in express three molecules these of activated these co-stimulatory types required T-cell cells However, ways. responses distinct activate these in the where T from and into are process, cells present and drive present of cells. of differentiation sources, cells and take the naive initial types expansion areas they antigens in effector all Dendritic up, T clonal mainly T-cell already respectively; with T and soluble macrophages processing cells pathogens, B dendritic contrast, interact they mainly and By cells in and functions cells. antigens antigens to from recruit of CD4 intracellular primed by effector T cells those presenting specialize helper

of array from a 9-9 pathogens. cells process antigens Dendritic wide

Fig. arise marrow (see cells the progenitors Dendritic bone myeloid from primarily within 1.3). throughout from marrow blood lymphoid via to organs. bone body, the emerge migrate to tissues They the secondary to directly or the classes two There are dendritic cells, (Fig. cells: cells dendritic conventional major of and dendritic plasmacytoid 9.14). distinguish and in factors interferon-producing subset-specific dendritic two and the the of The these markers functions classes, transcription cell-surface innate cells plasmacytoid that

Fig. cells the dendritic response. immune plasmacytoid have different in roles 9.14 and Conventional cells. activation naive (left panel) primarily conventional dendritic Mature are the concerned cells with T of of are dendritic and cells, There subsets mature but express molecules priming efficiently, all when and they co-stimulatory MhC they several antigen T these conventional naive process for cells. proteins are cell-surface The proteins in expressed cell are text. by dendritic described the the mature including have shown Immature dendritic (TLrs). molecules of but surface most pathogen recognize numerous molecules, here the cell-surface lack Toll-like of many receptors receptors the cells that of plasmacytoid class panel) are interferons. viral dendritic sentinels large primarily amounts infections, (right for and secrete cells I viral of cells, is intracellular but priming TLr-9 the and for efficient cell express sensing in This they receptors less TLr-7 T naive infections. dendritic category

discussed immune in response, 3. are Chapter in to focus activating In naive we and on dendritic this response— cells T immune conventional adaptive shall of role antigens the chapter presenting the cells.

abundant dendritic epithelia. and where Conventional sites, tissue are lung, intestines, as at barrier skin, such cells contact in are surface the close with they the solid such most are organs present heart They as also in kidneys. and cells absence molecules, injury, and low infection levels co-stimulatory to of T yet so of tissue naive or have the In not dendritic are cells. equipped stimulate Dectin-1. recognize 205, by complexes), using the dendritic phagocytosis antigen:antibody DEC (which in macrophages, the cells include and receptors antibodies carbohydrates of antigens which and very in complement langerin, ingesting are dendritic receptors regions recognize C-type receptor, mannose active cells and Fc lectins, and Like constant on macropinocytosis, volumes process large extracellular of are Other engulfed. are which of the in up fluid antigens by nonspecifically surrounding taken microbes can that with such to In be by thick escape way receptors, this polysaccharide evolved ingested. capsules, recognition strategies bacteria as phagocytic have bacteria microbe, (Fig. fungi, any virtually cells for antigens dendritic parasites, to from of antigen and type versatility uptake present pathways enables viruses, in including The 9.15). MHC molecules on and processed Uptake Chapter into cells. they T recognition extracellular endocytic the II these pathways them (see presented where by are pathway, 6) class antigens of for directs CD4 by

example, when cells of A the route antigen through directly for infection. cytosol, handling antigen viral dendritic enters second occurs by susceptible some entry by molecules binding that by Dendritic as directly cells enter receptors. to cytoplasm to which are the infection act cell-surface viruses, as presented the type Chapter dendritic proteasome 6). processed onto after reticulum, cell endoplasmic peptides cytoplasm in as virus-infected into and of surface Viral MHC class molecules transport the cells (see the on in I other synthesized any are proteins in the loaded cell of antigen T activate then cells to CD8 enables cytotoxic differentiate CD8 any and and kill present cells, recognize virus-infected cells into to cell. This naive which effector that dendritic T

Fig. (third 9.15 dendritic take can by to presentation cells T which Cd8 different panel). cells routes The up, antigens. protein It for possible, process, present is however, and for major delivery presentation (fourth molecules either presentation phagocytosis to class be I antigens into cytosol pathway for a delivered endocytic II cells, by process for macropinocytosis, for eventual be system, to cross-presentation route considered peptides T receptor-mediated taken uptake called of to exogenous by Cd8 class endocytic MhC the antigens or into to molecules panel). is delivering to MhC the the to the into panels). Cd4 it antigens cells seems T Finally, transmitted be that two (first from can although viral Cd8 route cells, details of to example, this the dendritic thought a (fifth cytosol, presentation to particularly T one in for is are result for to infection, production another, of the panel). be the still of cell unclear as antigens for peptides I class delivering for to molecules major MhC route

phagocytosis molecules. particles can of pathway virus I extracellular of presentation class result macropinocytosis by in endocytic cells or virus-infected also peptides viral or the the MHC on Uptake into an phenomenon, is the is for to as discussed antigen pathway 6-5. known This usual MHC I processing cytosolic cross-presentation, class in alternative and Section vesicles cells the onto or diverted may for Here, MHC the for molecules. that cytosol proteasomal transferred be endocytic reticulum to viral class enter degradation I endoplasmic phagocytic to antigens dendritic and loading via T do stimulate The activation cells viruses result not cells. directly can that CD8 dendritic of that infect the is stimulating pathogens T-cell (see is a intracellular most 6-5). is that specialized responses Section by Cross-presentation of performed for dendritic subset cells to conventional efficiently effector cytotoxic directly not. virus infection Any whether cells or the can infect dendritic lead therefore viral cells, CD8 of can T generation the to dendritic the stimulate produce antiviral MHC II enhance In addition, on to class production T of B of which the and naive antibodies presented immune CD4 the activate leads the T cell’s peptides response. CD4 by cells, cells effector production cells molecules that viral that cytokines

to to In herpes migrate cells finally influenza same cells. not dendritic antigen tissues lymph present infections simplex the nodes viruses, T the cells peripheral that cases, or naive from the be with as that may some such simplex it skin dendritic (Fig. to draining for lymph the the infection, cells in transport residing herpes nodes capture In antigen and example, 9.16). dendritic the CD8 T in transferred dendritic resident this cells dominant CD8α-positive which some responsible antigen for is naive There, to are infection. priming cells cells,

Fig. and activity. the no have longer mature foreign that differentiate antigen co-stimulatory to Langerhans skin, in peripheral cells dendritic antigen but 9.16 organs, take the can present lymphoid into cells up ingest migrate T prime cells. can to both antigens now they and Cd4 type T of Langerhans are one Cd8 cells naive (yellow) cells. epidermis. case that dendritic for of immature resides the In in some infections, viral cell the seem the antigen (first ingest herpes site simplex cells dendritic virus, dendritic in panel). arriving various resident but to with no transfer of some co-stimulatory infection able They have activity from antigen to ways example, (second panel) antigen lymph (third take of up the the of panel). they presentation cells nodes to lymph then (orange) locally presence for nodes in the migrate In and infection, (fourth to class T cells Cd8 panel). There naive I antigens they MhC-restricted

be cross-present presented means the have dendritic can still can TLRs this but been infect cells and via from that rapidly dendritic viruses up This kill cells and by that dendritic material. take cells dying their of activated transfer uninfected that antigens type

lymphoid to processing. antigen and cells migration their enhances induces organs

A of dendritic cell the is the induction activation adaptive critical in immunity maturation. step of through phagocytic by and recognition responses When an to activate cells (Fig. such of macropinocytosis, receptors or then as infection TLRs dendritic pattern pathogens capture occurs, pathogens means these receptors 9.17, top panel). Multiple detecting of to on of the expressed and various are in thought dendritic Fig. of the the are signaling pathogens members and involved family classes TLR presence be cells tissue (see 3.16). In is, TLR-9, by cells other a humans, expressed TLR-1 and however, along with TLRs express except and plasmacytoid for TLRs which dendritic conventional lesser to known cells dendritic degree. TLR-7, all cells Chapter addition in to by receptors recognition the take also several 3, receptors up phagocytic dendritic of provide used pattern the to maturation In signals. pathogens described which (see which binds cell mannose Fig. the lectin fungal of on glucans Examples range in Dectin-1, wide fucose and recognizes walls present residues a found pathogens; β-1,3-linked include and DC-SIGN, 3.2). receptors the as such for complement, that dendritic well phagocytosis. receptors bind activation cell to receptors receptor, as such may to Other can pathogens, or as mannose as phagocytic contribute

their secondary dendritic lymphoid TLR in significant migration into a receptors in facilitates cells, the by tissues. which expressed signaling results alteration chemokine the as embarked This differentiation the them licensing, that of on will enable are program called to change in is dendritic cells cell now activate often T cells. behavior activated chemokine sensitive the CCL21 signaling TLR and which and of local lymphoid through the CCR7, receptor lymphoid expression makes their tissue induces induces into lymphatics the dendritic produced by the to tissues. cells the migration Whereas T-cell to marginal the cells dendritic from blood must lymphatics T-cell zones, reach cells the wall cross into via the T sinus. high zones of venules and entering the the endothelial afferent the migrate leave directly

the tissues, into they entry. enter progenitors can direct tissues, blood, including from from bone peripheral and they which most cells make migrate dendritic lymphoid marrow via originate populate and which the here, CCr6, express: CCr1, for CXCr1, to simplicity). receptors shown tissues on they and CCr5, particular entry (not is CCr2, based chemokine particular all CXCr2 cells as are actively but express highly and dC-sIGn, via molecules. macropinocytic, such dendritic co-stimulatory 205, langerin, Tissue-resident do and not dectin-1, deC they phagocytic receptors are text). most the They the of different see carry Toll-like types of (TLrs; receptors panel). TLrs dendritic pathogens, at infection, their of of (top sites are leading exposed activation cells to to dendritic induction activated the of cells the CCr7 (second TLr become causes panel). (‘licensed’), chemokine involves to receptor signaling which antigens phagosomes. up the of taken TLr processing signaling also increases into dendritic lymphoid panel). direct and are cells CCL21, to CCr7 draining sensitive (third CCL19 expressing to them the which tissue B7 molecules. of maturation co-stimulatory higher CCL19 which result in provide and MhC levels CCL21 and signals, further molecules time the draining are have arrive conventional no they activators longer T of lymph cells but By naive the powerful in become node, cells phagocytic. dendritic II (bottom molecules class MhC class as of ICaM-2, levels as high well panel). high LFa-1, levels and adhesion molecules, and the B7.2, B7.1, and Cd58 of I They ICaM-1, express

antigen-presenting (see induces CCR7 function signaling of into lymphoid also dendritic cells it Fig. their the but tissue, contributes not CCL21 enhanced only to migration through third 9.17, panel). activated by longer able By no to phagocytosis they or dendritic tissues, antigens are within the cells macropinocytosis. arrive lymphoid engulf time levels instead molecules, class long-lived class and stably them II already high enable which I pathogens very present They of taken express from MHC to and up processed. peptides MHC levels equal express their they importance, molecules of on surface. co-stimulatory Of high on with B7.2 two and naive (CD80) receptors which molecules: deliver Section (CD86), There main are (see glycoproteins by structurally co-stimulatory cells transmembrane related T signals B7.1 the co-stimulatory interacting 7-21). express levels CCL19, high secrete Activated molecules, attracts including dendritic DC-SIGN, cells the and adhesion chemokine which naive they T specifically also of cells. very the properties cell dendritic stimulate in responses these naive to cells strong enable Together, Fig. (see T bottom panel). 9.17,

enhanced problem of presentation cells present a dendritic antigens, the some peptides, self activated maintenance for Despite could also which of their present self-tolerance. pathogen-derived The Chapter that receptors avoided. 8), been however, of responses peptides self antigens (see in the presented most has, thymus repertoire are receptor recognize ubiquitous self purged so against that T-cell T-cell proteins bear tissue their lymphoid infection their on fluid. addition, in cells by In breakdown have surface, in the that will self-peptide:MHC from own extracellular derived complexes present tissues activated the of and proteins the not dendritic been these Because the naive appropriate do activated however, cells. as not have not cells cells express dendritic same do co-stimulatory molecules, to the they capacity do T activate naive by are in regulation alternative activation. rather immune node-resident, the peptides immune the or than T still activation of induce may Although cells program lymph of cells details self an that favors unclear, ‘unlicensed,’ dendritic presentation

other pathogens pathogen dendritic reveals of that activation. degradation trigger Intracellular cell than peptides components viral in DNA the containing activation the as dendritic induces motifs recognition or cells (see Fig. of unmethylated vesicles rapid CpG of present is by which intracellular plasmacytoid For bacterial consequence DNA TLR-9, dinucleotide of a example, 3.10). to protein pathways kinase Exposure DNA unmethylated signaling and mitogen-activated (MAPK) NFκB (see activates Figs. such and leading cells. the cytokines (IFN)-α IL-18, IL-6, IL-12, to by 7.19–7.21), and pro-inflammatory as production of interferon IFN-β dendritic cytokines dendritic these expression augment act to of molecules. turn, themselves co-stimulatory In the the on cells the of can Heat-shock are cells. internal that bacterial constituent function proteins antigen-presenting another activate dendritic TLRs are viruses Similarly, cell replication. dendritic during recognized double-stranded some via by produced RNA viral the inside

believed microbial of system antigen-presenting to by associated by infectious with self in is activity including agents borne constituents immune induction innocuous antigens allow from cells proteins, the co-stimulatory proteins. antigens to distinguish common The co-stimulatory on cells. injected foreign response many when an proteins fail Indeed, immune own induce their in do to because antigen-presenting activity not they induce the however, When antigens induce bacteria, protein mixed become are because the they essential co-stimulatory activity ingest such with immunogenic, protein. that cells bacteria in the in Section bacterial or (see Bacteria Appendix used I, components known A-1). this are way adjuvants as discrimination see can will proteins the mixed in 15 regulation importance in co-stimulatory the from disease, of Chapter induce nonself. autoimmune illustrating adjuvants the We bacterial how self with activity crucial self of of

may for presentation act interferons antigen conventional and dendritic helper cells by as cells.

Plasmacytoid I of defense interferons their of and the viral helicases, cells act type Sections on dendritic production antiviral to acid-sensing high the as against TLRs their early (see of are and infection 3-10 and sentinels RIG-I-like thought basis nucleic in intracellular 3-22). expression antigen-specific activation not reasons, thought several are a For cells. in in the involved way to of major they T naive be co-stimulatory MHC fewer class Plasmacytoid and II conventional cells. surface, they their than molecules dendritic on process efficiently dendritic less and cells express antigens after In dendritic synthesis plasmacytoid recycling not unlike dendritic addition, of being do class conventional cease activated. and cells, the MHC II molecules cells conventional pathogen-derived cells cannot for II recycle complexes dendritic cells molecules extended do. and to surface present as that rapidly MHC so peptide:MHC their means they T periods, This

however, dendritic cells. antigen helper by for as act dendritic conventional presentation Plasmacytoid cells may, cells mice studies activity with bacterium the by monocytogenes. was infected This intracellular revealed Listeria in macrophages induces bacteria. dendritic T produce to which the cells IL-12 kill IFN-γ, conventional abundant Normally, helps cells by CD4 made experimentally mice by were production When dendritic cells IL-12 conventional decreased, eliminated, the susceptible plasmacytoid and Listeria. became dendritic cells to cells to interact production. cells conventional It that dendritic dendritic appears with IL-12 sustain plasmacytoid expression dendritic CD154), which of cells CD40, through dendritic cells. of a TNF-family conventional that expressed by induces receptor transmembrane to cytokine, a ligand (CD40L the plasmacytoid binds TNF-family Activation or CD40 activated is TLR-9 dendritic sustain production the cytokine cells. production to of This IL-12, by cells interaction IL-12-induced IFN-γ the strengthening conventional pro-inflammatory T of enables in although dendritic amounts than do. Plasmacytoid IL-12 also can conventional smaller cells cells produce themselves, dendritic

present naive to be antigens T 9-12 by pathogens that scavenger cells. are induced Macrophages to foreign cells can

two that can cells is other to there B of and presentation important that as an The dendritic of antigen-presenting although act function antigen cells. distinction these cell cells between are and cells, cells the T macrophages types by that cells. T antigen is present activate naive and cells B It unlikely macrophages to or antigen present that enhance these as recruit already have cells signals conventional to to dendritic provide been by their a that, cells of cells turn, functions the to ‘helper,’ effector cells T effector, primed functions. Rather, T own in means B cells their bound to effector into peptides antigen this immunoglobulin elicit present from immunoglobulin-secreting derived In help by are in antigen order differentiate cells. surface receptor from to cells that naive that to activated way, T body as of the against innate many elimination infection, phagocytes. an and that such phagocytes, properties mechanisms defense immunity, innate, And, 3, have while by provide avoid resisting microorganisms destroyed line engulfed of we learned killing as Chapter in to the some antigen-nonspecific pathogens by enter are first developed which have antigen but as failed presentation response to use the their recruit to we immune them will Chapter 11. discuss ingested that enhance Macrophages can in destroy microorganisms have adaptive further microbicidal activities, to

not macrophages class B7. have surface few Resting and no II express molecules MHC on do or their their the of class molecules by recognition B7 MHC induced is of both (MAMPs). II and The ingestion molecular patterns of and microbe-associated expression microorganisms recognition (see a components microbial 3). Macrophages, that of Chapter have surface variety receptors pattern like dendritic recognize cells, of for class via intracellular complement they B7. microorganisms take up are peptides that and presentation, where molecules as to recognition pathogen TLRs degraded phagosomes, such and to II receptors, scavenger into the MHC while receptors Receptors contributes triggers components produce Dectin-1, signaling expression of dendritic pathogens. traffic conventional when unlike nonmigratory; do by lymphoid tissue-resident cells, they However, zones of activated generally to tissues not T-cell are macrophages amplifying dendritic responses for that initiated by molecules increased already important thus cells. co-stimulatory class T-cell is of macrophages likely It by activated expression and locally molecules MHC is II more and appears be important T for of This maintenance the or that site infection. enter a cells to effector functioning of memory

residing in addition lymphoid found in Fig. (see to macrophages In organs tissues, are 9.13). many the blood. lymph including into and cords, lymphoid tissue, the efferent present collects afferent of node, They lymph the areas in before medullary the are where the marginal sinus, the in the lymph flowing where enters are and largely zones are sequestered T-cell of activators inefficient naive they cells. from T However, them the appears of entering main to antigens tissues be and function their from Rather, in to microbes blood. prevent ingestion the lymphoid particulate scavengers of are also apoptotic They lymphocytes. important

are that particularly or cells. of cells, dying also Macrophages not they T other self is should activate dead sites scavenge in continuously naive rich antigens, which so it important sources blood The daily. liver cells macrophages of Kupffer splenic numbers the the remove cells in pulp, of dying sinusoids the red particular, large from of and the bacterial class no cells the MHC receptor that Kupffer and of LPS. TLR-4, express II the signals little presence self they amounts immune in endosomes, peptides Thus, not elicit are macrophages large response. generate to an although likely of their these

cells efficient antigens 9-13 that to B their bind are at highly immunoglobulin. surface presenting

which to B antigen-binding are by (BCR), internalizing the through highly is the component soluble B-cell uniquely their IgM, which receptor-mediated efficient bound at endocytosis. adapted antigenic is receptor, or specific receptor membrane-bound molecules cells membrane-associated molecules of bind If component, will internalized the and antigen protein as the B process the peptide contains fragments fragments a display then protein cell to complexes. II class peptide:MHC the able cells. antigen cells present low concentrations mechanism to even and T Through of to this take B up are specific levels peptide:MHC levels of surface the so and B-cell specific B express also molecules, high (Fig. constitutively II of class cells appear on class MHC complexes high II 9.18). the Chapter cell presentation B activated allows antigen previously with will cell this antibody-producing mechanism as that signals an by the specifically drive cell to differentiation As has B CD4 receive to pathway the into 10, same see T a to T in interact from the cell's of a antigen cell. we been

but, molecules. co-stimulatory be can B7 and constituents cells with molecules, they not various by constitutively cells do to induced as express B dendritic microbial express macrophages, B7.1 a as In and protein expressed was by is B on fact, LPS, B by first activated vivo. cells cells predominantly in identified B7.2 as act not most to toxins present protein surfaces at solution. and only abundant are concentrations so infections; many by in such and are particulate, bacteria viruses, are Soluble antigens, cell bacterial and during antigens low soluble binding natural venoms, snake anticoagulants body examples the toxins, immunogens many soluble however; molecules, bacterial by blood-sucking and natural Some allergens. insects, enter injected are as responses. T it to B natural important Nevertheless, are that soluble in naive is immune cells in cells priming unlikely antigens soluble they are limited encounter with B do, a more antigens dendritic by Tissue extremely antigen-specific cells and concentrate can as to of these naive than antigen-specific cells appropriate antigen specificity the up macropinocytosis, cell cells T although likely dendritic number B are cannot cells. take antigens the once a encountering increased recognize antigen cell peptide dendritic of expansion. chances clonal greatly The displays been lymphoid a surface and on naive detained T that a has it its B tissue cell a undergone the are cell can cell by the finding of antigens T in has

antigen by internalized endocytosis High at speciÿc B-cell receptor-mediated is Speciÿc are surface of antigen density the efÿciently fragments presented

Fig. very antigen to to their surface present cells. efficiently T immunoglobulin B specific cells 9.18 can use

of Fig. The types three in antigen-presenting compared cells are 9.19. co-stimulatory types is the to against pathogens against self. controlled immunization while responses provoke In as expression of these of each cell activity avoiding so

bind cells soluble specific is as antigen protein, allows to internalize B are. especially surface efficiently, a immunoglobulin most as present if very toxins and the antigen where in binds molecules. it intracellular II vesicles, is MhC class internalized The processed to antigen to the class vesicles where transported recognized surface, are be complexes can foreign-peptide:MhC The by the cell cells. II T a fragments only antigen are receptor, presented internalization such B-cell inefficient the the few specific B-cell surface is of is subsequently at for When shown). and the protein (not not its proteins

Fig. properties of cells. various the antigen-presenting 9.19 The of cells, presentation involved are cells types dendritic main cell the to cells. the and in T B antigens macrophages, foreign of they class locations the of effectively, means (not expression, in molecules type in their antigen their body, and the These vary co-stimulator cells adhesion antigen present MhC uptake, surface their shown). expression, II by antigen expansion naive in cells cells activating is involved dendritic presentation primarily and for differentiation. T Macrophages primarily surface from of antigen B molecules. cells or present specific in effector to form help cytokines cells and receive the T

Summary.

response antigen-presenting organs. lymphoid generated secondary An in cells is T when immune adaptive naive contact the cells activated that tissues specialized facilitates circulating lymphocytes architecture These between their have and antigens. interaction target a efficient of by and the organs are their and (TNFRs). the controlled lymphoid receptors TNF formation proteins family of The organization peripheral which embryo lymph Lymphoid the (LTi) chemokine nodes and the tissue of inducer production, expressing in induce patches. expressing with Peyer’s in receptor cells stromal the formation cells to turn interact LT-β lymphotoxin-β developing (LT-β) initiates the of lymphotoxin-expressing interactions cells lymph architecture the normal establish Similar nodes. dendritic follicular (FDCs) and TNFR-Iexpressing between B spleen cells and tissue distinct lymphoid chemokines. are into cells T by areas partitioned B within and specific

rare brought survey by through cells effectively ensure antigen-presenting recirculate tissue the can and antigen-presenting To sample continuously organs antigens that many antigen-specific for T pathogen-bearing body lymphoid cells thus in from cells, sites. different cells the T of stromal tissues into CCR7, HEVs. CCL21 specialized which displayed is chemokine lymphoid in is secondary by cells is and migration guided binds T-cell on of The the by T produced of cells endothelium zones that lymphoid the organs receptor naive the configuration cells endothelial the switch endothelium. rolling LFA-1 surfaces where expressed cells ICAM-1 the affinity along L-selectin a for CCL21 expressed induces contact of in integrin the to T expressed on specialized with T the by venules, by high their initiates venule naive with a diapedesis, the T the into adhesion, T-cell and zone. initiates migration cells This of strong main there dendritic There, naive cells, and are of cells plasmacytoid cells, dendritic T dendritic two populations: antigen-bearing meet which cells. conventional cells. secondary cells survey and the responsible pathogens for T continuously Conventional naive invading tissues activating cells for are dendritic dendritic to accelerate via delivers of and for-eign-peptide:self the that other cells TLRs receptors antigen Contact processing MHC with production pathogens signals dendritic complexes. and T-cell T which induces encounter expression cells, to CCR7 naive directs and also by lymphoid signaling organs, of of cells. TLR they activate their zones migration where secondary dendritic

or pathogens can particulate T soluble to cells peptide:MHC to and also antigens Macrophages complexes process presented B from as cells. be naive cells to to is and B enables mediated antigen cells. recruit T antigen-specific activated types dendritic uniquely of antigen However, cells, cells presentation cell the the by presentation latter activities T macrophages whereas effector by previously two help IFN-γ-producing 11, ingested macrophages discussed recruit these For antigens presenting as Chapter augment pathogens. cells to killing example, of in by T from of intracellular their pathogens, CD4 from class cells switching, to Chapter 10. topic stimulate Presentation T by recruits antibody and production help of cells antigens in B discussed further a in the in all innate to of also In function that activated co-stimulatory is response from the molecules receptors three signal presence types expression signals infectious antigen-presenting agents. to cells, immunity of of

by dendritic Priming T of cells naive cells. pathogen-activated

are when T-cell peptide:MHC appropriate mature T naive or a CD4 an encounters antigen-presenting initiated cell CD8 responses displaying cell activated ligand. the cells will cells. generation now of the naive T from effector We describe T called on and the often memory T target to The priming, is of antigen effector naive subsequent cells responses to encounters primed cells, T distinct from from and T cells, of the same responses activation of with differentiation the antigen. their cells later killing T naive of directly pathogen-infected T CD8 of cytotoxic cells cells. generates Priming capable cells a priming. the depending of effector types array CD4 signals nature they the into diverse cells on cell during of develop receive more it which of cytokines, include set more involves the pathogen-specific direct response. frequently can of activity but CD4 a toward target secretion cells cytotoxicity, also a effector

antigen-presenting of cells T Cell-adhesion the with interaction initial cells. mediate naive 9-14 molecules

cortical lymph of to As naive bind antigen-presenting region node, migrate cells the that the T they encounter. cell they through transiently each and the LFA-1 T cells (Fig. through efficiently Activated cells bind between dendritic interactions CD2 cell naive very cell CD58 on and ICAM-1, and ICAM-2, on T the dendritic 9.20). this role of molecule distinguish. of been adhesion each difficult the synergy, has because to Perhaps precise normal the true in responses, and function engineered redundancy can lacking seems T-cell these this suggesting CD2, to for People substantial of molecules. have also LFA-1 genetically be lacking mice

molecules peptide. of its binding cognate cells T numbers of antigenic sample crucial naive cells is for the for to a T The MHC antigen-presenting time to presence large transient of in providing cell ICAM-1 ligand, its cell its cases induces LFA-1 through greatly In recognizes a a that rare for and T-cell signaling affinity in change ICAM-2. receptor in T those increases the which naive conformational peptide:MHC that of (see during secondary 9-6). naive organ cells is T migration the CCR7 change the through as conformational lymphoid into induced same signaling Section by This a the association change LFA-1 stabilizes the T the (Fig. antigen-presenting cell cell antigen-specific The in and between 9.21). cell, persist its can for association progeny, adhere also The which the cell time T can cells. the T several differentiate proliferates antigen-presenting and to effector days, into during naive which

antigen. T the cells an do with recognition encounters in Most of of result antigen-presenting however, cells not, the the the exiting circulating. able separate to cell tissue, from In the through it continue antigen-presenting blood to to so T can and eventually reenter case, must efficiently lymphoid migrate cell this that be continue the is mechanism. also binding, Dissociation, stable cells, but antigen-presenting of involve signaling like between may T the its known cell little and

afÿnity binding change LFA-1 and Subsequent T-cell Conformational prolongs signals of cell–cell LFA-1 increases contact receptors in

Fig. 9.21 specific Transient and between T stabilized antigen-presenting antigen by cells interactions recognition. cells are adhesive

Fig. in 9.20 interactions lymphocytes of antigen-presenting cells. with important molecules superfamily the of are Cell-surface immunoglobulin the to ICaM-1 initial Cd2 and LFa-1 synergizes the binding the ICaM-2. In encounter cells, on antigen-presenting with cell antigen-presenting T Cd58 to binding of cells with LFa-1 integrin the is Cd11a:Cd18. αL:β2 heterodimer ICaM-2 ICaM-1 respectively. as Cd54 also known and are and Cd102,

XX.X MOVIE

cell, cell. T to that higher through causes on ligand LFa-1 induces it T-cell in with When a to intracellular on the a an receptor specific change cell affinity signaling bind binds (TCr) antigen-presenting ICaMs to conformational antigen-presenting the its Cd4 shown T cell The T here a is cell.

and on resting chains T γ cells, expressed are β constitutively. the affinity. They moderate IL-2 with bind the of receptor. activation formation cells synthesis chain the of the α and T induces the of high-affinity heterotrimeric similarities chains γ for sequence and in which to receptors of each cell-surface The regulates show differentiation. amino acid growth cell prolactin, hormone and also and growth β

Fig. by T are activation cells. signals antigen-presenting kinds in Three 9.22 of of cells involved naive has antigen by signal Cd4 this co-receptor encountered. T-cell in the T and, the of complex the MhC (arrow 1) receptor that a been to Binding cell foreign-peptide:self a transmits example, cells (apC). the signal, of by a T to same be (arrow requires the effective co-stimulatory naive signal antigen-presenting cell second 2), activation delivered In encountering example, cell molecules has T the 2, increased effect proliferation cell the and net this received on B7 the the delivers is whose T cell of on signal signal that Cd28 survival 1. antigen-presenting members and co-stimulatory may provide various signals. family of receptor also TnF the ICos effector on out differentiation that carry the third of cells responses, T signal nature by T the For subsets cell. produce (arrow depending in different particular, delivered a pathways effector different of of antigen-presenting cells 3) Cd4 differentiation. directing commonly, not this but are Cytokines exclusively, involved in

T signals differentiation and cells multiple for clonal expansion cells. Antigen-presenting deliver 9-15 naive the of

types discussing activation three T is it the different of signals at to of When (Fig. naive cells, least useful consider 9.22). interaction The peptide:MHC generated specific complex a receptor. first from T-cell of the is with the signal cell. of T-cell activating specific essential a with is T receptor the peptide antigen Engagement for its naive does on and the own, not, the T effector proliferate fully However, cells. cell or even also this if T stimulate to into CD8—is its differentiate co-receptor—CD4 ligated, of T-cell least the the one Expansion and that promote of kinds co-stimulatory and cells, that involve of signals signals: cytokines cells. of other the of two direct naive T T differentiation effector T subsets cells differentiation at into expansion different survival and differentiation T Notch naive effector the to although than these ligands, cells, of appear be of Additional contribute of as those cytokines. signals, can lineage-specifying lesser such importance signals to

The are molecules. the co-stimulatory B7 best-characterized molecules as (see found exclusively cells, naive cells, These the T-cell immunoglobulin 9-8). members such of on stimulate that homodimeric superfamily of are the dendritic Section proliferation surfaces cell is T a of B7 the on 7-21). The superfamily Section (see CD28, immunoglobulin receptor molecules the for member B7 optimal B7 clonal Ligation to is the of experimental responses. by of of or expansion been inhibit CD28 molecules CD28 the molecules necessary has T molecules B7 of binding shown of for T-cell cells; blockade naive to deficiency targeted

activated co-stimulation 9-16 of and cells high-affinity expression the CD28-dependent receptor. interleukin-2 T of induces IL-2

cells synthesize little are T found cells and small RNA cytoplasm, condensed scanty or as chromatin protein. resting they with Naive and as produce rapidly cycle divide numbers the progeny reenter and On cell large of to they undergo antigen-driven activation, differentiation. they Unlike can effector T produce effector when cells, which cells depending naive (IL-2) interleukin-2 cytokines diversity primarily phenotype, produce activated. the of mature a T on on in for vitro of required T long cells. was be the thought proliferation naive IL-2 to Based studies, is might IL-2 IL-2 can T-cell studies of However, proliferation indicate that important. in while it more be in cases many other functions and survival, augment and dispensable vivo the their regulatory activated. T is particular, In maintenance do IL-2 own which for essential produce IL-2 not cells, when of primary in appears affect be a effector memory also response in and IL-2 of balance as that discussed develop T antigen, 11. will cells the to to Chapter

presence the of with initial encounter of the also same of antigen induces of at a as synthesis IL-2 known the phase the The time, receptor triggers the the chain G1 specific the the it co-stimulatory cell signal T α of with (also along cycle; into cell IL-2 in entry CD25). three is of The IL-2 receptor α, composed and chains: β, γ (Fig. 9.23). activation, moderate γ to T composed IL-2 form only the which of a affinity βand for Prior binding. only of receptor has cells naive the chains, express naive hours of expression T upregulate Within cells activation, CD25. of the IL-2. of respond for Association the allowing low higher concentrations very γ the βand with receptor of to a a creates heterodimer IL-2, to CD25 T affinity cell with much

cells T to naive contrast T express constitutively T, In , or cells, regulatory

CD25, the the thus of Fig. (see receptor high-affinity, form IL-2 9.23). and trimeric available form As cells quantities the receptor, it receptor high-affinity of in of cells only later is T are IL-2 form the IL-2 the 9-23), binding limited can discussed low-affinity that express Section of for the that T to that the outcompete antigen. expressing early thought of is response (see by the to to In limit T way, a act cells. its for ‘sink’ this IL-2 as cells availability other

have of receptor T upregulated CD25, the cells binding naive T for However, form and with high-affinity compete activated they IL-2. once cells by activated IL-2 differentiation, triggers signaling supports that T proliferation their The and enhance ing bind- of activation cells and (Fig. can naive these their 9.24). to that the progeny a T allowing day one all days, cell clonal to rise in of can four give same cells bear thousands for divide to several precursor up way receptor. times this activated antigenic

induces Antigen activation of factors receptor NFAT, gene cells or synthesis in which (see Sections 7-14 recognition and the naive bind activate 7-16). to NFκB, IL-2 its the T and the region transcription promoter the transcription to T-cell of AP-1, the by three production contributes at Co-stimulation least CD28 in IL-2 through the ways. of to PI thereby IL-2 NFκB which factors, and signaling AP-1 activates the First, transcription 3-kinase, CD28 mRNA. transcription the increasing production of of increases region. the However, IL-2, of including the mRNAs short-lived 3' sequence are in untranslated cytokines, because ‘instability’ an many very (AUUUAUUUA) of proteins IL-2 lifetime sequence, and inducing protein. the IL-2 in an molecule resulting signaling more mRNA instability the expression increased activity block of that of by of prolongs CD28 the translation the total kinase IL-2 protein (see the Finally, 3-kinase the T Akt cells. activate helps generally which production Section increasing activated growth 7-17), PI of and cell survival, by promotes

pathways in involved are T-cell 9-17 Additional co-stimulatory activation.

activated, sustaining proteins number or naive modifying it a a Once is signal. that of CD28 to T to in the expresses co-stimulatory addition cell contribute other either belong TNF receptor or receptors CD28 co-stimulatory family. to the generally These the

proteins expressed T-cell develops. as and activated modify co-stimulatory response are the T signal on CD28-related the cells B7.2. protein of co-stimulator or structural which known the ligand, as B7.1 binds is a such inducible (ICOS ICOSL and (ICOS), B7-H2), relative One ligand a is dendritic produced ICOSL monocytes, on cells. B and cells, activated CD4 such does CD28 T-cell as IFN-γ, induce not Although driving IL-4 regulate seems cytokines, T-cell resembles subsets. proliferation, to other and by it IL-2 the of ICOS made but expression in ICOS switching. function B-cell cells for T helper is cells CD4 isotype such as responses enabling to for as particularly important within ICOS develop expressed cells severely T centers fail responses. ICOS diminished on germinal to in have mice lymphoid centers follicles, antibody is and and lacking germinal

B7 receptor CTLA-4 CD28. is Another sequence related (CD152), for which is molecules in to molecules B7 avidly 20 about times more binds CTLA-4

Fig. cells and Activated T to IL-2. respond secrete 9.24 expression expression the receptors. IL-2 and IL-2 of induces the of of high-affinity and naive activation cells T secretion enhance the IL-2 to growth IL-2 differentiation. to and T-cell binds high-affinity receptors

delivers CD4 cell cells cell and inhibitory activated binds CTLA-4 signals avidly antigen-presenting II T + T CD28 TCRCTLA-4 MHC to activated B7.1 does B7 than class more

Fig. receptor for inhibitory CTLA-4 B7 is molecules. 9.25 an signal express molecules Fig. binding co-stimulatory cells B7 (see which a Cd28, naive delivers on T cells. the driving expansion 9.22), survival thereby the T and of of and of the express has cells T which or than B7 thus all molecules activated CTLa-4 higher a Cd28 affinity levels most (Cd152), binds B7 for increased molecules. serves response. thereby CTLa-4 regulate the to the T-cell of proliferative phase

activate, but rather inhibit, than its than the cell effect is 9.25). CD28, T to (Fig. B7 with with and molecules suggested CD28 motif, an does by activation cells. expressed to T-cell ITIM for it antigen-presenting is by not interaction inhibit CTLA-4 competing contain cell, to naive of expression induces less cells making the of T stimulation activated antigen-presenting CTLA-4, restricting Activation production. T by cells than cells naive the T sensitive surface thereby IL-2 to limiting cells molecules the B7 CTLA-4 is to for of Thus, of binding essential and activated response antigen T B7. proliferative with mice by confirmed a fatal of a a producing CTLA-4 such was by characterized disrupted mice disorder lymphocytes. massive gene; This overgrowth develop immune responses. T to molecules increase binding B7 cell-dependent CTLA-4 from markedly block that Antibodies

co-stimulatory TNF-family molecules also Several signals. deliver (see a Section through NFκB to by 7-23). seem all function TRAF-dependent pathway activating These co-stimulatory signal in to cells on of the dendritic receptor T to on naive delivers constitutively CD27 process. expressed CD70 potent binding T cells early The cells activation a its T-cell to and dendritic on thus CD40 signaling proliferation. stimulating binds signals cells initiating ligand express activating that on to two-way further T dendritic cell increased also transmits the The B7, to T cells, induces receptor CD40 the cell expressed demonstrated early expansion curtailed in an when stage. at immunized, these a is ligand ligand; mice in CD40–CD40 T-cell response CD40 clonal role T of of pair The is mice the cells responding lacking are sustaining the cells, pair is expressed on and molecule ligand dendritic 4-1BB (CD137) The and 4-1BBL, co-stimulators. cells, macrophages, make its B of TNF-family which up another T-cell activated this is activating the and the type T-cell:antigen-presenting T cell The cell of dialog. interaction also effects receiving the are antigen-presenting with as of to signals; sometimes this cell referred bidirectional, interaction both T OX40L, and cells, activated are and its and expressed Another dendritic on respectively. ligand, OX40 receptor co-stimulatory cells proliferation. to proliferation survival indicating viral has OX40 responses and sustaining Mice ongoing T-cell deficient in in that in reduced role CD4 by T-cell T-cell infection, a enhancing response show OX40

cells do require to into 9-18 co-stimulation effector T act. differentiate cells that T not Proliferating

T of days naive specific that T specialized their antigen. to cell follow their differentiate cytotoxic ability re-encounter synthesize the they or the During acquire functions required into rapid for helper molecules cells 4–5 activation, cells T-cell division effector that when distinguish undergo that them from T changes naive T cells. cells Effector additional cell, the T important cell a requirements: antigen One in attack an encounter need with the results has is their in most its for differentiated into without immune effector activation of once co-stimulation (Fig. specific 9.26). which This is cell molecules. can easy with to act on particularly to understand cytotoxic co-stimulatory T express whether a any or for CD8 the distinction virus, able not be must infected cells, infected cell up not also if are antigen molecules. feature and initially taken However, able B cells cells of to the that these for even must cells have as important is CD4 T CD4 activate macrophages co-stimulatory expressing function effector this be effector cells,

effector receptors seen and molecules by expressed T cells. also Changes the in cell-adhesion are recirculate They and therefore to cell-surface cease nodes. lymph L-selectin lose through for glycoprotein-1, express or on endothelial serve (for are which they inflamed as upregulated that E-selectins vascular PSGL-1), P-selectin Instead, cells example, Pand and glycans ligands

Fig. 9.26 cells Effector T cells to effector respond panel). status can (central target cell their differentiated have the co-stimulation. once without cells required a surface effector into actions the specific the triggers an antigen any need on for antigen-presenting without and encounter cell with recognizes of their naive T effector cell antigen cells, T that the receives co-stimulation. becomes IL-2. and two signals cytotoxic cell can responds 1 kill illustrated (arrows any panel) and activated, 2, as virus-infected here, T it both a to and secretes target left Thus, do molecules. clonal express enhances signaling that co-stimulatory those cells, including not IL-2 cells contributes and effector at inflammation. vessels expansion sites roll of the T blood differentiation the to allow to to T cells the of on to which VCAM-1, the which them as than bearing the of T endothelium. well the LFA-1 expressed naive molecule also integrin is They and cells, levels higher CD2 allows on inflamed express bind vascular to as also VLA-4, adhesion endothelium do orchestrate This the of and infection, to immune where cells allows the response. enter they local bloodstream T exit effector sites Fig. in in the surface changes are summarized T-cell These 9.27, in and 11. be further Chapter will discussed

Fig. expression 9.27 T the of changes molecules. of cells Activation cell-surface several example here The is T cell. Cd4 a T they which nodes, home express LFa-1. such other express L-selectin, cells adhesion relatively lymph Cd2 low as of to but naive resting and molecules levels through T endothelium are on e-selectins and, pand induced inflammation. psGL-1), of upon activation, roll allow expression expression ligands at for which instead, on (e.g., of to the sites L-selectin activated pand ceases expressed e-selectins of cells also amounts is to the bind ICaM-2. activated Increased which and integrin ligands, of produced, its ICaM-1 LFa-1 are which ensures on endothelium, cells newly activated are inflamed called to a vascular at tissues integrin likely T vLa-4, T that encounter infection. where allows enter to cells sites arrest they expressed peripheral adhesion as potential higher target with cells, avidity the molecule well on as adhesion a a the Cd2, their interaction of higher their Cd44. density activated the have of cells T increasing molecule density surface also of By T of Cd45ro with with isoform activated gene, the splicing the transcript a isoform, in receptor Cd45 alternative rna the of is T-cell the Cd45 and cells that expressing expressed, change associates which of occurs Cd4. the the change more This T sensitive cell complexes. of low concentrations to stimulation makes by peptide:MhC receptor cells naive lymphoid is Fig. activated of egress allowing 1-phosphate that Finally, expressed by from become the 1(s1pr1) (see resting T do the cells, sphingosine tissues not 9.11). the prevents s1pr1 proliferation downregulation for after days activation of several egress period T-cell of and differentiation. during exit lymphoid expressed it several again, after allowing is cells tissues. days, to the effector from

to 9-19 different activated cells CD8 be in T cells. ways can effector become cytotoxic

and cells the on its fall Naive CD4. the CD8 two T of one carries large co-receptor classes, bears into co-receptor surface other which the called (Fig. or target (sometimes cells T cytotoxic T their differentiate CD8 all CD8 into which CTLs), cytotoxic cells cells kill lymphocytes, 9.28). especially in are pathogens, viruses. intracellular They defense the important against and as on class T I proteins surface, cells recognized complexes viral are their fragments lymphocytes. cytotoxic of Virus-infected peptide:MHC these display by

activity Perhaps cells co-stimulatory cells because these naive more require of actions destructive, than T cells. CD8 so do cells naive them effector to are activated CD4 T drive the become to effector requirement ways. in This met be two can intrinsic The co-stimulatory high dendritic priming activity. simplest by cells, activated is have which dendritic cytotoxic cells. CD4 T required produce cells to help to into effector induce the activated become differentiation CD8 their for sufficiently cells, In some cells IL-2 T from without viral directly infections, will cytotoxic property we Chapter dendritic of against 16. tumors, to exploited in responses T-cell as This see been has generate cells

additional the help, T however, cells. which majority requires CD4 by CD8 of T-cell effector In infections, is provided viral activation antigen-presenting cell antigen-presenting cells presented recognize naive amplify CD4 the the related CD8 further T that T cells the can by of (Fig. activation antigens cell by activating 9.29). cells activates first 9-17). dendritic B7 CD4 expressed Sections CD40 express the T and the by (see cell ligand to 9-16 IL-2 and on the additional in and to the cell, 4-1BBL binds ligand T expression cell. CD40 CD40 provides co-stimulation turn CD8 by an delivering of B7 cell, which increases additional the dendritic naive signal dendritic that the to by CD8 produced acts CD4 T promote effector cells differentiation. T-cell also The activated IL-2

differentiate into CD4 different subsets functionally effector T of 9-20 several cells cells.

cells, differentiate with that functions. different several T T T cells cells subsets immune into In orchestrate CD8 CD4 of effector contrast main T The helper regulatory functional are helper subsets (T TH1 1), (TFH), follicular cells. and T TH2, (Treg) TH17, secrete TH2, they of the pathogens defined are on cytokines subsets combinations that of basis TH1, and different by the The TH17 elicited and classes different are (Fig. of 9.30). cells Fig. lymphoid (see myelomonocytic for different series classes innate of the cooperate of the innate with the pathogens (ILCs) ‘immune clearance different with modules’ cells and subsets of These form integrated specialized to 3.37). as persistent will response typically One predominant these other allergies. immune or or of especially in progresses, autoimmunity, an infections, subsets become the As

Fig. CD4 CD8 require 9.29 responses Most T-cell T cells. the in only recognizing cells cells antigen-presenting activated Cd8 T (apC). same may with on become antigen the co-stimulatory of presence cells cell Cd4 interacting T weakly mainly T happens effector the antigen-presenting cell of to recognizing the increased cell levels antigen-presenting This on by antigen on and Cd4 being co-stimulatory an cell. induce activity triggered T Cd4 IL-2 produce drive abundant help also Cd8 thus T-cell and proliferation. The cells in own may the IL-2. This T turn Cd8 make to its cell activate

Fig. help target 9.30 T to effector eradication Subsets CD4 pathogens. cells to cells different of provide specialized classes different are for the of of cells. Cd4 the other antigen-specific effector T the Cd8 of cells, which unlike case of B cells or, act target to eliminate eradicate in that innate cells typically the system, functions cells, pathogens—whether TFh infected T enhance immune pathogens, directly cells of cells on activate them IFn-γ, which Th1 cytokines, such more macrophages, destroy enabling (first cells panels) microorganisms produce efficiently. as intracellular to barrier helminths. eosinophils cytokines and mucosal Th2 at (IL-4), that panels) surfaces enhanced and cells (IL-5) basophils eradicate (second and immunity recruit cells activate to produce and (IL-13) promote mast cells (third panels) induce IL-17-family produce that cells stromal Th17 neutrophils to to that sites recruit cytokines infection. secrete chemokines local epithelial and of along antimicrobial the that kill peptides epithelial Th17 activate can cells produce also IL-17 to with produce barrier cells IL-22, site which bacteria. at linked antigen cells B-cell form the TFh follicles, panels) germinal center promote with through to where of response. B cognate traffic naive cells and they interactions (fourth recognition type that and of and cytokines 2, of participate against are recruited subsets 1, pathogens. 3 cells TFh different in responses characteristic other types produce to in and homologs, subclasses responses. antibodies IgG2a 1 their in activate the strongly producing type IFn-γ in (IgG1 IgG2b, IgG humans, TFh mouse) cells belonging and produce cells certain opsonizing to B and IgG3 mast basophils in type drive and release for Ige, arms and TFh immunoglobulin responses. differentiate cells 2 cells to which cells IL-4 B produce Those granule producing immunity. produce to appear TFh for be that context 3/Th17 opsonizing antibodies generating pathogens directed in the cells IL-17 type against extracellular important of during suppress and T-cell autoimmunity panels) cells development T of prevent help cell responses. regulatory the generally (right immune activity and immune innate

in cells 11, these of although lacking antigenic the many lymphoid receptors, shall which, features effector same those subsets of parallel the we cytotoxins. further in innate of of cytokines Chapter many (ILCs), discuss T-cell functional patterns produce ways or

CD4 hence subsets, distinguished were TH1 to subsets their The the TH2 first names. and be T-cell TH1 by of and production cells whereas IL-13. IL-4, are the of IL-5, characterized by IFN-γ, production are cells characterized TH2 the IL-22. they are IL-17F; also the TH17 cells because produce so and cytokines named they IL-17A produce display. they concert of with to class-switched in effector cells help B to or are cells TH17 immune targeted TFH immunoglobulins different cells innate the by of generate isotypes, TH1, receptors array TH2, which different develop Fc cells function tolerance of, antigens have clearance and to, promote immunoregulatory Treg the they rather than cells recognize.

infections eradicate help by TH1 that or survive replicate within microbes cells can to macrophages. cause viruses, the intracellular and and such tuberculosis certain as include protozoans, mycobacteria Examples leprosy. that bacteria, but in Chapter evade These described by bacteria usual macrophages phagocytosed killing intracellular mechanisms 3. are way the in the can surface macrophage further the macrophage, on bacteria. of an If kill ingested enhances activate recognizes will a bacterial TH1 the microbicidal cell to through the activity IFN-γ, macrophage’s release displayed the it antigens of infected which in that class favors mouse. also IgG promote B-cell 1 production Type of switching responses as IgG2a opsonizing antibodies, such the shall in We Chapter of TH1 functions 11. more cells detail describe macrophage-activating in

to TH2 helminths, extracellular cells control by mediated mast responses cells, infections and eosinophils, IgE. particularly parasites, promoting by help by particular, cytokines response to cells to a switching IgE, infections. required class In is are B primary produce of for of part which as fight the parasitic of produced role type 2 for making interest. also the additional responsible TH2 asthma, differentiation of and is medical IgE antibody allergies

CD4 The TH17. subset cells third T major is of effector cells amplify to such bacteria help that typically responses (see neutrophilic are Fig. TH17 and response fungi, to induced extracellular in clear and pathogens 9.30). and or to opsonizing TH17, promote B-cell switching IgG3 class antibodies. IgG2 3, responses also type the TH17 the urogenital antimicrobial cells, by produce and that important in are peptides and barrier resist tracts cells respiratory, IL-17 in skin, gastrointestinal, and to invasion. IL-22, epithelial microbial produced also activating including Cytokines

eradication are response TH17 to associated. their contribute germinal of unique the TH2, pathogens of providing with In help or through of TFH they responses—irrespective promote pattern classes cells cells, cells to which immune most contrast to center B TH1, role to in of the in they context of or of are in Thus, the where role class-switched elicited of type type 2, 1, central 3 a patterns the responses, development antibodies. either TFH play type distinct cells CXCR5 follicles. their to of localization by markers, cells identified and TFH expression such as their mainly lymphoid PD-1, are certain and

cells, effector TFH controversy of the been in providing role had CD4 point B-cell the of Prior discovery help. of to T subsets a cell or is antibody function it thought TH17 T than cells, it of TH1, that was cell, production follicles. effector now Although for TH2 primary was is the implied rather lymphoid B-cell the high-affinity TFH this that primarily in provides cells, help that the TH2, originally of Nevertheless, as switching. some isotype patterns of 1, naive or of responses, same TH17 cells TH2, of the and of a lineage-defining cells TFH to component the 2, cells differentiation drive production 3 alternative cytokines develop B share to of TH1, type and explains presence to an through or isotypes of receive to of switch other the the such in course can ‘TH1’ B ‘TH2’ cells This presence IgG2a to of infection, IgE through how, cytokines. switch cytokines, as help the TFH of that to other developmental active the represent appear to help. a lymphoid a of research, B-cell the Thus, specialized tissues remain TFH and is T effector relationship providing distinct are subsets branch cells for matter within while still cells CD4 of to TFH 11. the 10 of more detail return will functions helper cells and in We in Chapters

clear above the cells described activating help pathogens make to All involved body. the T their in target are from effector cells responses that different CD4 cells have a T Other function. is Treg T These or are suppress rather than because them. T-cell function their activate cells, to cells, called regulatory responses in immune cells are involved and preventing Thus, autoimmunity. the limiting response Treg regulatory recognized. of Two subsets are T currently main cells 8-26). known see thymus, and regulatory and T Section as becomes is the still (nT tT natural, One fate subset to , a respectively; thymically in derived, committed cells while or cells conditions. naive subset influence under the environmental particular T from The differenti periphery CD4 T the ates in of cells other of peripherally T or as respectively). group is This (iT cells known pT induced, derived, , and be 9-23. Section discussed in further These cells will

of pathways. induce Cytokines effector cells the distinct down CD4 9-21 naive differentiation T

are consider cells. from briefly types and how subsets, the derived will we of now Having noted T functions T-cell they naive CD4 the innate a the the The by by during priming the cell antigen-presenting signals been activated of of regulated or cells defined and initial is environment, priming by CD4 have naive immune pathogen. other largely T period is a that whether provided by progeny fate cell local priming. cells the naive developmental balance determinants signaling during and and fate of cytokines, CD4 principal with are the of co-stimulatory are integrated TCR As the T of which previously, lineage-specifying noted combination which drive cells)—are that signals may and TH17, induced that and The cells and regulatory five different distinct associated that identity unique markers with (iTreg cytokines (Figs. TH2, their transcription main subsets induce T cells their define naive surface CD4 formation, TFH, T develop—TH1, their differentiation, into factors 9.31 and 9.32).

there stages IFN-γand is TH1 cytokines development T-cell during activation. IL-12 a predominance of early naive of the the induced when is intracellular As 3-16, stimulate IL-12, the including networks. gene described resulting many activation the signaling and key of cytokines, in in pathway, JAK–STAT specific Section IFN-γ by JAK families different and members Different are activated the cytokines. STAT of the defines lineage-specifying of effector gene-expression that of cytokines pathways program Each a Fig. a T to profile activation downstream transcription distinct unique effector on the the is of dependent network cells (see pattern mature STAT factor of 9.32). (type development, are STAT4 interferons STAT1 IL-12, respectively, 1—IFN-α by and 2—IFN-γ) type immune sequentially are by critical or activated during are and IFN-β; cells and innate early infection. TH1 and produced which For as may NK Activated source 1 an important of group ILCs, IFN-γ. such cells, also be thus differentiation loop. positive IFN-γ, may Finally, reinforcing the TH1 feedback of a cells through provide more for signal themselves cells the TH1

Fig. of T-cell determinants principal 9.31 effector are differentiation. programs the alternative of CD4 Cytokines

of into other principally subsets. distinct Cd4 as cells cells, that T cytokines cells, provide can well as antigen-presenting dendritic naive the immune various cells development induce innate The environmental pathogens, cells which to such various produce. will cytokines sensor as conditions, exposure the determine innate signaling, response to cells and in differentiate to differentiate response IL-12 Th2 cells IL-4. whereas Th1 sequential in IFn-γ IL-23. upregulate produced become differentiation transforming dendritic to of and Th17 factor-β growth with cells, to responsive IL-6 (TGF-β) induce which IL-23 receptor expression the cells of by acts signals TFh development, differentiation not understood their is also cells might naive it IL-6 what their precursors. additional induce currently although require for from are IL-2, TGF-β IL-6, absent, the T pathogens of the presence the cells. and When and favor of lack of induced development

Fig. of CD4 factors transcription members 9.32 that downstream family subset determine the act immediately T-cell Different cytokines of STAT development. of specify and iTreg With family participates of activates exception which in transcription cytokines development different factors. the that the of the TGF-β, effector the development, distinct of members sTaT each both cells of of Th17 naive Cd4 sTaT4 IL-12 receptors of their by is IFn-γ differentiation and on dependent cell sequential binding antigen-activated and activation on T to sTaT1 cells. respective of Th1 expression, of these sTaT participate factors the Th1 in Both induction with of to the then which T-bet cooperates sTaTs program differentiation. differentiation cell activation IL-4 sTaT6 signaling. of receptor dependent on downstream is Th2 Th2 expression, sTaT6 program acts sTaT6 differentiation. with which cooperates to GaTa3 increase to induction sTaT3, of expression which, in participates rorγt the with TGF-β, differentiation. in activates concert Th17 and IL-6 Th17 also which later activates the and amplify sustain to program. sTaT3 acts in differentiation, IL-23, Th17 essential. TFh fully cell sTaT3 upstream factors sTaT of by programming are although understood, actions The differentiation of expression is not Bcl-6 of differentiation IL-2 activation sTaT5 of expression. and iTreg by upstream in Foxp3 important acts is

expression switches is of the and induces IL-12 IL-12Rβ1, other in factor, another induces on naive inducible naive of activation of component T interferon the IL-12Rβ2 the which STAT1 the The of activated T expressed by IFN-γ transcription the cells genes already T-bet, receptor, component CD4 cells). receptor, on (the for further activated are induce be can signaling. TH1 cells, by to to These IL-12 cells cells now dendritic by and macrophages becoming T and STAT4 committed produced programming. and upregulates T-bet expression further TH1 completes STAT4 central a differentiation. TH1 in Due to ‘master programming T-bet referred of to cell TH1 regulator’ role is as development, its sometimes

requires IL-4. TH2 development antigen-activated naive receptor cell its When expression encounters which IL-4, an promotes STAT6, activates transcription factor the GATA3. of T as cytokines such by of powerful encoding is and genes several the cells, IL-13. produced activator TH2 a GATA3 IL-4 feedback. its stabilizing induces own positive cell-intrinsic differentiation via also thereby expression, TH2 GATA3 long of TH2 initial been debated. IL-4 The response triggers has that a source which induces TH2 chitin, insects responses. possibilities by can activated IL-4 parasites, mast present as produce polysaccharide attractive they helminth as Eosinophils, abundant because well each basophils, and and in in a cells are crustaceans, when with mice basophils and chitin, into In IL-4. recruited and tissues eosinophils activated to are produce treated are humans, 2 IL-4, can also cells suggesting might group to contribute that In these ILCs TH2 differentiation, unproven. produce is this although might source cells contingent Clearly, differ, on might cellular IL-4 the are innate inciting contribute for TH2 there development, the and several immune antigen. that produced T-cell provided TH1 positive IL-4 development to amplify by the naive TH2 precursors. IFN-γ produced may cells development from feedback TH1 activated TH2 cells, for activated Similar cell by by

and when cells naive arise during IL-6 factor predominate TH17 cytokines Figs. transforming the T-cell CD4 activation (TGF)-β (see growth and 9.31 9.32). of the which requires cells is signaling. activated by Development of STAT3, IL-6 TH17 actions cells Figs. effector IL-12 activity require and than of responses IL-23, cytokine for receptor of TH17 further to TH1 requirement and seem development the typical rather receptor in TH17 express for IL-12 the Developing cells, TH1 the the IL-23, similar expansion the effective to (see

and 9.31 9.32). is is of RORγt, transcription nuclear development central receptor cell TH17 hormone stabilizing to regulator, differentiation or master signature the TH17 The cells. of a factor, that microbial for derived innate and TH17 cell products. required immune by of source cells from TGF-β activated differentiation is IL-6 The primarily further cells cells, not TH17 as TH2 do via cell produce they appear or to TH1 IL-6. directly do positive naive Unlike feedback, TH17 from development not induce cells CD4 T TH17 naive TH17 cells indirect by IL-6 cells mechanism for production reinforcing precursors. and However, IL-17 immune appears to enhance produced differentiation by an provide innate from

lymphoid recognition secondary the and upon not tissues, in thymus. antigen naive of presence the pro-inflammatory of cytokine transforming (TGF-β) and They absence and factor-β T other in are cytokines. IL-6 the activated growth in cells when develop the (Fig. which cells, it determines or co-signaling that TGF-β presence TH17 whether absence of of development of the inflammation IL-6 the promote immunosuppressive is leads generation Treg to the of cells or Thus, immunity and 9.33). is absence by of or by to regulated products presence its cells immune tending innate pathogens, production. of generation IL-6 the The with pathogen stimulate the responses. absence immune immunosuppressive In is cells favoring of of and differentiation pathogens, the unwanted production low, so IL-6 Treg preventing distinguished equivalent transcription and of the are nT Like appear by functionally factor CD25, and be FoxP3 cells. cells expression to iT cells, cell-surface nT to act manner Both to cells responses produce as well to further in as can and differentiation. suppress may IL-10, support and themselves nT inflammation, TGF-β, iT iTreg an inhibitory which act immune and

subsets cells, requirements efficiently so produced clearly established. described not the in above, are the TFH and differentiation for vitro, been unlike their not have yet this important control subset. to much development, be seems about but IL-6 TFH the learned to remains be of for stromal the the cells by development factor of which expression the is for the One produced B-cell chemokine for transcription which TFH receptor is required CXCL13, important CXCR5, of Bcl-6, follicle. the for is localization not follicles, CXCR5 T-cell in other TFH expressed is and subsets. essential by effector is for ICOS, express the which by also is cells abundantly for cells. B ligand expressed TFH ICOS helper mice defect the show of TFH cells, in antibody lacking severe a because seems T-cell-dependent ICOS crucial activity responses. for a different high develop proliferation switching, with to cells characteristic and of of of IFN-γ, that B-cell IL-21, class of in produce parallel into (for or cells. T-cell cytokines differentiation plasma In cytokine of production IL-17), B amounts the example, TFH low patterns subsets antibody-producing promote supports of which which and cells amounts IL-4, the they effector addition

CD4 9-22 produce. they other’s T-cell cytokines subsets each the can through differentiation cross-regulate

CD4 effector of various subsets T functions. The different have each cells very different the a must it efficiently dominated response orchestrate by coordinated For control of these of that response immune to effector pathogens types subsets. is one cytokines distinct that principal through are of the the means produced by ensemble is A subsets. of different achieving this negative from and differentiation same the one precursors, effector cells also of response to while in feedback naive others. a of positive pattern some thereby T control suppressing promote effector that of these Importantly, cytokines loops mechanism providing participate (produced cells) IL-4 development, example, IFN-γ potently and inhibit TH1 (Fig. or development, respectively by (produced promoting TH1 TH2 by cells) TH17 both TH2 For 9.34). is cells. cross-regulation there and TH1 between TH2 Similarly, potently by TH1 IL-4 cells development. produced TH2 inhibits inhibit a cells Fig. TH1 Conversely, cells, of the can (see TH2 IFN-γ, of proliferation product 9.34). cells cells. both inhibits of T development the TGF-β produced TH2 and TH1 by the precursor T of by reinforce cells differentiation from In way, effector cytokines this their produced cells. own kind naive

when for generate TH1 positive amounts of recognize a reinforcing antigen feedback copious through IFN-γ cells signal they the TH1 cells differentiation more of cell, target a loop. the thus on In type a recognition this way, particular of

Fig. a complementary and in developmental differentiation reflects with the shared requirement for in mutualism cells iTreg the TGF-β that provides microbiota. TH17 A 9.33 roles link promoting of their must microbial immune Th17 the extraordinarily tissues, system that major mucosal an high cope organisms iT of where particularly a for site the cells the of comprise is density with deployment the intestines, microbiota. and barrier. host important can with its opportunistic While functions, a provides some the as they breach metabolic it the cause are its that constituents potential pathogens microbiota represents mucosal serious if of infections threat also responses host-protective mount by a of production occur, by all-trans against inflammatory cells. determined microbiota suppress responses, should Th17 as the of while production iTreg microbiota, acid breach to a to retaining adaptation and untoward balance promote balance inflammation between IL-6 directed the dendritic cells, the developmental cells, is and (at-ra) immune capacity which inflammatory host-protective vitamin mucosal the between retinoic metabolite the pro-inflammatory restrain the an barrier response which against cytokine the but IL-6. homeostasis, at-ra, derived the microbiota antigens no cells presented by resident dendritic are a subset produce at that of specialized from context in thereby production in suppressed is the when however, development effector favor are favoring at-ra IL-6, signals, cells. recognized TLr-stimulating the antigens of of Th17 of

to in conditions, represses TGF-β and development. Th2 produced under Th1 by promote cells homeostatic T T order responses IFn-γ panels) in or under which Th17 IL-6 be production, (upper or cells production cells, similarly inflammatory to inhibited potently conditions that IL-4. the order of Th2 of by T inhibits the by responses activation would otherwise facilitate favor development Th1 TGF-β override IFn-γ or development produced present inhibit if them cells, Conversely, Th17 IL-4 effect are Th1 to panel). the of the (lower center cytokines induce or and signals IL-6 can by Th2 by produced cells panels). of Th2 IFn-γ Th1 the blocks (right growth cells dominantly IL-4 on Th2 the by other in cell produced of prevents panels). development hand, Th2 (left cells Th1 favor can maintenance which antigen produce inhibits T-cell IL-12, development IL-10 stimulation, all the chronic IL-4, production and Th1, thereby cells. of IL-23 and/or of conditions and Th17 cells Th2, dendritic although shown, subsets by suppressing the under of not and macrophages,

Fig. The CD4 cells development of can subsets that negatively regulate subsets. the other 9.34 effector each of T cytokines activity produce or

which IFN-˜TH2TregTH1Treg TH17 IL-4 TH2 system cells secrete the chain of IFN-˜can to cells TH1 of cells proliferation reaction inhibit Activated cells proliferation or TH2 amplifies cells cells TH2 by cells innate response, and and innate TH1TH2IL-4TGF-°TGF-°IFN-˜IFN-˜Activated the differentiation the secrete IL-4 inhibit of TH1 adaptive immune on immune the differentiation IFN-˜acts in response. initiates to a response TH1 pathogen turn acts IL-4IFN-˜TH17IL-4IFN-˜IL-4 links suppress development innate inhibit that the to of and of TH1 the Thus, certain (for produce cells. cells dendritic Listeria) mycobacteria to effector favoring IL-12, induce macrophages intracellular emergence bacterial infections and example, activation in intracellular enhanced turn, TH1 promote pathogens. these clears cells, that macrophage

cytokines a cross-regulation in been The by demonstrated number mice. responses in T-cell have inappropriate of consequences of infectious effector models of adverse appropriate responses Such on the T-cell impact subtle notion crucial that induction CD4 the a clearance, of reinforce the of in outcome have is for that and show infection. can subset significant effector studies differences T-cell pathogen CD4 the protozoan example of infection a and clearance. murine response requires macrophages of TH1 model by Leishmania the major, of for which activation parasite this is One TH1 to the protect animal activating by that kill infected C57BL/6 macrophages mice produce cells

L. major. L. cells; major, activate BALB/c TH2 infected unable which mice become fail instead, growth. to inhibit with into macrophages Leishmania TH1 differentiate cells, they CD4 cells In however, T are to to a with activated seems kinase), of analog C antigens the cross-react (Leishmania memory Leishmania an cells antigen, are the difference result parasite. population receptors LACK gut-derived of T that expressed by to for from specific of This but in but present mice of memory produce in reasons in C57BL/6 not mice. unknown for strains but both are BALB/c IL-4 These mice, they cells during CD4 T to IL-4 secreted pathogen infection and In Leishmania TH2 of elimination Leishmania-specific of by new these become to BALB/c cells small cells death. TH1 failure mice, cells amount instead the memory cells, leading drives of is infection BALB/c a by The preferential treatment antibody, decisions TH2 (Fig. can early so is demonstrating during rather cells anti-IL-4 of week T naive infection, in development after IL-4 but be developmental cells of TH1 importance the cytokines ineffective this reversed made if early in of or mice than by crucial blocked 9.35).

T in CD4 adaptive cells immune controlling Regulatory 9-23 responses. are involved

in are immune their central defined by and a fall T into responses cells groups and Regulatory developmental preventing origins different autoreactive play different functions. role that CD4-positive that levels L-selectin CD62L high T-regulatory Section the and (nT cells in the constitutively and receptor (see Natural ) CTLA-4. express thymus 8-26) of are cells of and develop CD25 (see naive CD4 express in also T (iT and 9-20). arise Section cells CTLA-4 the periphery from CD25 Induced ) T and cells CD4 cells 5–10% circuation. represent the Collectively, cells of in T about T which, interaction cells at among of of preventing transcriptional gene of actions, transcription other expression production of the is FoxP3, natural induced IL-2. promoter, the AP-1 IL-2 between the NFAT and gene and and hallmark factor both T activation A the with interferes

are molecules to high-affinity self-peptides. and MHC ventional the selected α:β containing by receptors binding in thymus T-cell in function them by are known by regulatory the not the activated or self or whether It other the express is ligands same in currently self non-self periphery they antigens. their selected that to thymus the antigen-presenting to to to other that interfere signals. responses Multiple cells cells capacity interactions the provide with to of contribute mechanisms appear inhibit cells of principal but T cells, these with activating antigen-presenting are T of ability among expression T adequate cells. high cells, natural The surface of preventing of T the them on expressed naive of thought to levels antigen-presenting of for compete by cells permit to CTLA-4 is co-stimulation B7 thereby expressed co-stimulatory cells on of remove can been surface them T depleting has CTLA4 of the B7 antigen-presenting thereby that activity. cells, Indeed, from it molecules physically proposed IL-2, naive the lacking activated. Similarly, from CD25, ability lack to for CD25 the cells and produce thus expressing until expression sequester and IL-2 which cells, high-affinity T to by appear receptor T fully IL-2,

mediated cytokines. cells Other immunosup T by pressive functions production of are of their can cells prolifera inhibit tion T (see produced TGF-β T-cell by Fig. 9.34). which T by late molecules in expression co-stimulatory MHC cells. inhibits response, the antigen-presenting cells molecules is of immune produced an by IL-10, and the by cells. limiting means of cytokines a of T effector cells, the antigen-presenting inhibits also production responses IL-10 As pro-inflammatory of and cells, IL-12 promote ability of to For their and the thus example, and IL-10 by cells differentiation the maintenance of production potently impairs and IL-23 TH1 TH17 respectively. inhibits antigen-presenting syndromes in role highlighted cells critical T are function. regulation deficiency autoimmune in of several 15) (described aspects that by by Chapter caused cell immune The of T different in is

lymphoid of cells functional share of also natural differentiate tissues in they T secondary from most T and export express the induced cells. after phenotypic FoxP3 features the Although and thymus, in the function major particularly as microbiota, to the the mucosal immune intestines. inflammatory is of such A resident tissues microbes of cells commensal iT responses prevention bowel disease deficiency of intestinal Here, source immune-mediated reactivity (see which against iT to of 15-23). microbiota appear of the antigens IL-10, characterized disease, Section also the an by dominant inflammatory the intestines cells chronic causes be of retinoic dendritic detail derived by Retinoic intestinal presence of acts 12, discussed As TH17 the will of Chapter cells acid, differentiation is cells cells T induced in (see while acid produce cells induce suppressing to more antigen-presenting Fig. differentiation by of produced be intestines A. vitamin the with T which in favored that differentiation in from the TGF-β the is 9.33). therefore balance retinoic and of acid antagonistic The IL-6

Fig. development The T-cell the by acting CD4 of 9.35 of subsets during early stages be infection. the cytokines can manipulated altering of Th1 to intracellular macrophages provide protozoan that requires a elimination parasite the protection. IFn-γ because the needed activate with major is response, infection Leishmania they L. to generate major susceptible because a pathogen. are to BaLB/c mice the normally Th2 response (see and T IL-4 develop to because This early the this during text). induces is cells the they lineage into Th2 infection produce naive antibodies beginning the response. Th1 this the of neutralizing a anti-IL-4 of IL-4 naive lineage; protective mice of cells Th2 prevents Treatment inhibits develop infection and T with the toward diversion BaLB/c at mice these

respectively, TH17 controls Treg lymphoid differentiation tissues and in mucosa-associated the induced intestinal cells the (MALT). cells, of

lack cells Treg also expression characteristic cytokines immunosuppressive that CD4 have but FoxP3 cells produce T been of described. their One but of to by IL-10, of absence population, defined FoxP3. been as largely referred of TR1 expression production such cells, has TH17, B we certain responses to under that such different circumstances, many as persistent produce during recognize TH1, chronic can now cells, IL-10 TH2, and However, cells, antigen. including Therefore, of and they immune if so, T a in represent subset cells cells, have functions regulation. uncertain is whether unique whether distinct TR1 it

Summary.

or the circulate. through in of The within priming, naive they tissues crucial lymphoid antigen-presenting the T cells is which step antigen-specific activation, cells adaptive constantly first by immunity are The antigen-presenting which molecules, most co-stimulatory distinctive important. the of expression cells of most is the B7 feature molecules the of cell-surface the the T presents molecule Naive will antigen CD28 antigen-presenting only when both specific to cell and cell. B7 to to respond the antigen a T receptor on T-cell cells a helps dual on both and activity. cells, from cells co-stimulation the to cell requirement prevent This antigen-presenting ligation lack receptor responding which self antigens co-stimulatory by T same tissue for to naive

differentiation cells adaptive T leads of cells, event T critical the in naive Activation immune to their and most effector proliferation into responses. to regulate cell T develops that antigen. cytokines effector of in the combinations type of response Various are activation primary T-cell In influenced cytokines present the innate by the during turn, immune system. an antigen on cell act that surface. of target displays effector can clone its any acquires on expanded progeny Once cells function, T its of T have variety a cells functions. Effector recognize cells virus-infected them. CD8 cytotoxic T kill and cells killing TH1 promote to of pathogens. cells the intracellular their effector activation of enhance macrophages cells mucosal effector against such helminths, as pathogens, as cells requiring of TH2 cells the eosinophils their elimination. such promote mast immunity barrier and activities for particularly certain elimination of epithelial The promote sites, production barrier is recruit TH17 antimicrobial sites infection cells, to types peptides where and of by neutrophils fungi of and at the of orchestrated by they cells. bacteria provide cells and to and switching. they the specialized for cells germinal for production centers, isotype interactions help and where with B localization TFH are follicle B-cell antibody that subsets responses subsets. cytokines by self-reactive CD4 of restrain of antigen-presenting T-cell the T by the immune other cells T-cell activation the naive producing cells and response limit effector Regulatory inhibitory preventing

of their cells T General properties and cytokines. effector

interaction involve effector effector of target specific the antigen. functions T-cell an cell a with displaying cell T secreted example, cell, on target cytokines), the are (for CD40L) by are that the activated mechanisms T example, proteins or cell-associated focused by antigen recognition. (for by expressed whether Effector to T on engaged. whereas is mechanism of The all effector depend cells, is types common type T cell their of the that focusing effector effector actions

by with are molecules. interactions target Effector antigen-nonspecific initiated T-cell cell-adhesion cells 9-24

are Once find the it differentiation that recognizes. must lymphoid completed T has complex an tissue, peptide:MHC in displaying that effector it the its target cell cells B-cell targets tissue. the TFH without leaving cells lymphoid encounter their their directly lymph thoracic site antigen duct enter via tissues the blood, emigrate cells T and nodes. in most primed of the by from either or other if in efferent effector spleen in if and lymphoid lymphatics the activation However, primed sites at their changes have migrate effector into during infection. tissues, Because differentiation, now of that the occurred particularly cells T can of cell-surface in 11. expressed Chapter will blood further of molecules the and chemotactic sites adhesion local vessels changes as to on the by endothelium are a in factors, of be by guided infection, these local the as They discussed result

antigen-nonspecific to and interaction antigen-presenting T of binding T cell, is cell effector its LFA-1 The cell target, an like initial that an an of naive a mediated to by CD2. T less and higher effector twoto surface than efficiently do bind have of T and of are T on fourfold cells. and effector on to than their can levels ICAM cells, The target LFA-1 antigen-presenting CD58 naive on cells cells cells CD2 so that increase an affinity in recognition T-cell’s ligands. for on T-cell antigen the unless its LFA-1 the This transient receptor the target of is interaction triggers by cell the of tightly molecules. its remains to target its cell and more to binds then T effector release The bound long enough periods. switch Effector and which induce relatively their genes macrophages their contact new actions CD4 must proteins targets for and on secrete cells effector B have T out to to carry activate so or to long with synthesize new maintain cells, antibody, as cells, successive kill from under rapidly to be them dissociating attaching observed by relatively the and they targets (Fig. microscope can contrast, Cytotoxic T 9.36). the address the and target, local allows in the some T T or effector detach of new targets. cell change cell, to Killing provides binding cells of class although a CD4 molecules suggests without signal to T-cell detach. their the T CD4 evidence How that engagement disengage MHC receptor is cell II to for from targets not known, effector the antigen-negative

signaling to targets the direct to effector and regulate molecules. release of their

peptide:self MHC is to MHC site and binding contact, When synapse. associated cluster complexes to the called of self their complex the supramolecular immunological or complexes, (SMAC) what the cell–cell at the peptide:self co-receptors specific T-cell antigenic receptors forming or activation their cluster also molecules here. cell-surface Other the For example,

Fig. of their T molecules. with involve initially cells Interactions 9.36 adhesion targets nonspecific (top is here cytotoxic LFa-1 T target ICaM-2 a T ICaM-1 and as on the initial The the major panel). between interaction illustrated cell, cell, on cell Cd8 or with to specific presence T of cell the cell remain surface to peptide:MhC and target allows This for in the scan contact its the binding complexes. panel). carry the can cell it not antigen, disengages potential does specific the until cell (third If the other and scan panel) target targets antigen finds (second T specific the its deliver contact increases prolonging through cells molecules. T the adhesive stimulating T-cell of two receptor interactions, and to cell effector between the the the the signaling strength the disengages cell panel). then The T (bottom

Chapter 9: T-Cell-Mediated Immunity

pSMAC cell Organization CD8, Outer CD4, (red) ring synapse (green) TCR, immunological circle the cSMAC pSMAC T cell of dendritic talin CD28 PKC-˜Inner cSMAC LFA-1:ICAM-1 peptide:MHC

Fig. T 9.37 another cell between an immunological contact forms area and of synapse. cell an effector The fluorescence one between Cd4 cells) contact an through of confocal the is the cell a of T viewed (as shown. a (apC) cell micrograph area antigen-presenting and of two in the ring; synapse, or contact indicated also the red structure apC supramolecular distinct activation a which immunological central called the in or known by (psMaC), regions: green. form complex sMaC area the the cell between inner, outer, and as into T the sMaC the is bright indicated (sMaC), peripheral (csMaC), the proteins and organized (TCr), receptor pKC-ε. Cd2, the in The and Cd4, T-cell csMaC Cd28, is enriched Cd8, psMaC the protein for LFa-1 is integrin talin. the The cytoskeletal enriched and of Kupfer. courtesy photograph a.

a tight seal surrounds the to receptor induced and ligation of LFA-1 creates 9.37). of the that (Fig. T-cell co-receptor molecular receptor ICAM-1 by T-cell binding its and supramolecular cases, known some an central a In two zones: contact surface the zone complex the outer peripheral central into activation the organizes as known activation supramolecular zone complex (pSMAC). (cSMAC) as known the The contains proteins cSMAC important of T-cell activation. signaling to in most be cytoskeleton to the protein (see the actin presence notable pSMAC connects the Section LFA-1 and mainly 3-18). is the of LFA-1 cytoskeletal for which talin, The structure implied by Fig. synapse static immunological The a not as is is dynamic. quite 9.37, but cSMAC, periphery where the T-cell endocytosis ubiquitin-mediated ligase through E3 move from the degradation into involving the they receptors Cbl undergo 7-5). (see Section are in T-cell microclusters there where being formed contact of in receptors being than peripheral areas, cSMAC, highly Because receptors is (see active degraded Section are the the actually T-cell weaker and 7-8). signaling are

and receptors contact a the of Clustering cytoskeleton the cell. reorientation molecules effector T-cell the at cell target signals of of polarizes focuses that of the with release site effector the the for a Fig. This illustrated T in cytotoxic cell is 9.38. in cytoskeleton is on polarized, intermediary named defects in 13-6). protein become which of and protein of other the which 7-19 (WASp), cells the immune (see and T Sections syndrome an the the important to syndrome in cause signaling result effects, T-cell Wiskott–Aldrich the for An deficiency is inability among effect T-cell and by protein adaptor signaling by Vav recruitment (see mediated WASp of Section is Activation the receptor 7-19). of destined the turn the secretion with local is for travel. contact; and site apparatus produced, starts center (GA), reorientation cortical reorganization microtubule microtubule-organizing cytoskeleton reorientation leads the center which through most cytoskeleton of of Polarization of the the the actin to from (MTOC), in the proteins Golgi at this which the cell, cytotoxic its site preformed of at contact target T In the cytotoxic focuses cell. reorientation with exocytosis T-cell granules of the the the cytoskeletal secretion induced The focuses also synthesized the the of molecules T by receptor. of T-cell newly ligation effector polarization a of cell contact the and effector cytokine which site the secreted is principal with the cells, TH2 target of confined For concentrated is the cell. example, IL-4, molecule at of

inducing cells synthesis create Thus, of the and to induces three site the it T-cell target triggers receptor molecules. the molecules space effector which concentrated; of it apparatus ways: of of and/or effector tight be by controls effector of effector the cell; effector in contact effector the delivery the focuses can delivery narrow their of signals a cells to of the binding a secretory molecules reorientation at in release it onto cell the actions All effector contribute these targeting antigen. of to bearing mechanisms molecules specific even thus is effector highly themselves though target antigen-specific. molecules T-cell not cells, are Effector selective activity appropriate for

effector the 9-26 effector they that determined produce. are by array T cells The of functions molecules of

CD8 into cytotoxic cytotoxic are effector released cytotoxins, produced effector (see in by The which specialized and by two cells T fall broad classes: Fig. molecules T cells stored granules and all are by cytokines de effector cells. which membrane-associated T 9.38), proteins, novo synthesized and related effector 9-31. are of the cells Section and discussed cytotoxic in Cytotoxins principal are molecules T Their tightly be penetrate apoptosis must in can regulated not and they trigger any in specific: lipid cell. bilayer particular they because are release the the MHC effector mainly receptors actions these to proteins. contrast, membrane-associated expressing are class T and cells through bearing restricted their molecules proteins, production largely and act cells for II of cytokines By CD4 and

are effector summarized Fig. molecules The of T main in cells 9.39. their proteins cytokines and T-cell before a are discussing briefly will diverse of group review The the we actions. cytokines them and these effects. cytokines Secreted to mediate molecules act often in and concert membrane-associated

distance. act a can Cytokines or locally at 9-27

(autocrine are small actions). that properties proteins cell soluble another cell of alter behavior or of actions) Cytokines (paracrine the secreted or the secreting can itself by cells system. by Cytokines to are many produced addition in of those the types immune cell families introduced the already of We have

Fig. target antigen-bearing cells molecules to cellular of polarization on The antigen specific allows recognition the T cell. be focused effector 9.38 during cell. is illustrated here example Cd8 cytotoxic The a T cytotoxic contain granules in left the called Cytotoxic cells specialized (shown lysosomes proteins. which cytotoxic contain in panels), T red effect adhesion on the Initial cell through target granules. location to have the cytotoxic a not molecules any of binding does cell. the apparatus of the the contact aligns turn microtubule-organizing to within T-cell the apparatus, including cytoskeleton become causes polarized: in toward (MToC), the target Golgi of reorganization the aligns the center T (Ga), receptor the cell Binding secretory actin at site cortical which granules cell. the proteins in target specifically from the then directed stored are Golgi derived cytotoxic onto cell. cytotoxic The shows in panel an T photomicrograph unbound, isolated a in cytotoxic is red. and green granules cytoskeleton stained in The the microtubule T the cell. how are throughout the dispersed granules note (larger) depicts cytotoxic T cell. bound panel cell a b a target to granules now bound The T contact at of the site the are cell–cell cell. in clustered of release T cytotoxic shows in cell. a the from micrograph electron granules The c panel courtesy of panels Griffiths. and b a G. podack. e. courtesy of panel c

Fig. molecules. produce different subsets types effector 9.39 T-cell different effector of The recognize peptide:MhC killer predominantly that cells cells I complexes. Cd8 T are class T (which cytokine are target cell) the perforin helps are often also granzymes to cell), into IFn-γ. and produce deliver (which the apoptosis pro-proteases release trigger target that activated in They the granzymes intracellularly and membrane-bound also the effector They carry molecule ligand Fas (Cd178). binds in a this on the apoptosis Fas target (Cd95) When to cell activates it Fas-bearing cell. cells II functional recognize Cd4 T peptide:MhC subsets The various complexes. of class activate as cell, infected IFn-γ cells by that or as secrete to molecules. effector are infected the ingested they macrophages activate pathogens; to specialized have are other Th1 well membrane-bound ligand. Cd40 ligand can and/or Fas They express

so death ligand function. which Cd40 activation is cell, triggers Fas-bearing molecule and targets, the of expressed Th1 triggers strongly whereas influences target of the Fas ligand responses parasites Th2 immune promote specialized also promoting allergic and cells are to responses. for the IL-13. in and IL-9, B-cell They B-cell factors growth secrete provide activation and help IL-4, IL-5, Th2 cells and Cd40 switching molecule binds principal Cd40 to (see Chapter isotype effector and on expressed is The ligand, induces proliferation B-cell by which cells 10). B membrane-bound and of cells IL-22, acute recruit IL-17 inflammation infection. sites of and neutrophils family to produce helping promote the members by to Th17 B7 sequestration as cytokines actions exert IL-10 which produce via distance, but a of may TGF-β cell–cell cells act and that and as also inhibitory T act such such interactions. IL-2, inhibitory at

that innate and Chapters in receptors (see adaptive 3-15 in cytokines and are Sections 7-1). and their and immunity important 7 3 with Here we functions T concerned effector mediate the cytokines of cells. are that T by followed the Many cells given a produced interleukin are name number. cytokines by (IL) cells shown in by cytokines T are produced The Fig. list and immunological of interest III. 9.40, cytokines of is in more comprehensive a Appendix has Appendix helped receptors mice have cytokines vitro, Section clarify physiological their (see diverse genes cytokines of can biological roles. when in for and the targeted many cytokine Although effects I, to disruption tested A-35) in

of at that Section contact Binding so release orchestrates the target 9-25). of concentrated T-cell cell with they site of polarized cytokines the receptor (see the are the with most cytokines synergize molecules. of the those actions membrane-bound soluble Furthermore, of the effector that local have selective on The can bind target combinatorial, all membrane-bound the effects cell, are cell. focused by the which these to cytokines receptors this an effectors of mechanism of on interacting is only effect therefore molecules and, is another because the example, synthesis confined IFN-γ, instability the controlled cell by target effects IL-4, cytokines T for are of secretion Section that a so ended. (see further IL-2, not regulation cells cells by has some of after by mRNA The does of with continue their tight and synthesis: their interaction is to 9-16), target

Some effects. have distant cytokines IL-3 and GM-CSF (see Fig. T-cell-mediated to cells antibodyand 9.39) cells innate released the and immunity. of granulocytes, and on which TH1, in stimulate production and are bone are both act TH17 cells marrow effector TH2, important macrophages by dendritic stimulate marrow bone from also and cells the IL-3 production GM-CSF of precursors. which activating and them on act production G-CSF, TH17 to IL-17F cells, stromal produce produced IL-17A by primarily cells enhances

Fig. T-cell a network.’ functions cytokines. and ↑ 9.40 of increase; nomenclature what through many called well-defined is ‘cytokine effects The cell types. cytotoxic nK lymphocyte; different cytokine multiple on cells, each ↓, natural activities has CTL, killer decrease; cells; cytokines in factor; of bowel effector no, are IBd, CsF, activities colony-stimulating highlighted inflammatory red. disease; Major a nitric cell given mixture produces cytokines secreted of type by oxide. The

by the neutrophils marrow. bone of eosinophils. TH2 bone which stimulates of production IL-5, produce cells marrow released, effect the more likely is the the or in reflect amounts to Whether to vivo. cytokine the focused the distant cell, local release is is a cytokine degree of target which on given this and stability

proteins cytokines usually are trimeric express several surface. that T 9-28 the cell with as TNF-family associated cells

of T cell Most family on TNF membrane-associated surface. as the members proteins cells express the effector include being Fas ligand, associated. always TNF-α, These the two latter the (LTs), and cell-surface (CD178), lymphotoxins CD40 ligand homotrimer. assembles is T soluble forms into membrane-associated and and made a by TNF-α in cells simply family but in called (see LT-α a Section LT-β to member called transmembrane of linked form its to LT-α homotrimer, 9-2). membrane-bound a LT-β is Secreted is heterotrimers, third, form, this form and homotrimers bound ligands. when and TNFR-II, their TNFR-I receptors TNF-α LT-α, The for to the and of trimeric of critical signaling. the event of seems initiating is structure all ligand-induced members receptors The family, be their to trimerization characteristic in TNF the

cells. the bind ligand target transmembrane ligand to CD40 (CD95) CD40 proteins and Fas on respectively Fas and Fas apoptosis a and induces in Fas (see the its domain in Fas-bearing ‘death’ contains of death ligand by Fig. cell binding cytoplasmic Fas tail, by 11.22). Other can associated and also TNFR-I, domains including also induce members, apoptosis. TNFR-family are death with and binding TNFR-I. by apoptosis induce Thus, TNF-α to can LT-α

activating immune B on T-cell effector CD40 and is for cells, expression TH1, TFH signals TH2, CD4 and induced important TH17, is CD40. cells through cells delivers innate particularly it its and to function; ligand it tail TRAFs factors). linked cytoplasmic CD40 to of (TNF-receptor-associated death domain; called downstream a instead, The proteins lacks is the them isotype pro-inflammatory become macrophages CD40 CD40 of whereas much involved example, to concentrations ligation the CD40 of higher cells lower of secrete promotes receptive IFN-γ. growth amounts cells on to of TNF-α) on B and is induces B macrophages; ligation switching, and cytokines in activation (for and ligand with 13. as will associated learn in Chapter is immunodeficiency, Deficiency we in expression CD40

Summary.

transient T targets are adhesion. Interactions between antigen-nonspecific their effector cells by initiated and the on by cell surface elicited the the are effector T T-cell are target an peptide:MHC on of cell. effector complexes receptor functions when only recognized triggers or and This its target. antigen-bearing adhere cell, effector directly target to leading cell to to at target event strongly the molecules the of activation more release recognition death T to the effector cell the the molecules T a determined of are largely cell cell by T target on specific of an binding the effector effector The cell. by the set antigen immunological that produces recognition consequences without any contact with the uninfected is cytotoxic killing at preformed cytotoxins whose specialized focused target cells infected thus store site cells cell, the nearby. killing cytotoxic granules tightly it CD8 in release T of effector of de members membrane-associated effector T the Cytokines TNF of are cells. most synthesized novo and proteins by family expressed can distance. target act molecules the an Membrane-associated effector the can cell, receptors soluble a on bearing interacting on deliver cell locally at appropriate receptor, whereas on cytokine only or to signals cells cytokines other cytotoxins of by the the receptors, and through molecules effector of membrane-associated actions specific T for with account of CD8 cells. most cytokines functions The of together effector cells, effects the released their

cytotoxicity. T-cell-mediated

of only own or apparatus virus sophisticated a and, can its biosynthetic parasite bacteria, the metabolic inside All is multiply and in cells; indeed, viruses, has highly infected cells. consequence, in of cytoplasm that some no replicate a not before to they and infected they be pathogens only which susceptible cells to enter accessible replicate. in of modification antibodies they are the the eliminated cells Although once these can enter clearance cells, or by antibody-mediated destruction also capacities. T acquire defense TH1 CD8 role host is This filled may cytotoxic in cells although by largely cells, cytotoxic cells, T antigen in infections MHC is the I molecules in cells. of limiting susceptibility that depleted present lack crucial mice or of these artificially cytotoxic the of humans of animals that CD8 T such role seen or cells to class increased The T of cells T tissue requires the mechanisms cells and without of destruction elimination accurately powerful CD8 be targeted. cytotoxic both infected the to healthy of The

to T target via cells extrinsic cell 9-29 undergo Cytotoxic death and pathways apoptosis. programmed cells intrinsic induce of

of cytosolic the cells their pathogens T host, cytotoxic for cells cellular To infected host target death. deprive can ways. die in various Cells necrosis. damage and oxygen leads Physical or occurs muscle or or a chemical complement, membrane the during in heart deprivation attack disintegration such injury, as to with antibody heart cell of that This a cell and is local form by often of death healing response. wound inflammation accompanied stimulates can by cell which is autophagy. form other death, cell of The programmed or known as occur death apoptosis by by changes or either for specific events proceeds regulated cellular and process of chromosomal of membrane series that induced Apoptosis DNA. by enzymatic in plasma a survival, of fragmentation membrane required is blebbing, extracellular lipids, distribution a lack the and include the is signals signals that of the of fragmentation through apoptosis that DNA the into pairs pieces A is nucleases of of the DNA between 200 nuclear activation nucleosomes. base long cleave hallmark is degrading or 6, and senescent the abnormal Chapter organelles. As proteins of process in autophagy described cellular of condensation cell In characteristic large destruction death, and before that autophagic apoptosis. organelles of the nucleus the vacuoles is degrade

their by 9.41). T (Fig. undergo targets inducing apoptosis cells kill to Cytotoxic apoptotic involved in signaling Two cell death. pathways general are by extracellular so-called extrinsic of pathway is called One, activation by ligands. of receptors death mediated apoptosis, the the of in ligand apoptosis Engagement stimulates cells. receptor-bearing is lack induced of example, The or factors noxious pathway for ultraviolet (for is survival. of the or drugs), required response mitochondrial pathway as stimuli the apoptosis chemotherapeutic known growth other irradiation in intrinsic or and to is in cysteine IL-1 for called aspartic to role proteases Chapter in their both the 3 which mature caspases, the introduced cytokines forms. Common of pathways to processing were proteases, their activation IL-18 or and specialized acid-specific

Fig. induce in cells. T apoptosis CD8 can Cytotoxic target 9.41 cells complexes cell (top cell cytotoxic to death of a the recognition by by Cd8 the target leads target panels) cell T specific (CTL) peptide:MhC a on apoptosis. of multiple targets. can kill to recycle cells Cytotoxic T including directed granules. binding and the proteins of receptor the series stored release of steps, same in each cytotoxic requires killing the panels), shows process a with of apoptosis (bottom The a normal panel micrographs cell healthy where is nucleus. shown in a vesicles, (red) condensed the sheds membrane in contrast of the the field. apoptosis cell in of the the is same chromatin becomes to part the necrotic membrane the although retained, and, upper cell b) early integrity (panel cell in In nucleus much and and is the through are visible, of vesicles. its no the the has cell cytoplasm stages late of (panel condensed, shedding apoptosis of cell) cell mitochondria (middle very c), membrane lost hirst. Windsor and r. courtesy photographs (×3500) of e.

by in this catalytic as adjacent which the case, pro-domain. caspases are pro-enzymes, is pro-caspases, in synthesized domain other proteases, an many inactive Like inhibited the protein the pro-domain. Pro-caspases cleave activated caspases are other inhibitory by that to release changes classes There other activating caspases and effector apoptosis promote pathway: cleaving initiator apoptosis. caspases; in apoptotic the cellular two associated involved are of caspases the caspases initiate with by The caspase the pathway pathway 10, 9. caspases, caspase initiator whereas caspase intrinsic two related uses and extrinsic uses 8 use 6, effector caspases. as Both 7 pathways and caspases 3, that proteins cleave cellular critical are death cell. variety the integrity effector caspases that activate the promote enzymes a of of and The for also integrity endonucleases degrade they activate the proteins cleave that chromosomal and the are the required the and example, nuclear nucleus, For fragment for that of structural DNA.

T by or induce either can pathway. the target-cell death Cytotoxic the cells apoptotic intrinsic extrinsic expression non-immune-system cells as (Fas, the by which The receptors other extrinsic or mediated or TNF-α of by immune expressed and TNFR-I) are and as cells. is well LT-α, system, FasL for of CD95, pathway the cells release inducing intrinsic a of of T pathway cytotoxic universal cell more acquired is the restricted, for have these somewhat death mechanism directional the cytotoxic Because granules of activate antigen-specific distribution apoptosis. targets: receptors that in are into cells they fully cells mixed although contact When centrifugation, to take induce can minutes, can rapidly become cytotoxic and 5 die target evident. brought antigen-specific to cells with by hours T within target death of are rapidity cell. of delivered target reflects release the this that to preformed The effector molecules response the cytosolic killing host directly the mechanism the In also cell, may act to apoptotic on addition pathogens. viral DNA. the activated can that destroy are in degrade example, cellular For also DNA nucleases to apoptosis release which assembly otherwise the prevents virus, the of cells. virions and infect could nearby infectious This of cytosolic nonviral course activated of pathogens. in enzymes Other apoptosis the destroy may pathogens them. as by necrosis killing healthy Apoptosis is therefore these infected in to ingest intact and are that cells dead parasitize a infect cells necrosis, macrophages the released cells; means can from to of or dying the continue preferable cell,

The apoptosis cytochrome pathway of is 9-30 from intrinsic of mediated c mitochondria. release by the

c by is the Apoptosis caspases. from release by activation triggered of which intrinsic of the cytochrome pathway triggers mitochondria, the its in c (apoptotic Apaf-1 to oligomerization form stimulating apoptosome. cytochrome protein protease the binds a activating called Once cytoplasm, the to factor-1), 9, then frees its aggregation caspase, domain activate self-cleavage promotes of pro-caspase its to The which caspases effector apoptosome (Fig. and initiator an catalytic recruits 9.42).

between family of Bcl-2 members of interactions of proteins. is release the by controlled cytochrome c The domains Bcl-2 more and The can apoptosis, of groups: two one promote into members presence (BH) general homology family is divided proteins members by of or and Bcl-2 be that that the defined

an pro-caspase caspase of pro-caspase activates and ICAD, enter cleavage programmed into the recruits apoptosome, ICAD is 3 which induces 9, Apaf-1 nucleus turn and pro-caspase When 3 CAD releasing swell 3 and death a the leak, in and copies change binds Caspase DNA to Apaf-1 pro-caspase mitochondria ccomplex in multiple which cleave CAD Apaf-1:cytochrome assembles to cleaves activates induced, releasing cytochrome conformational which self cell cleaved c, 3 3

Fig. In c intrinsic 9.42 from the cytochrome apaf-1. release pathway, the induces pro-caspase formation to the which self-assembly programmed cell multimeric mitochondria change ensues apoptosome, apoptosome, resultant initiate recruits induces of activates apaf-1 which of The that conformational death. 9 in 9 pro-caspase panel). (third apoptosome to of activates by to allowing (first 9 the cytochrome c panel). it, Clustering it confined downstream pro-caspase mitochondria normal cells, caspases, In the is cleave such caspase the 3; enzymes (fourth of leak cleave dna mitochondria panel). during of as such intrinsic the out in pathway, this activation the cytochrome can swell, results c to as however, allowing which ICad, the stimulation cytosol cytochrome into c where the by (second Fig. is panel), bound intrinsic Bcl-2 family of 9.43 scheme by proteins. of the pathway General regulation proteins. activate of stimuli (sentinel) a extracellular group pro-apoptotic apoptotic proteins. activate protector pro-survival, by block executioner protection to pro-apoptotic, proteins directly to provided either the proteins function or sentinel can the apoptosis cells, by Bax, mammalian is proteins In Bak, mediated executioner Bok. and by these and (Bcl-2, protector Bcl-XL, In are Bcl-W). proteins proteins the prevented cells, acting from normal c release death, causes cytochrome of of executioner and activated the proteins cell The Fig. release subsequent shown in as 9.42.

(Fig. Sentinels Bax, Protectors NOXA Apoptotic stimuli Executioners Bid, PUMA, Death Bil, Bcl-XL, Bok Bcl-W apoptosis Bim, inhibit p53, Bad, Bak, Bcl-2, 9.43). to such executioners), family (referred Bok cause directly as Bax, as mitochondrial bind and membranes Pro-apoptotic Bak, Bcl-2 and to members, release. c cytochrome can is may but do they still not in How this membranes. pores known, the form they

anti-apoptotic stimuli are The survival. Bcl-2 promote family cell members that by induced proteins itself. known the best of Bcl-2 anti-apoptotic The is stimuli invasive oncogene cancer. as to makes gene apoptotic identified progress an in its overexpression cells was likely in thus lymphoma, The and the and Bcl2 an more more to a resistant first tumors B-cell to function Anti-apoptotic may proteins of Bcl-W. clear, cytochrome membrane the release family is include the binding Other blocking by pro-apoptotic Bcl-XL members the they the precise mitochondrial but The block not by to mechanism family to of inhibitory the function inhibition members. directly of function of c. and

A stimuli. members apoptotic 'sentinels' and second pro-apoptotic are by family are activated Bcl-2 termed family of or proteins proteins. act these stimulate PUMA, the Once Bid, block to Bad, which activated, can executioner the pro-apoptotic antiapoptotic include the of and of activity proteins, act activity to directly the either

proteins CD8 granules the contained that are in T apoptosis trigger effector Cytotoxic cytotoxic cells. 9-31 of

recognition cytotoxic upon action target of the on the of antigen release of principal T-cell cytotoxic of cell. calcium-dependent mechanism surface specialized granules The is a cytotoxic of least lysosomes are cells: and T contain that granules in Cytotoxic granulysin modified proteins classes at expressed granzymes, cytotoxic three distinct effector that (Fig. specifically perforin, are 9.44). granules in active an after stored cytotoxic in prevent but These granules release. actions the are until proteins within form, conditions their are direct and forming to damage through in, by forms Perforin the perforating, cytotoxic cell. cytosol which target a causes both of membrane, contents the the delivered or conduit other granules into target-cell of pores acts which target plasma the cell in once mouse, 10 apoptosis which to cytosol activate of in there the delivered 5 by the and formed Granzymes, humans pores via are perforin. target-cell activity mice, also expressed which high not humans is to able antimicrobial in is and in has but induce Granulysin, target concentrations cells. apoptosis at in acts also granzymes. contain serglycin, granules as forming scaffold, perforin a and complex with Cytotoxic the the a which proteoglycan

effective perforin target-cell required killing. are granzymes for and Both cells because granzymes, that but kill alone lack needed numbers cytotoxic target of of cytotoxic inefficient. cells, the killing the very cells In is are presence perforin can large cytotoxic from into to unable a granzymes kill of the due are cells, lack the T target mice deliver perforin other to In cells contrast, cell. lacking mechanism to

directly target cell in apoptosis which activates the and by by also caspases both damaging trigger mitochondria, caspases. Granzymes activating A B. are Granzyme are two abundant mitochondrial granzymes and cell through by understood. triggers A caspase-independent death not damage, mechanisms completely granzymes that most The B, activates and and proteins binds caspase inactivates proteolytic deoxyribonuclease eventually activating cascade, like caspase (ICAD) inhibitory by (CAD) after 3, Granzyme thereby cleaves which CAD. caspase-activated the acid activates caspases, the protein an cleaving residues a that to aspartic (Fig. cells believed nuclease in target that the This be to enzyme degrades DNA is 9.45). T either Granzyme the virus-infected on of fashion. cell cytotoxic directed targets to induces protein mitochondria protein), intrinsic BH3-interacting cleaves granules it release recognition contents agonist a (for directly its the of B the BID domain also a cell antigen T pathway; cell its to death the in Cd8 apoptotic a activate by cytotoxic serglycin, are cell target (top granzymes, complex proteoglycan perforin the the membrane the delivered in a to and with panel). of introduced of cytosol the the unknown pro-caspase on target cell the specific contents and panel). into intracellular then By of without (second targets the directs granule entry mechanism, the BId perforin an apparent 3 formation, proteins such pore act the and granzymes as into and indirectly, (third the BId caspase 3 truncated cleavage either granzymes into the active cleavage the pro-caspase panel). (tBId) directly of or an BId of cause cytochrome the tBId to release mitochondria on c acts cytosol. into amplifies activation. the of further turn 3 This 9, inducing caspase that by activates formation the promotes apoptosome in apoptosis which procaspase release targets panel). (Cad), which ICad activated dnase 3 the to dna fragments (bottom caspase-activated caspase

mitochondrial space it As pro-apoptotic discussed amplification as turn release cascade, and from of the 3, caspase as of central membrane assembly (Section activated of the mitochondrial caspase causing the such disruption in outer to apoptosome or by with initiates intrinsic 9-30), cytochrome c. of the activates Apaf-1, indirectly which molecules c 9. is cytochrome the the above initiator intermembrane apoptotic Thus, activate acts initiator and to to caspase 9. the 3, granzyme indirectly the directly B activate caspase effector

phospholipid of rapidly are phagocytic is in leaflet. membrane, membrane: recognize the the phosphatidylserine, only cell death the phosphatidylcholine cell inner the leaflet replaces outer which as change undergoing predominant cells, in normally programmed a by in which the found Cells ingested without co-stimulatory and down phagocyte of induction by the is broken the proteins. cell completely ingested The digested do immune an immunologically Thus, process; or apoptosis cells to contribute ‘quiet’ not is, responses. stimulate normally is normally apoptotic that

serial Cytotoxic targets specific selective cells are antigen. a expressing killers T 9-32 of

only they offered the a a of target of other cytotoxic specific amounts bearing equal the target specific two mixture and not, T cells, the one When bearing are kill cells cell antigen antigen. cytotoxic killed. The bystander’ themselves not the and T are ‘innocent cells cells release the cells T effector is killed because of cytotoxic not The are polarized. molecules probably cytotoxic highly we Fig. saw in As center 9.38, microtubule-organizing to the cells cytotoxic their a focus cell. contact Golgi on orient T target secretion of apparatus and with point toward contact of is shown point movement in the Fig. Granule 9.46. one, by T one secretory point cells of apparatus allows time. at suggesting the contact toward attack kill released one several in turn whereby strongly target them their Cytotoxic that attached reorient only mediators and mechanism cytotoxic any are cell at cells to each different one allows a CD8 kill infected to single cells without them in cells tissue widespread damage The cytotoxic (Fig. of T focused action narrowly creating tissue occur, crucial of as with as the and 9.47) does very is central system, the not in of is importance limited, cell nervous islets. neurons regeneration pancreatic in tissues where the or

environment of can preformed Cytotoxic forms cells proteins their the inactive rapidly they in targets in that the are T store granule. kill because cytotoxic cytotoxic are the a the antigen. granules proteins precursor encounter and with naive its loaded into synthesized Cytotoxic first of specific cell T after cytotoxic soon induces T of granules perforin so and the cytotoxic receptor novo of CD8 Ligation of is similarly cells, that replenished. in effector synthesis supply de granzymes T-cell the kill of single it targets possible T makes to CD8 for a in series a cell succession. This

Fig. into granzymes serglycin 9.45 apoptosis. the and cytosol cells granzymes, Perforin, released to target and cytotoxic granules are from of deliver induce

is and (tBID) DNA perforin, cleaves Granzyme Engagement virus-infected (CAD) peptide:MHC caspase-activated cinto the 3BID ICAD cytotoxic DNase delivered releasing via cCAD cytosol caspase by pro-caspase activates BAD of Release infected CAD the granzymes and TCR ICAD, of cytotoxic perforin granulegranzymeserglycin by T cytochrome 3 cytosol with perforin mitochondrial B cell cell complexed outer complex and apoptosis, disrupts and 3 DNA cell 3 Truncated induces into BAX BID caspase pores causes membrane, directed targets of TCR tBID activated fragmentation release of cytochrome serglycin cleaved pro-caspase BID formed MHC and

Fig. fashion. released a Effector highly from in are granules polar 9.46 molecules T-cell to cells of dyes, and T granules the movements allowing their with granules cytotoxic followed labeled under fluorescent photography. by time-lapse The the be microscope can be be to seen pictures with of a series is the cell which during we cytotoxic killed. taken target interaction cell, eventually a a show here of T at the has panel, the top target T with cell 0, a just right) below). (upper cell time (diagonally In made contact red dye, point distant contact. at fluorescent of time, cell, a of the granules the T the are this labeled from with has elapsed, completed has to the second begun the toward a after cell, target move panel, that the the been have minutes. panel, third In minute essentially after granules 1 in 4 move after minutes, have (note into the panel, has T cell the the between which fragmented released the apoptosis the and nucleus). in to last been target, granule begun contents undergo 40 space the the cell, other recognize from can to The T whereupon on target it disengage cell go targets. now and kill will of photographs courtesy G. Griffiths.

act cells cytokines. also T 9-33 Cytotoxic by releasing

which in the eliminate cytotoxic T in is infection. target way apoptosis cells cells CD8 main Inducing cells and cytokines However, TNF-α, which host other to contribute ways. in T the also IFN-γ, release LT-α, defense CD8 most cytotoxic class involved in and induces increased proteins are other inhibits molecules that in viral peptide MHC synthesized I infected of of of the replication loading and these directly, IFN-γ class newly I MHC molecules cells. expression chance as cells be cytotoxic target attack. will This recognized increases cells the infected that for as as to also infection, of cells. and they them serve both macrophages, sites recruiting effector IFN-γ activates cells where antigen-presenting via which can with IFN-γ apoptosis can cells can 9-29). 9-28 in and and kill their TNFR-I, through target interaction and some macrophage LT-α (see induce TNF-α TNFR-II, Sections with activation synergize CD8 the in T act variety cells limit spread to cytotoxic ways cytosolic a of pathogens. effector of Thus,

Summary.

against host essential in most CD8 be cytosol: defense commonly Effector reside cytotoxic are T will cells in viruses. the that pathogens these such cell kill peptides T by molecules. that harboring cell These foreign I any bound class the are transported pathogens MHC cells can to cytotoxic surface to recognizing three multiple apoptosis activity target mechanisms and into the the killing target antimicrobial induce is cytotoxic types perforin, preformed cell; and function releasing proteins: has granulysin, in any by granzymes, cells which to cell; pro-apoptotic. of type in of perform of cytotoxic acts CD8 their which granzymes which delivery T use with attack the to properties cell virtually infected any a These cell cytotoxic pathogen. T cytosolic and allow destroy Fas, cells. ligand, to cells, The is some expressed binding may by CD4 apoptosis Fas induce also by on membrane-bound some target which T CD8 and expressed granules. most mediated that in less However, is pathway this important infections than cytotoxic by an class CD8 and inhibits I cytotoxic MHC activation. and also which produce viral macrophage IFN-γ, important is expression inducer replication molecule cells of T kill with cells. infected precision, targets cells T sparing Cytotoxic adjacent great normal damage in precision cells. the is of This minimizing crucial allowing infected while eradication tissue

to 9. Summary Chapter

on surface antigen-presenting antigen of is of an cells encounter T in naive adaptive zones secondary lymphoid specific initiated T-cell An the immune response cell when tissues. the cells and the co-stimulatory naive their cells express molecules cases, inducing expansion, cells, In conventional antigen-presenting are most and for B7.1 dendritic clonal B7.2. that responsible T activating innate but dendritic not where the infection, encounter they pathogens, sites lymphoid in only and migrate through Conventional lymphoid tissue. take recognition, of antigen at to they reside activated up local cells periphery, also become tissues, survey it lymphoid resident may T naive dendritic to cell potent cells dendritic direct antigen become cells. of cross-presentation secondary The in or may activator transfer T naive a organs CD8 to for cells, cells interferons. type against responses I by producing dendritic rapid Plasmacytoid to viruses contribute several cells, onto of types of and various directly primarily modulating proliferation their produce Activated other by T T of target IL-2, signals drive releasing act in the cells; cells cells. effector early which T mediators differentiation is important which differentiation cell. infected can effector by so that destroyed T or T be an co-stimulation, independently effector This of of target peptide:MHC triggering cells any activated cell occurs complexes by T with pathogens, cytotoxic replication. cells target infected sites cells removing of cytosolic thus CD8 kill pathogen of response different function: specialized CD4 neutrophils effectors immune by innate (TH17); (TFH). the in can mast cells cells and effector (TH2); macrophages cells T targeting adaptive that eosinophils, distinct (TH1); basophils, promote immune turn B for cells and become enhanced arms or effector of cells adaptive control T all the known innate mechanisms effector response. immune virtually Thus, and control regulatory cells CD4 of by responses immune T In subsets T-cell activity. limit addition, suppressing that and help are produced

Fig. neighboring antigen specific 9.47 kill uninfected cells sparing cells Cytotoxic bearing cells. T target while a T to cells, all cells are armed cytotoxic but killing Cd8 cells tissue in the the killed. susceptible are only effector proteins by of infected ensures T-cell neighboring which cytotoxic release receptor specific the granules cell the (not and recognition kill, shown) target the polarized that identifies by of to cells are spared.

are cell cells recognizes is cell Neighboring for infected cell death uninfected programmed not T killed Infected

Questions.

Choice: of the Which Multiple true? statements is 9.1 following

development arterial is factor regulated the of transcription A. homeobox by prox1. and the venous system

to deliver lymphotoxin to arteries cell stromal induce LTi the non-hematopoietic B. lymph-node development.

chemokines Lymphotoxin-α3 to CXCL13. such as represses signaling C. induce nFκB

nodes. supports Lymphotoxin-α3 cervical development mesenteric and the binds of TnFr-I and lymph D.

9.2 the lymphoid through and B T secondary blood. organs cells distributed are Fill-in-the-Blanks: to the by their compartments respective instructed directed These to then chemokines. are as CCL21 the of in by nodes. _______in secreted by spleen the T-cell is example, _________ and the the displayed For lymph zone into respective as the T-cell of chemokine CCr7 signaling the zone. cells directs well as T this _______through is secreted for In cells the which is _______ ligand contrast, ______. and B the by to CXCr5, attracts __________ the enter the B-cell as participate respond cells follicle of also subset formation and _______, them of a cells which in to the T center. expresses germinal to can T allows CXCL13

describes events Which Multiple the into naive T-cell of node? Choice: 9.3 for the correctly following necessary entry lymph

results lowered induces which CCr7 affinity A. Gαi, signaling in integrin for binding.

lymph into cells s1p node. migration promotes upregulation the T naive B. receptor of on

in which cell the promotes activates CCL21, the rolling exposes to hev and LFa-1 migration. T C.

and interacts on MadCaM-1 hev promotes into cell Cd62L the node. with expression the lymph D. migration the on T

naive not cells viruses present or antigens infect to T In from tissues cells. cases, the do Short viral influenza 9.4 that antigen-presenting some Answer: peripheral hsv develop an to response adaptive immune system immune how pathogens? the is to such able

bloodstream. expression which False: or induces 9.5 in CCr7 the dendritic lymph to promotes stimulation migration TLr cells, True the through the node

cell dendritic as response. dendritic following cell a of (pdC) Matching: the activation signatures (cdC) plasmacytoid or each 9.6 pathogen Classify conventional

___1. CCL18 of ___2. production ___3. upon recycling activation Continuous MhC ___4. dC-sIGn of expression of expression Cd80 ___5. and Cd86 Answer: upon process dendritic in immune TLr-9 macrophages does of cells, cells, context differ of and 9.7 B how Short antigen among expression response? an Cd40L presentation stimulation the the

Multiple signaling? 9.8 CCr7 following of TCr and the is of Choice: Which common a consequence

activation A. Integrin

induction Multiple IL-2 the B. which induction of 9.9 increase can Choice: a production? C. Which Th1 Th2 by D. selection signaling following mechanism Cd28 positive describes

sequence. Cd28 of signaling IL-2 expression that mrna the proteins induces A. the stabilize

cell akt, supporting B. arrest. pI inhibits production by IL-2 3-kinase cycle

3-kinase ap-1 IL-2 nFκB, thereby the suppresses of increasing and pI production. production C.

T-cell In majority T-cell viral Cd8 True activation False: help. the requires Cd4 or 9.10 of infections,

function. each cell 9.11 cytokine its subset-specific T with respective Cd4 effector Matching: Match secreted

infections of eradication i. IL-17 intracellular A.

ii. IL-4 B. response bacteria extracellular to

C. IFn-γ iii. of Control extracellular parasites

iv. IL-10 D. Matching: Cd4 suppression The T-cell cytokines drive of 9.12 effector following responses Th differentiation. subset respective its subset-specific Match factor. transcription each with

A. i. IL-4 IFn-γ rorγt B. ii. Foxp3

IL-6 C. TGF-β and iii. T-bet

D. TGF-β iv. of 9.13 the Choice: GaTa3 false? statements Multiple Which following is

at TCr is signaling csMaC. A. strongest the

mediates in ligase, TCrs csMaC. e3 the an B. degradation of Cb1,

at molecule directs reorganization Cytoskeletal release the effector C. immunological synapse.

Integrins such as sMaC. in LFa-1 the associate D.

blanks the Fill-in-the-Blanks: selected word below. list sentences, For with the from following in fill the best of each 9.14 the only be once. will each used all used; should be words not word

malignant mediate cells cells. or destruction of T infected Cd8 can the specifically cell two cells induced induce this, different to in do Cd8 can order ways. In T _______ be death, which _______, can _______, such as pathway. ligands _______ _______ First, possess that T Cd8 apoptosis the cells induce or through pathway. contrast, cell In an intrinsic induced can death be also initiate which granzymes into allow are the _______ this mechanism, cell. released, entrance of the To once activate cleaves granzymes the _______, degrade and these to to allowing in _______, cleave the can cell’s access have gained cytoplasm, dna. turn _______ which and formation also the Granzyme a allowing release membrane, _______ as _______. for of the and consequence B cleaves disrupts of _______, mitochondrial

General references.

R.L. Coffman, the Origins perspective. a personal : TH1-TH2 of model: Nat. Immunol. 7:539–541. 2006,

receptors: chemokine and Griffith, cells and Sokol, and host immunity. J.W., Luster, C.L., for defense A.D.: Chemokines positioning Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2014, 32:659–702.

W.R., Carbone, Heath, and F.R. cell : cell surfaces. subsets Dendritic at and secondary body primary T in responses Nat. Immunol. 2009, 10:1237–1244.

and Chu, of the ligands. for M.K., cells J.B., of composition H.H., peptide-major complex histocompatibility preimmune On McLachlan, repertoire J.J.: Jenkins, specific T Moon, the Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2010, 28:275–294.

T.A. Springer, paradigm. multistep leukocyte lymphocyte and emigration: signals : Traffic for recirculation the 1994, 76:301–314. Cell

Zhu, Yamane, Paul, W.E. H., J., and effector cell T Differentiation CD4 : of populations. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2010 28:445–489.

references. Section

and T distinct lymphoid in B 9-1 secondary locations found lymphocytes tissues. in are

Liu, Y.J. Sites : activation, in of B selection, spleen. and lymphocyte tolerance J. Exp. Med. 1997, 186:625–629.

R., R.: place receptor-derived Carsetti, cell quality the F., and in Ray, of is and signals. B B., M.C., R.J., by cell spleen P., in steps determined Paige, Loder, B Mutschler, the C.J., Torres, discrete takes Sideras, Lamers, development J. Exp. Med. 1999, 190:75–89.

R.E. Mebius, lymphoid tissues. Organogenesis : of Nat. Rev. Immunol. 3:292–303. 2003,

The proteins family. and lymphoid tissues tumor is controlled necrosis inducer of lymphoid factor of by 9-2 development tissue cells the secondary

S., Haralambous, L., K., Douni, al. E., S., Hill, Pasparakis, Alexopoulou, S., Kassiotis, G., et D., M., Kontoyiannis, Akassoglou, Georgopoulos, Plows, D., in TNF and the of regulation immune role knockout Transgenic : analysis and disease pathogenesis. of J. Inflamm. 1996, 47:27–38.

D.D. Y.X., Fu, Chaplin, and Development of tissues. and lymphoid secondary maturation : Annu. Rev. Immunol. 1999, 17:399–433.

Matsumoto, O., M.H., M., Baranyay, Nahm, D.D. Mariathasan, and F., S., Chaplin, Kanagawa, migration. lymph development, is organ lymphotoxin-α lymphocyte of abnormal (LTα)-deficient : due defective mice in to Absence nodes not Inflamm. J. 45:72–78. 1995,

function Kraal, and Mebius, G.: of and R.E., spleen. the Structure Nat. Rev. Immunol. 606–616. 2005, 5:

Mebius, P., and I.L. Rennert, Weissman, R.E., but : that follicular cells. LTβ+ to cells, T Developing cells and CD4+CD3– nodes cells can B differentiate collect not lymph NK APC, or 7:493–504. Immunity 1997,

and R., Roozendaal, Mebius, R.E. : Stromal-immune cell interactions. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 29:23–43. 2011,

development lymphatic of and Oliver, the Prox1 the Wigle, for required system. function G.: J.T., is murine 1999, Cell 98:769–778.

of secondary tissues lymphoid 9-3 and distinct are into B the partitioned chemokines. cells by regions actions of T

J.G. K.M., Ansel, Cyster, and : in Chemokines lymphopoiesis lymphoid development. organ and Curr. Opin. Immunol. 2001, 13:172–179.

Cyster, J.G. and organs. cell secondary : lymphoid migration in Chemokines Science 1999, 286:2098–2102.

Cyster, J.G. : migration: scent T of the zone. Leukocyte Curr. Biol. 2000, 10:R30–R33.

E.H., Reif, K.M., H.L., P.L., K., Hyman, Ekland, Tang, Ansel, J.G., Cyster, Luther,

Ngo, and V.N. S.A., homing cells stromal and Follicular to lymphocyte : follicles. Immunol. Rev. 176:181–193. 2000,

tissues, sampling secondary T cells on dendritic through 9-4 migrate cells. complexes Naive lymphoid peptide:MHC

A., and biology Caux, cell Vicari, of by Chemin, S., chemokines. trafficking Bouteiller, B., Dieu-Nosjean, dendritic Ait-Yahia, and de Dendritic Homey, regulation cell Massacrier, B., A.: Zlotnik, C., O., K., Vanbervliet, C., M.C., Springer Semin. Immunopathol. 22:345–369. 2000,

M.K. Jenkins, and A.A., Itano, in node. to the cells CD4 lymph T naïve : Antigen presentation Nat. Immunol. 4:733–739. 2003,

Kimpton, R.N. C.R., W.G., Brandon, and Mackay, Cahill, M.R., and blood lymph subsets the lymph secondary in nodes. marked between : afferent and their distribution show differences Lymphocyte of efferent J. Exp. Med. 167:1755–1765. 1988,

Butcher, Picker, L.J., and E.C. : homing. and mechanisms molecular of lymphocyte Physiological Annu. Rev. Immunol. 10:561–591. 1993,

R.J., F., P.J., Fu, and W., Li, Thomson, A.W. O’Connell, Steptoe, associated rejection. a allografts cells of tolerance of from is Trafficking in allostimulatory tissue donors: of with : Flt3L-treated from liver lymphoid switch APC to recipient augmentation potent Transpl. Immunol. 1999, 7:51–57.

the M., and T., from Ryoke, states. Kunisada, Hayashi, Kakiuchi, H., Nakano, trafficking skin in T., steady and Yamazaki, antigen Distinct K., S.: active Yoshino, H., Int. Immunol. 2003, 15:773–779.

and chemokines molecules. depends on entry lymphoid Lymphocyte adhesion tissues into 9-5

A., leukocytes. Hogg, McDowall, B., Leitinger, R., P.: Mechanisms Henderson, Stanley, integrins and activity contributing on N., to of the Porter, J., Immunol. Rev. 186:164–171. 2002,

E.C. and Campbell, D.J., Kunkel, E.J., Butcher, lymphocyte in and Chemokines immunity. : trafficking intestinal Microcirculation 2003, 10:313–323.

D.: roles proteinases. molecules adhesion of J.A., the Graesser, evolving immune and system: the Cell and interrelated migration in Madri, Dev. Immunol. 7:103–116. 2000,

L.K., E.S. Petersen, T.E., and Rasmussen, Sørensen, Johnsen, L.B., aberrant : as is expressed proteins. encodes GlyCAM-1 Human mammary the gland truncated splicing variants mRNA and various in Immunol. Lett. 83:73–75. 2002,

S.D. Rosen, beyond. homing, and L-selectin: Ligands : for inflammation, Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2004, 22:129–156.

Mempel, Andrian, T.R. and von U.H., in lymph Homing : nodes. cellular traffic and Nat. Rev. Immunol. 3:867–878. 2003,

entry is responsible into T for Activation by the cells lymph naive nodes. integrins 9-6 chemokines of of

J.G. Cyster, migration and : sphingosine-1-phosphate, Chemokines, lymphoid in organs. cell secondary Annu. Rev. Immunol. 23:127–159. 2005,

leukocyte and integrin G., C., Kim, activation E.: Rapid Butcher, Laudanna, chemokines. J.Y., by Constantin, Immunol. Rev. 2002, 186:37–46.

Cyster, and Lo, J.G. C.G., T.T., Lu, pulp. white entry of splenic lymphocyte the Integrin-dependence into : Exp. J. Med. 2003, 197:353–361.

Luo, Springer, and Carman, C.V., T.A. B.H., and signaling. integrin Structural of basis regulation : Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2007, 25:619–647.

H., Rosen, Goetzl, and E.J. network. paracrine autocrine receptors: and and an its 1-phosphate : Sphingosine Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2005, 5:560–570.

from The lymph by exit controlled nodes 9-7 a T is lipid. cells chemotactic of

S.R. J.G., Cyster, Schwab, and lymphoid Sphingosine-1-phosphate organs. from egress : lymphocyte and Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2012, 30:69-94.

activated dendritic initiated lymphoid responses T-cell by cells. organs secondary 9-8 are in

Miller, M.J., Dustin, Nussenzweig, R.N., and Germain, M.L., M.C. promise. pitfalls immune Dynamic and of : system: the imaging progress, Nat. Rev. Immunol. 6:497–507. 2006,

M.D., in Autonomous Wei, microscopy. Parker, S.H., M.J., and cell T two-photon Cahalan, vivo trafficking with Miller, I.: examined intravital Proc. Acad. Natl Sci. 2003, USA 100:2604–2609.

C.H. Lee, and K.P., Schlienger, Craighead, Levine, N., B.L., June, K., protein CD4+ human of dendritic Efficient cells. antigen-specific T priming monocyte-derived by : cells Blood 2000, 96:3490–3498.

cell The presentation in Amigorena, biology C., cells. Thery, dendritic and antigen S.: of Curr. Opin. Immunol. 13:45–51. 2001,

Dendritic cells 9-9 wide antigens process a of array pathogens. from

Belz, Carbone, W.R.: dendritic G.T., antigens Cross-presentation F.R., and Heath, by of cells. Crit. Rev. Immunol. 22:439–448. 2002,

T P., cells. and and cell C., Amigorena, S.: dendritic by J., Zitvogel, presentation stimulation Guermonprez, L., Valladeau, Thery, Antigen Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2002, 20:621–667.

Jung, of dendritic and and cells. A., S.: Mildner, function Development 2014, Immunity 40:642–656.

A.T., Albring, K.M. J.C., Murphy, and Wu, Satpathy, X., lineage. the : cell dendritic Re(de)fining Nat. Immunol. 13:1145–1154. 2012,

W.R.: and dendritic K., CD8+ Shortman, cell The subset. Heath, Immunol. Rev. 2010, 234:18–31.

Naik, S.H. and K., Shortman, inflammatory and development. : dendritic-cell Steady-state Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2007, 7:19–30.

their organs and lymphoid to antigen induces migration processing. enhances

Heath, Carbone, W.R., Zhan, C.M., K., Villadangos, F.R. Y., J.A., S., Waithman, Lew, Jones, Shortman, and Allan, A.M., R.S., Bedoui, J., Migratory transfer node-resident lymph efficient : a for to cells cell priming. antigen population dendritic CTL dendritic 2006, 25:153–162. Immunity

B.J. and Bachman, M.F., Marsland, M., Kopf, : Chemokines: just than road more signs. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 6:159–164. 2006,

microbial by and Toll-dependent dendritic J.M., selection antigens for of Medzhitov, R.: Blander, cells. presentation 2006, Nature 440:808–812.

control immune Medzhitov, receptor Toll-like R.: of adaptive A., Iwasaki, responses. and Nat. Immunol. 2004, 10:988–995.

bug the tolls. Sousa, receptors e for Toll-like and cells: C.: dendritic whom Reis Semin. Immunol. 2004, 16:27–34.

conventional and by cells. act for helper may dendritic as cells presentation antigen

Production and Trinchieri, type interferons: G.: Asselin-Paturel, cells dendritic and of I C., plasmacytoid beyond. J. Exp. Med. 202:461–465. 2005,

naïve helper Pekosz, promote of T unpolarized can of antigen-experienced A., and T 1 R., and E.R., cells to but M.: M., proliferation Cella, cells Kanagawa, Veeraswamy, expansion fail O., Interferon-producing T Krug, A., Unanue, induce cells. Colonna, differentiation Exp. J. Med. 2003, 197:899–906.

for immune activation. essential between Interleukin Tada, conventional crosstalk T.: and Ohteki, H., Kuwajima, plasmacytoid T., cells K., and CpG-induced Sato, Ishida, 15-dependent Tezuka, H., is dendritic S., Nat. Immunol. 2006, 7:740–746.

M., Colonna, of cells viral functions the M.: Unraveling and autoimmunity, during and tolerance. infections, plasmacytoid dendritic Swiecki, Immunol. Rev. 234:142–162. 2010,

are can present be pathogens to T 9-12 that cells naive foreign scavenger antigens Macrophages to induced cells. by

W.P., Erwig, Rees, Pearce, A., and A.J. R.N., Barker, L.P., Hill, K.S., Devine, enhanced cells. is macrophages necrotic, but the of by uptake by : apoptotic, not Antigen presentation Clin. Exp. Immunol. 127:220–225. 2002,

interactions Bassetti, M., Underhill, macrophages Rudensky, Dynamic Aderem, cells T of with D.M., A.: presentation. antigen during and A., Exp. J. Med. 1999, 190:1909–1914.

Pisetsky, C.F., Zhu, D.S. Reich, F.G., and receptor in role and DNA by scavenger of oligonucleotides. macrophage : stimulation bacterial synthetic The the immune Immunology 2001, 103:226–234.

surface bind that highly B immunoglobulin. antigens 9-13 cells to presenting efficient their at are

the of to Leclerc, P., between of antigen T C.: presentation rate The antigen Bedouelle, determines efficiency England, antibody-mediated dissociation H., and cells. antibody Guermonprez, and P., J. Immunol. 1998, 161:4542–4548.

N., T., antigen Shirota, elaborating Hattori, cells conjugated Hirasawa, and capturing B Tamura, Terui, cells T., K., by Th1 oligodeoxynucleotides H., G.: with CpG IL-12. Ohuchi, Sano, induce K., Immunol. J. 2002, 169:787–794.

L.M., Sparks, Weaver, K.R., Zinn, Schwiebert, Collawn, Kang, L., Zaliauskiene, and J.F. K., C.T., S., by Enhancement MHC of uptake : responses class II-restricted of peptide receptor-mediated antigens. J. Immunol. 169:2337–2345. 2002,

cells. initial the molecules antigen-presenting interaction 9-14 with naive cells Cell-adhesion mediate of T

M.L. Dustin, and T-cell kinapses. : activation through immunological synapses Immunol. Rev. 2008, 221:77–89.

P., Brocker, Friedl, and E.B. move: on T-cell diversity with triggering of : cells. TCR antigen-presenting interactions the Immunol. Rev. 186:83–89. 2002,

and A., in interactions K.S., T S., matrix: Schafer, Antigen sequential. dynamic, Borgmann, are E.B., M., Friedl, Kampgen, Brocker, Grabbe, and cells dendritic of E., short presentation cells P.: Zanker, Gunzer, S., lived, extracellular with Immunity 13:323–332. 2000,

immune F.: interactions. Sanchez-Madrid, polarity M.C., adhesion and Montoya, during Sancho, M., Cell and D., Vicente-Manzanares, Immunol. Rev. 186:68–82. 2002,

J., Assembling immunological of Wang, synapse. and resolution atomic Eck, the M.J.: views Curr. Opin. Immunol. 2003, 15:286–293.

deliver 9-15 the clonal of T cells. for and differentiation signals expansion cells Antigen-presenting naive multiple

H., J.A. Bour-Jordan, and Bluestone, function: : regulatory and costimulatory of a CD28 signals. balance Clin. J. Immunol. 22:1–7. 2002,

Chen, L., D.B. Flies, and Molecular co-stimulation co-inhibition. mechanisms : cell T and of Nat. Rev. Immunol. 13:227–242. 2013,

Delaney, J.A., Coyle, and T., Goodearl, A.J. Gonzalo, J., Gutierrez-Ramos, Corcoran, A., J.C., Cutting the and : complementary CD28 inducible both for unique molecules costimulator related activation. deliver optimal T-cell signals and required edge: J. Immunol. 166:1–5. 2001,

The and R.J., family Sharpe, A.H.: revisited. G.J., B7 Freeman, Greenwald, Annu. Rev. Immunol. 23:515–548. 2005,

M.L. Kapsenberg, T-cell Dendritic-cell of pathogen-driven : control polarization. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2003, 3:984–993.

Wang, cells H., S., Zhu, ICOS. A.I., that Chen, Tamada, binds Costimulation Dong, and J., of L.: Chapoval, T by B7-H2, a Ni, molecule K., B7-like G., Blood 96:2808–2813. 2000,

interleukin-2 T induces of activated co-stimulation CD28-dependent of cells and high-affinity receptor. 9-16 IL-2 the expression

signalling. TCR quantitative CD28-mediated Acuto, support and O., F.: co-stimulation: a for Michel, Nat. Rev. Immunol. 3:939–951. 2003,

Gaffen, S.L. domains the Signaling interleukin : 2 of receptor. 2001, Cytokine 14:63–77.

Kasprzak, J.A. Shapiro, Cole, B.A., Ragheb, Y., Seko, W., and S., mRNA : cytokine role stability disease. pathogenesis of in autoimmune The of the Autoimmun. Rev. 2006, 5:299–305.

activation. Y., promoter costimulatory Yashiro-Ohtani, IL-2 underlying X.Y., H.: Gu, molecules W.R., CD28 T., H., M., Molecular contribution non-CD28 differential Zhou, and Park, versus Fujiwara, Nakahira, of Naramura, M., mechanisms Hamaoka, R., to Abe, Immunol. J. 168:3847–3854. 2002,

pathways T-cell activation. Additional co-stimulatory 9-17 involved in

diseases. T-cell TNF Croft, of in role members M.: superfamily The and function Nat. Rev. Immunol. 9:271–285. 2009,

The family revisited. A.H.: R.J., G.J., Freeman, B7 Sharpe, and Greenwald, Annu. Rev. Immunol. 23:515–548. 2005,

T.H. Watts, T cell : responses. of family members costimulation in TNF/TNFR Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2005, 23:23–68.

cells cells 9-18 effector co-stimulation to T into Proliferating act. T differentiate require do that not

is Gudmundsdottir, effector Turka, Wells, and level: in function linked proliferative vivo of A.D., at to cell H., single-cell requirements T the and clonal expansion capacity. L.A.: Dynamics J. Immunol. 162:5212–5223. 1999,

and C.A., A.K. London, M.P., Abbas, Lodge, : cells. Functional and dependence responses of T costimulator CD4+ memory Immunol. J. 2000, 164:265–272.

(CD86) Studies Th2 expression and both not of B7-1 of Th1 priming A.H.: versus distinct during cytokine cells production. for using B7 Schweitzer, molecules show A.N., B7-2 requirements but antigen-presenting restimulation (CD80) and Sharpe, lacking J. Immunol. 1998, 161:2762–2771.

can effector T ways to be cytotoxic CD8 9-19 in cells. different cells become activated

J.E., O., Marker, Thomsen, S.O., Andreasen, Christensen, and A.R. of maintenance CD8+ and T CD28 : ligand induction cell and of Role antiviral responses. in effector CD40 J. Immunol. 2000, 164:3689–3697.

Trubey, Blazevic, G.M. C.M., V., and Shearer, in helper the of costimulatory for and human Analysis T virus-specific requirements generating : effector vitro responses. Clin. J. Immunol. 21:293–302. 2001,

place cell effector time: the responses. right and L., The Sha, B7 Liang, novel W.C.: T members regulate family at right Curr. Opin. Immunol. 2002, 14:384–390.

CD4+ generation. in Ahmed, and memory effector differences and CD8+ R.A., R.: T cell and Seder, and Similarities Nat. Immunol. 2003, 4:835–842.

Manjunath, von W., U.H. Andrian, N., and Weninger, cells. CD8+ : and differentiation Migration T of Immunol. Rev. 2002, 186:221–233.

several 9-20 into functionally subsets differentiate of cells effector cells. T different CD4

R., C.T. Basu, and Hatton, Weaver, R.D., family: flexibility The follows function. Th17 : Immunol. Rev. 2013, 252:89–103.

Abbas, Bluestone, and J.A., A.K. T adaptive cells. : versus regulatory Natural Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2003, 3:253–257.

(TFH). S.: Crotty, T helper Follicular cells Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2011, 29:621–663.

helper insights differentiation function cells. New of and C.: into T King, follicular the Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2009, 9:757–766.

A.Y. Rudensky, and D.R., Littman, regulatory and in Th17 and T cells inflammation. mediating : restraining 140:845–858. 2010, Cell

Reiner, K.M., Murphy, and S.L. helper decisions cells. T of : lineage The Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2:933–944. 2002,

R.I., and Nurieva, of follicular helper the cells. and Y.: Understanding T Chung, function development Cell Mol. Immunol. 7:190–197. 2010,

naive down the pathways. T induce CD4 cells of Cytokines differentiation 9-21 distinct effector

R.S., of P., S., N., lepromatous Reddi, A.L., Brooks, of Nath, and effect reactional Vemuri, the Colston, cytokine V.: patients. cells Jain, on antigen Misra, The profiles stable leprosy I., and presenting Ramesh, M.J., Immunol. Lett. 75:69–76. 2000,

and Paul, O’Shea, J.J., W.E. plasticity Mechanisms lineage helper T and cells. commitment underlying of : CD4+ 327:1098–1102. 2010, Science

Luster, Voehringer, Van D., H.E., A.M., Tager, and Locksley, Rooijen, N., Reese, Liang, A.D., R.M. T.A., of accumulation with innate tissue immune in the induces Chitin cells : associated allergy. Nature 2007, 447:92–96.

Peng, S.L., B.M., S.J., Szabo, L.H. Glimcher, Sullivan, and Th1 regulating mechanisms Molecular : responses. immune Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2003, 21:713–758.

Harrington, P.R., Murphy, K.M. Gavrieli, L.E., Mangan, M., Weaver, C.T., and cell effector with CD4 T ties. lineage Th17: an regulatory : 24:677–688. 2006, Immunity

subsets produce. through 9-22 the each cross-regulate can other’s CD4 T-cell they differentiation cytokines

M., S.L., R.W. Dutton, Swain, Carter, L., Croft, and reciprocal type of 1 in populations: of interleukin-4 and profiles. type : polarized antigen-specific action 2 versus promoting Generation IL-12 cytokine effector CD8 Exp. J. Med. 180:1715–1728. 1994,

polarization. O., Grakoui, mediate A., Kanagawa, P.M.: pathways effects K.M., altered Allen, ligands antigen D.L., and dose on cell and the Donermeyer, TCR-independent peptide Th of Murphy, Immunol. J. 1999, 162:1923–1930.

and R.D., Murphy, L.E., Harrington, Hatton, C.T. K.M., Mangan, H., Turner, Weaver, Murphy, P.R., T.L., via type from T T effector CD4+ 1 distinct develop the cells lineages. a 17-producing Interleukin : lineage 2 helper and Nat. Immunol. 6:1123–1132. 2005,

BALB/c Beck, N.: to McSorley, V., CD4+ flora Breittmayer, the Malherbe, T microbial with cells mice antigens J.P., from A., ability S.S., Priming the of major. infected rapidly Glaichenhaus, by Julia, Leishmania and intestinal secrete F., determines Girard-Pipau, in IL-4 L., J. Immunol. 2000, 165:5637–5645.

M., priming. provides lymph TH1 NK IFN-γ Martin-Fontecha, of to and for Induced recruitment Gerard, Thomsen, cells Lipp, Brett, S., C., Lanzavecchia, L.L., F.: nodes A., A., Sallusto, Nat. Immunol. 5:1260–1265. 2004,

of and T IL-4and Bottomly, Polarization IFN-γ-producing CD4+ T., Kamogawa, Flavell, naïve K., cells activation of cells. CD4+ T Nakamura, Y., R.A.: following J. Immunol. 1997, 158:1085–1094.

Seder, W.E. and R.A., Paul, phenotype T by : producing of Acquisition CD4+ lymphokine cells. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 1994, 12:635–673.

in involved T controlling are adaptive CD4 Regulatory cells responses. 9-23 immune

Fontenot, Rudensky, A.Y. J.D., and the well cell family adapted Foxp3. A factor regulatory development and transcription forkhead T regulatory contrivance: : Nat. Immunol. 6:331–337. 2005,

M.G., Roncarolo, M.K. R., Bacchetta, Narula, and S., Levings, C., Bordignon, 1 T regulatory : Type cells. Immunol. Rev. 182:68–79. 2001,

and Naturally Sakaguchi, tolerance to regulatory cells CD25+CD4+ immunological arising T S.: non-self. Foxp3-expressing in self Nat. Immunol. 6:345–352. 2005,

and tolerance. S., Sakaguchi, Ono, immune T cells T., Yamaguchi, Regulatory T., and M.: Nomura, 133:775–787. Cell 2008,

M., A.: immune by of Saraiva, O’Garra, regulation production cells. IL-10 and The Nat. Rev. Immunol. 10:170–181. 2010,

T-cell are interactions 9-24 cells by antigen-nonspecific initiated with Effector molecules. target cell-adhesion

Dustin, M.L. immunological through : T-cell synapses and activation kinases. Immunol. Rev. 2008, 221:77–89.

and der Merwe, Davis, van S.J. P.A., Molecular : mediating recognition. interactions antigen cell T Annu. Rev. Immunol. 21:659–684. 2003,

signaling to release molecules. of the targets regulate direct and to effector

G., J., R., Bossi, S., Trambas, Booth, G.M. and Griffiths, Stinchcombe, C., Clark, synapse: of : The secretory the a killer. serial secrets Immunol. Rev. 2002, 189:152–160.

D., F.: Cell M.C., adhesion immune M., polarity Vicente-Manzanares, Sanchez-Madrid, Sancho, Montoya, during and and interactions. Immunol. Rev. 2002, 186:68–82.

and Trambas, G.M. Griffiths, C.M., death. the kiss of Delivering : Nat. Immunol. 4:399–403. 2003,

they T 9-26 produce. molecules that of effector effector The functions array of by determined are cells the a & at can Cytokines or locally act distance. 9-27

and C.F., system: A.: evasion. I type Basler, and Garcia-Sastre, interferon antiviral and induction the Viruses Int. Rev. Immunol. 21:305–337. 2002,

W.E. J.L., O’Shea, and Boulay, Paul, J.J., their and Molecular within I cytokines : phylogeny cognate receptors. type 2003, Immunity 19:159–163.

and L.G., F.V. Guidotti, Chisari, infections. Cytokine-mediated viral of control : 2000, Virology 273:221–227.

mechanisms D.W.: Tvinnereim, and infection. Harty, to White, CD8+ effector A.R., T J.T., resistance in cell Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2000, 18:275–308.

A.E. Proudfoot, targets. therapeutic multifaceted receptors: Chemokine : Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2002, 2:106–115.

as TNF-family proteins with trimeric usually the surface. that associated express cells 9-28 are cytokines several cell T

both by mycobacterial L.G., TNF-alpha Murray, S., inducible intracellular Ryffel, B., controls oxide synthase-independent nitric synthase-dependent Freeman, Bekker, inducible G.: and oxide growth pathways. nitric P.J., Kaplan, and Immunol. J. 166:6728–6734. 2001,

D.N. Hehlgans, Mannel, and T., : TNF–TNF The system. receptor Biol. Chem. 383:1581–1585. 2002,

C.F. Ware, : LIGHT, Network lymphotoxins, TNF. and communications: Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2005, 23:787–819.

extrinsic intrinsic cells T pathways death via to apoptosis. and induce 9-29 undergo of programmed cell cells Cytotoxic target

B.B. Aggarwal, pathways superfamily: double-edged the sword. Signalling : TNF a of Nat. Rev. Immunol. 3:745–756. 2003,

Ashton-Rickardt, P.G. cell The programmed granule death. pathway : of Crit. Rev. Immunol. 2005, 25:161–182.

G.A. Bishop, of roles in function. The regulation the multifaceted : B-cell TRAFs of Nat. Rev. Immunol. 4:775–786. 2004,

Activation-induced Pinkoski, Droin, and N., cells. Green, M.: in D.R., death T cell Immunol. Rev. 2003, 193:70–81.

cytotoxicity. Ley, Russell, T.J.: J.H., Lymphocyte-mediated and Annu. Rev. Immunol. 20:323–370. 2002,

Siegel, R.M. crossroads and immune-cell life Caspases the of : at death. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 6:308–317. 2006,

H.G. Michaelsson, Wallin, Ljunggren, and Grandien, A., Screpanti, R.P., V., J., cell-mediated cytotoxicity. perforin-independent : NK of Regulation Eur. Immunol. J. 2003, 33:2727–2735.

of The 9-30 cytochrome mediated c pathway is intrinsic mitochondria. by the apoptosis release from of

Bcl-2 life-ordeath for The decisions. checkpoints and sensors family: C.: Borner, protein Mol. Immunol. 2003, 39:615–647.

G.S. and Salvesen, Bratton, S.B., the Apaf-1-caspase-9 apoptosome. of Regulation : J. Sci. Cell 123:3209–3214. 2010,

of cell pathways Death granzyme Lieberman, cuts: death. J.: D., Chowdhury, by thousand a and programmed Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2008, 26:389–420.

P.: Molecular Mitchell, of T.C., activated T and Marrack, Zhu, D.A., J., mechanisms Hildeman, cell vivo. in death Y., Kappler, Curr. Opin. Immunol. 2002, 14:354–359.

system. BH3-only the Strasser, role immune proteins A.: of in The Nat. Rev. Immunol. 5:189–200. 2005,

contained 9-31 the CD8 that trigger effector of in granules cytotoxic apoptosis T are proteins Cytotoxic cells.

D.R., and R.C. Pinkoski, M.J., Heibein, Lee, Barry, M., S.F., J.A., Green, R.W., Moyer, Bleackley, short-circuits the B 8 killing for Granzyme cytotoxic granule-mediated directly activity T-lymphocyte Bid. cleaving during by caspase : need Mol. Biol. Cell 2000, 20:3781–3794.

Revell, mice. of Johnson, Grossman, and The Bredemeyer, P.A., Lu, humans A.J., orphan H., and Z.H., Ley, W.J., granzymes T.J.: Curr. Opin. Immunol. 2003, 15:544–552.

weapons arsenal. new granule-mediated The ABCs J.: in the Lieberman, cytotoxicity: of Nat. Rev. Immunol. 3:361–370. 2003,

how and death: perforin Lieberman, understanding M.E., of J.: works. the Pipkin, Delivering on progress kiss Curr. Opin. Immunol. 2007, 19:301–308.

Ishida, and Fas/Fas exocytosis, by the as S.: pathway Yasukawa, Granule is Ohminami, of Y., system, Y., Arai, not CD4+ well in the Fujita, humans. cytotoxic main alloantigen-specific Kasahara, ligand lymphocytes and CD8+ mediated H., cytotoxicity M., J., as T 95:2352–2355. Blood 2000,

cells 9-32 targets Cytotoxic antigen. of and killers specific are a T selective serial expressing

Stinchcombe, Griffiths, and J.C., G.M. Secretory : cell-mediated cytotoxicity. in mechanisms Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 23:495–517. 2007,

Veugelers, I., B., C., T., Sawchuk, Shostak, Frantz, Bleackley, K., R.C. and Motyka, requires B-serglycin cytotoxic granzyme endocytosis. dynamin The : granules for from complex Blood 103:3845–3853. 2004,

by cells Cytotoxic T act also releasing 9-33 cytokines.

type A., 2 M.R., I., and in Lanyon, CD8+ Amel-Kashipaz, systemic M.L., 1 Quantitative cells between T type analysis Huggins, lupus Robins, P., of erythematosus. balance and and R.J.: Powell, qualitative cytokine-producing CD8– the Todd, and J. Autoimmun. 2001, 17:155–163.

J.B., Dobrzanski, J.A., M.J., Reome, and Hollenbaugh, R.W. Dutton, complementary : by in long-term Tc2 elicit that effector therapy contrasting and mechanisms 1 tumor Tc1 immunity responses. antitumor type result endogenous cell Immunol. J. 172:1380–1390. 2004,

type cytokine 2 chronic and virus L., cells G., Virus-specific Barnaba, disease Schiaffella, activity profile different Francavilla, S., L.V., in E., Abrignani, type Casciaro, C., V.: V., are related hepatitis to Chircu, M.A., CD8+ Bruno, or 1 with Sette, A., Prezzi, Finocchi, C T infection. Eur. J. Immunol. 2001, 31:894–906.

The Humoral Immune Response

the fluids. extracellular and through can body’s by spaces, intracellular pathogens moving spread multiply extracellular pathogens even in the Many by immune products, and destroy which prevent produced in the the act spaces extracellular by infections. microorganisms cells intracellular of B antibodies protected and extracellular humoral are spread response, to their The opsonization, activation neutralization, contribute (Fig. antibodies 1-20, ways: Section main to complement 10.1). we As three in introduced immunity and in bind cells, pathogens or can and pathogen; bacterial also ability thus enter their preventing ability neutralize cells. to to and Antibodies antibodies action prevent may toxins, enter therefore their to are bind said infect and to the the regions). uptake through by Fc pathogens opsonization, (C facilitate binding of by constant their the to phagocytes, receptors Antibodies also regions antibodies classical of activate Chapter Finally, pathway 2. bound of described can in proteins the complement pathogens as to the we system, certain This forming pores surface, activate by phagocytic the microorganisms opsonization proteins can lyse which complex, the the increase membranes. by cells complement pathogen’s site other placing in membrane-attack their of onto can help directly to recruit infection, and heavy-chain effector produced, antibodies is of class The of the influenced mechanisms Section 5-12). determines by their isotype choice the which used (see which are

and first with describe that naive cells of interactions In the lead of this of we cells production. helper the with cells and B part activation the chapter, B antigen to T antibody Section help, B Some of help involves can naive microbial follicular production antibody without usually from cells provoke cells antigens T-cell (see but (TFH) 9-20). activation T antigens helper by B cells then Activated and memory antibody-secreting cells. B into differentiate cells plasma affinity their for hypermutation variable-region called genes. maturation, (V-region) somatic affinity antigen greater antibody by of in of which responses target are undergo antibody produced Most antibodies process the a the class hypermutation response. diversity on molecular examine the switching—a its We that antibodies somatic as consequences, classes of immunological functional mechanism antibody of as process and the that different generates confer well occur cells maturation and T-cell switching in help. and B Both only affinity require class second classes the secreted those chapter, of particular antibody, into In sites. mucosal of introduce the functions various and part distributions of we the in the detail discuss to mechanisms of engages the of third how region we the contain eliminate effector chapter, in the and antibody infections. Fc part In various and T-cell this immune is 11. Like response immunological in discussed produces humoral the Chapter response, memory, the

Fig. opsonization, complement response immune humoral 10.1 neutralization, mediate the activation. Antibodies through and protect plasma antibodies After being main secreted infection by host from the three in ways. cells, pathogens infectivity They inhibit effects can the their or called of by neutralization a to process (top or panel). binding toxic them, products and macrophages accessory ingest the When receptors the as these such and to antibody’s bind pathogens, helping can region Fc cells on to pathogen. Fc kill neutrophils, to cells, bound (middle process panel). called is opsonization This first activating can trigger classical pathway. Antibodies by the the step C1, complement in complement (bottom of can activating by certain also directly complement kill panel). Deposition enhances cells bacterial and the membrane-attack proteins complex opsonization

activation antigen and T helper cells. by B-cell

and immunoglobulin distributions classes. functions of The

destruction Fc The receptors. of via antibody-coated pathogens

Fig. or A second thymus-dependent activation signal by antigens. required 10.2 thymus-independent is B-cell either for through in activation for is several first and its (BCR) antigen Chapter as 1) B-cell as pathways The described receptor required (indicated signal 7. activates delivered Signaling interact and opsonized CD19, surfaces. the by enhanced BCR co-receptors by CD21 the which microbial C3b is with on cell a For antigen to (first a T on II delivered recognizes helper degraded that (indicated surface. MHC as the fragments as (TFH) molecules class second antigens B-cell panel), the 2) signal bound is peptides of by thymus-dependent NFκB-inducing via the activating signaling cell, binds to TFH on B on the kinase cell (NIK). NFκB pathway CD40L non-canonical CD40 the such Section induces 7-17). Bcl-2 expression genes This as pro-survival (see of For a can in described (second lipopolysaccharide second as ligands, signal recognize bacterial antigens or 3. as receptors such TLR be (LPS) bacterial antigen-associated through that Toll-like thymus-independent panel), delivered Chapter DNA,

B-cell cells. T and by antigen activation helper

immunoglobulin roles as (BCR) in the response in pathogens. that to B-cell B-cell The two surface receptor plays serves activation Like a antigens the antigen the microbe. signaling the receptor from cascade derived on cells, initiates BCR T binding upon the for to that class surface. the processing, molecules to addition, the so can antigen MHC antigen antigenic BCR be returned bound sites to II B-cell In intracellular peptides can deliver the by differentiated same that II response class complexes These cells peptide:MHC in to already are pathogen. T recognized antigen-specific have helper cells, of response, (see that 10-6) before effector molecules generate an to is the The formed cells of cells and structure germinal help antibody-secreting during antibody antibody differentiate T plasma proliferate cytokines Section phase the to of center B cells. express cell B called into into memory B the cells and or that surface and a longterm memory and emergence intermediate the B cells rapid to T-cell cells of antigens antigens to these and absence the important the microbial can provides of ability in pathogens. directly response to help, a Some directly B respond many activate the antibody organs. the However, of of with classes immunoglobulin the T to cells other of peripheral for cells tuning switching lymphoid increase IgM helper cells B antigen on antibody the and antigen-stimulated other most interaction than to the the in fine responses affinity depend the and have lower to those tend help. functionally by less T-cell than antigens with microbial alone be induced Thus, induced to antibodies and affinity versatile

the antigen involves by cells signals microbial Activation B of and TFH B-cell or antigens. cells receptor from 10-1 either

8, cells. T learned provided professional well receptor requires of from naive activation antigen-presenting derived as the signals in co-stimulatory T-cell we signals cells Chapter as by As cells from naive addition either from also in or, T helper signals some B-cell arise (Fig. from receptor, signals derived require to directly Similarly, cases, that can cell microbial constituents in accessory the B a 10.2).

cells. by activation antigen helper T and B-cell

known involve unable and typically or cells, in are thymus-dependent alone antigens, antigens who are help. animals or T Protein as therefore induce responses they TD antigen-specific T-cell to lack antibody and humans TH2, reside the and that cells. cells differentiated in involved or T effector TH17 tissues TFH The fully not are are lymphoid TH1, cells a help, B display cell on antigen in cell can surface its recognize. must that a the T-cell T receive form To the with to cell a derived returned antigen II B and complex peptides and surface occurs class the surface in bound on degraded cell (see from is molecules when B internalized by immunoglobulin MHC it This are cell Fig. the within panel). first 10.2, favor that provides signals cell these B complexes, it induce proliferation. the the with peptide:MHC survival When cell TFH and recognizes expression production by cells, CD40 the activation its of including TFH (CD154), include (Fig. by B ligand, and cells These of TFH IL-21 various cytokines CD40L of signals on 10.3). Section the signaling the of (see inducing Bcl-2. CD40 anti-apoptotic by non-canonical 7-23) and NFκB activates as expression such B-cell molecules pathway survival enhances cells. IL-21 cells differentiation B activates enhances and proliferation into memory signaling cellular STAT3 and and plasma of cells IL-4, provide we 10-12. see IFN-γ, cytokines IL-6, can by which the produced will Section and antibody include that type in regulate signals as TFH produced, Other TGF-β, made from Chapter cells other These 9), cytokines also are effector are but subsets by these. TFH in distinct (described differentiated GATA-3 factors STAT6, regulatory example, cells that TFH the are by of are elements For transcription IL-4 for IL-4 and the cells. which responsible production TH2 transcribe independent using gene

from constituents antibody cells. some responses to absence cells, microbial in production rely help of on protein induce T T While B-cell the helper antigens can because in as or induce individuals who T known are antigens microbial lymphocytes. thymus-independent antibody have responses no TI These antigens they can antigens typically BCR such cross-link and polysaccharides highly repetitive are on of can the walls, as bacterial Such the cells. cell B molecules, direct recognition signal be B the common such cell signaling TLR In microbial Fig. that from as of can can a second a derived activate in (see cases, LPS such constituent in the described panel), second pathway, as NFκB activating Chapter 10.2, 3. them Thymus-independent return provide we later. antibody responses to will extracellular some bacteria, and protection against

germinal cells various differentiation cell proceed the CD40 activate by can center antibody-secreting TCR center, or signals germinal memoryB IL-6 induces B B-cell TFH Further plasma Bcl-2 CD40L plasmacell targets B primary generates NF˜B to STAT3 cell that recognition IL-21 the cell cells AP-1 proliferation B memory plasmablasts form TGF-°LFN-˛IL-4 TFH that cells resting MHCII Antigen cells, NFAT STAT3 focus

Fig. B activates differentiation. activate transcription cells their STAT3 several B-cell TFH provide factor subsequent and 10.3 which to that signals enhance the control cells and proliferation survival. antigen After receptor (see Section regulate that 10-12). produce cells the switching cytokines also binding will to isotype for can delivers TFH first B-cell signal the B-cell begin the complex enter on these signals, activation or when the panel), delivers plasma germinal receiving to the cells activated (first and class become recognizes II additional cell (second B panel). proliferate (not it TFH center, shown), B-cell peptide:MHC eventually After signals surface cells a cell of memory (third Besides expression cells CD40 ligand, panel). TFH the B important cytokines. several secretes Linked robust cells of promotes cells 10-2 antibody and Included is antigen T them responses. by IL-21, among recognition B

antigens pathogens. B-cell on greatly these concurrent deposition on of can complement by be activation surfaces the stimulated by microbial complex Fig. proteins contains (see co-receptor CD81 CD21, and the B-cell CD19, cell-surface The 7.27). to Section (CR2), surface. to near 2-13), deposited receptor CD21, brought that 2 and surfaces complement (see the the receptor C3dg is When fragments to B-cell C3d the binds same it or microbial complement are on bound activated the by receptor. other, are with associated activated CD21 becomes B-cell CD19 each and CD19 phosphorylated and enhancing This production downstream PI proliferation, differentiation, pathways, 3-kinase, Fig. (see then which several antibody recruits stimulates and 10.2, arrow 1). of C3dg. three linked the effect immunized experimental molecules This with antigen dramatically is when is that are egg-white coupled lysozyme to hen mice shown needed induce the the this lysozyme dose is In added modified the lysozyme. as antibody to in 1/10,000 that with as case of adjuvant little absence of of needed unmodified

as T-dependent are cells; recognition. B the linked by this activated For antigen called the antibody the is T is same cells recognized by responses, involved to protein by the from TFH recognized likely the recognized cell epitope differ peptide by However, is receptor. the cell’s B antigen the epitopes. viruses and bacteria, contain proteins as carry and carbohydrate and multiple both antigens, Natural such protein T recognized recognized peptide must the B appropriate cell take For and the T so the by occur, recognition associated the the B the can peptide that cell’s up be the antigen by cell present to physically cell. to linked receptor, with viral that For coat recognizes a an epitope virus on particle. cell B a protein example, complete will the internalize display B II molecules proteins can class MHC on on for degrade cell multiple peptides into viral surface. the B-cell The dendritic by CD4 specific earlier have infection, cells the into such and for T TFH will been activated some cells differentiated may in viral cells. have peptides B presenting these peptide, stimulated help antibodies (Fig. are activated provide signals their by protein viral coat When are cells that to the cells specific cells they B against to generate TFH 10.4).

recognition B-cell MHC appropriate relies molecules on peptide by the for concentration class presentation the Linked surface. the II of on MHC antigen alone. cells displaying that class of a receptor antigen more the II their times antigen peptide macropinocytosis B are efficient at on molecules that fragments than whose process B 10,000 through are particular B-cell cells binds A-1). of haptens, Appendix discovered on small responses are against production Section elicit their recognition through which of groups (see Linked was studies antibodies originally that I, own the antibody cannot chemical coupled that haptens immunogenic—known the carrier effect—for But reasons. become to carrier as hapten a are two protein protein to multiple it The can allowing B-cell receptors. groups, hapten carry cross-link response cells TFH Also, activated protein peptides T against strengthen become the and that the antibody can carrier to the hapten. are cells of a response, as allergic people an form of which responsible learn coupled protein the to for is hapten can proteins reacts with Chapter to penicillin, a by responses Accidental antibiotic in antibody stimulate shown a many coupling we 14. hapten the to host will that

and the Linked cells self-tolerance, at preserve since present self-reactive arise B to autoreactive works are TFH only if antibodies same self-reactive recognition will time. in Chapter This 15. discussed is further infants b design immunize vaccine against Vaccine (see the advantage as in used can of to linked type Haemophilus influenzae take recognition, Section 16-26).

tissues. lymphoid toward that encounter the cells 10-3 antigens migrate their B

is frequency of 1 in for low 10,000). than specific particular The a extremely naive (less lymphocytes antigen making cells cell cells a specificity with antigen T be the with remarkable encounter B in 108, a should ever same similar antigen it with of Thus, 1 B interact TFH the specificity. between random than that less and a chance regulation activated locations the ligands the of which cells—orchestrated within precise interaction (Fig. and several chances the productive B receptors—into of serves and requires a by specific reasons, T a these recognition increase linked sets of lymphoid migration to tissues, For of 10.5).

tissues T express which 9-7). to cells peripheral sphingosine the from and lymphoid Naive (see receptor, egress B 1-phosphate cells they use Section S1PR1, the T-cell B-cell respectively follicles (or two before zones, initially occupy the exit, (see areas B-cell and the zones), However, retained areas are Figs lymphoid distinct or primary they 1.18–1.20). and they expression These and zones chemokine established of are production. by different chemokine receptor patterns by express to cells cells and dendritic Naive and expressed and where zones chemokine (see CCL19 are localize receptor T cells ligands, highly CCR7, Section 9-3). the CCL21, stromal its CXCR5, abundant. they they Circulating where lymphoid the CXCL13 follicles, when chemokine B is migrate and tissues, lymphoid into cells naive the enter primary express follicle, Within stromal and CXCL13. the type, follicular cell cell specialized (FDC), cells a secrete dendritic the its processes; functions nonhematopoietic the by The antigen cell by B on access FDC a long trapping complement of it nonphagocytic surface for is in that using cell follicle. receptors cells origin numerous bears

cells. cells, BAFF 8-8), encounter secreted cytokine which soluble acts which and B as cells in for Once and naive by dendritic the follicle, TNF-family the B a factor Section is survival stromal cells FDCs, (see three through act can BAFF

Fig. interact. within and cells same 10.4 order contained must B to the cells molecular T in recognize complex antigens as is by a presented class example, II (shown and internal this In CD4 red) cell. by epitope viral is T peptide that MHC harbors protein an recognized a molecules epitope coat the that harbors on viral The native protein an a surface immunoglobulin on (shown recognized cell. virus blue) also by external a B as is is cells by (blue) remain the cell, T a T inactive. and presented (green) virus CD4 peptide-specific nonspecific left captured a activated becomes If (top dendritic whereas panel), cell and virus presented derived by molecules. If right are recognized B MHC specific is cell from class viral by (top internal panel), the proteins peptides processed a II signals coat (bottom T various panel), its recognizes cell the cell B cell accessory will on the deliver antibody this against the activated to the cell peptide When production that protein. B promote T is process recognition. known This as linked

Fig. tissues. cells secondary B cells lymphoid B-cell Antigen-binding in between follicle and the area a the T-cell T meet 10.5 border at T-cell spleen zones panel). collect the Antigens (first and in and enter the from follicles blood produced cells 25-hydroxycholesterol and CCL21, or (second chemokines CCL19 to CXCR5-positive migrate Naive distinct 25-HC), T (7α, regions and CCR7-positive the and panel). being respectively, CXCL13 cells where 7α, are B dendritic cell T-cell the panel). If antigen, its a B a encounters it on (third macrophage, CCR7 and border or zone either expression of follicular (FDC) a with toward migrates the cell increases recognition antigen-presenting activated same linked expression cells induces T CXCR5 cells further dendritic to by proliferation. migrate induce B-cell and of where this border, After reduce follicle retain expression 3 EBI2 regions but in B panel). outer to cells 7α, CCR7, of (fourth to days, the 25-HC and response to 2 migrate and interfollicular differentiate red with near After primary or another plasma interfollicular so, the some focus terminal cells. pulp, day forming antibody-secreting in the a regions B plasmablasts, proliferate, into differentiation cells and into cluster cells with EBI2 B and that a reaction. in remain to follicle that form induce the to become may there expression Bcl-6 center cells T participate expression TFH retain germinal cells

but CXCL13 promoting follicular B survival Interactions are through in T CXCR5 EBI2 T interfollicular regions follicular reside while interfollicular receptors, form in express regions into major B and become T 10.6). focus activated and cells T cells (Fig. B outer on resting induce in cells T-cell cells resting and CCR7 zone and with and and B induce zones cell and sustain cells cells cells CCR7 to CXCR5, Before and some T B cells TFH plasmablasts, and BAFF-R both reside and migrate Some migrate differentiate dendritic primary follicles cells B expression activated 7˜,25-HC move FDC EBI2, cells resting activation, express its induce interfollicular CCL21 to Activated to which Bcl-6 focus cells, cells primary TFH a cells cells T actions BAFF-R to (see NFκB Section (see TRAF3 signals through Fig. 3-7) the described non-canonical CD40 as pathway, for activate CD40 7.31), and, signaling, of induces like expression Bcl-2. for and BAFF BCMA, relatively has low BCMA. affinity are TACI BAFF for a other Two receptors although TACI also activation. APRIL, signal involved to BCMA the related signaling in and 5, 6 and through bind and pathways cytokine B-cell induce TRAF2, they

into blood. the derived via Antigens into transported spleen lymph the and nodes lymph, the are via viruses microorganisms from afferent and C3b the because B-cell and surface follicles they bearing Opsonized FDCs. CR1 of or antigens CR2 receptors accumulate are C3dg in on by the trapped complement expressed that nodes B-cell sinus be macrophages (SCS) antigens taken to spleen, particulate both can in marginal specialized subcapsular adjacent are the also by and of Opsonized the the of up residing regions sinus lymph the

members also activating B-lymphocyte called of or and TNF ligand) BLyS) factor, both proliferation-inducing are BAFF (B-cell APRIL the of cytokines. stimulator, superfamily (a are several initially types. produced membrane-bound They trimers by as cell where in the and B-cell is follicle, cells produced by FDCs it supports survival. other B-cell BAFF manner (see similar CD40 signals BAFF-R, Fig. receptor, Its a in to main and activate RelB:p52 non-canonical both the through leading transcription to factor, the pathway. to NIK NFκB and NFκB pathway, canonical TRAF3 7.31) p50:p65 the maturation and receptors (transmembrane antigen), for interactor) affinity cyclophilin weak. although binds the (B-cell is relatively the to calcium and its and BCMA also ligand latter BAFF modulator TACI activator the pathway. canonical These activate NFκB receptors

by and endocytic Antigen preservation low The

degradative to nodes surface transported on receptors surfaces, macrophages present afferent the complement (Fig. bind of follicles localized entering lymph antigens subcapsular be subcapsular cells allowing surface macrophages the also become the antigen the allows into B follicle to macrophages antigens follicular from subcapsular of the of on lymphatics to activity preserves Opsonized their sinus on the in trapped to 10.7). ingesting macrophages on rather the and degrading their surface These to seem than retain it. antigen can cells. be carried follicular by antigen-specific B then These and antigens sampled antigen cells from could within via their the and B also it any macrophages follicle. antigen complement acquire receptors of specificity these transport B that site between trapped and shuttle FDCs. the the the In in cells zone follicle, deposition carrying marginal antigen zone for on spleen, marginal can to macrophages actively dissemination of restrict infection. function also the SCS these In macrophages dendritic infection (pDCs). cells (VSV), of vesicular recruit relative virus, triggers rabies virus cells to nodes in stomatitis produce to and plasmacytoid by lymph of interferon a mice, the restricts to produced nervous further by interferon system. central eventually on pDCs spread, viral I otherwise pass which the would Type

spleen. to few or within FDCs or close enters After tissue of become macrophages, hours by follicles node B will sites specific first follicular antigen lymph cell it naive in a the encounters a the antigen outer displayed lymphoid positioned the where positioning the are oxysterols chemokine is as such EBI2 B orchestrated whose 7α, 25-dihydroxycholesterol. of expression This ligands cell’s (GPR183), a by receptor, interfollicular is follicular are precise and abundant ligands in outer source The these unclear, still regions. of the but they hours expression the 6 for distribute along to sampling activated EBI2 B T-cell the CCR7, follicle antigens and day, the expressed. 1 interface where together CCL21 between B-cell of cells with zone, to which there the cell induces After is functions B

immune response, an zones dendritic the During T are by cells. T-cell activated within cells are S1P1, cells lymphoid will T exit of tissue. and naive cells, downregulate When the into expression some activated, effector proliferate, differentiate migrate induce of B-cell with CXCR5 border expression will and However, to the the others follicle. Fig. (see linked by can T response, they that might antigens B activated cells encounter this the location moved increasing that the recently have recognize activated during presented to chance cells There, cells B same 10.5).

Fig. sinus antigens subcapsular Opsonized preserved captured are 10.7 and by macrophages. with poorly medulla. in lysosomal compared (SCS) (CR1 Macrophages macrophages and subcapsular reduced of 1 lymph express levels the and node receptors are enzymes CR2, respectively), sinus in and the residing endocytic, have 2 complement of the surface antigen CR1 to SCS afferent arriving from and the macrophages. Opsonized CR2 lymphatics on binds transferred by on it some B of of to retained is macrophages, surface, and being can where completely cell the antigen presented cells. the surface Instead follicular degraded these be B dendritic the into the transport able follicle, of surfaces antigen follicular where then are can on be it to cells the trapped cells.

cells cells homotypic lead and receptor T cells. SLAM, interactions B adhesion family on mediate between expressed that Ly108, and members and to The are CD84 SLAM such receptor augment also signaling that SLAM enhance help cytokines cells. of production to B by can the as IL-21 T-cell that for SAP signaling with The SLAM SLAM-associated one is another. sustain required is binding a to molecule receptor adapter between express sustained initially SAP that cells T cells. levels at adhesion B are for T and insufficient low express TFH induces factor of which of levels levels higher the high Fully differentiated SAP Bcl-6, transcription expression. cells This interactions sufficient sustain allow cytokine cells. level to signals to and is B and cell–cell the delivery of CD40L for

express and molecules turn cells, cytokines in B which development. promote T activate cells TFH-cell 10-4 surface that

respond peptide B the cytokines cells. and cells that TFH TFH When turn receptors by by B cells activate in activating presented cells, encounter an expressing survival, B7 those B co-stimulatory induced and B-cell cells CD40L family. of on cells on expression to expression especially also B-cell of above, of As TFH increase mentioned activates the induces the CD40 molecules, binds activation. (CD30L), CD30 expressed CD30 T B-cell express also cells ligand to promotes cells which on and B Activated proliferation normal. Mice activated responses in cells B and humoral CD30 show of than lymphoid weaker secondary follicles reduced lacking proliferation B-cell also cytokines regulate that antibody several secrete cells TFH and production. Primary by STAT3 produced cells cells in differentiation. immune and early support to factor transcription responses B which is which these proliferation the and activates among TFH IL-21, in is similar on exerts autocrine TFH effects cells. IL-21 other (described antibody in such the T IFN-γ, other helper TFH IL-4 cells response, produce Chapter Later in and 9). as are that will cytokines, subsets the characteristic of B-cell discuss later. differentiation, class we These impact particularly will switching, as

cells. to B ability between TFH contact to cells successfully signals these The cells these intimate on deliver depends of cell–cell (signaling that molecule) Specific Ig the stabilize are molecules, adhesion contact. prolong of SLAM superfamily several lymphocyte receptors activation involved and family, including interactions promote both cells homotypic binding Ly108, TFH cell and express through cells (CD150), (Fig. and adhesion SLAM B 10.8). which CD84, by these protein, by which interact for TFH cell–cell The is all SAP cytoplasmic necessary regions adaptor family prolonging and mediated these contact with which receptors receptors. highly is (SLAM-associated an cells of SLAM expressed protein), and in germinal inactivated cells to lymphoproliferative in with B discussed which NK-cell a T-cell disorder defect failed cells a lymphoproliferative center, interactions with SAP production and associated antibody syndrome, the The TFH and below. gene X-linked due in is between is of the cells lymphoid TFH occur appropriate regulated to deliver The that for differentiation. activated and will linked cells recognition the migration peripheral in location increases B help chance the and organ same B-cell Antigen-stimulated that hours. recognize T fail with within antigen that cells 24 die the to same B interact cells

also This T-cell first provides interaction differentiation by only B important cells, but T cells cell. the B provided by not between and help influences to B signals (inducible molecules T cells. expressed a of is protein), which co-stimulatory ICOS cells express B7 a for the and of family ICOSL, Activated ligand B by member co-stimulatory (see the induction and linked by recognition, Section This to the important of cells interaction, 7-21), signaling factors in ICOS T c-Maf. differentiation provided Tand and B-cell of activates for is Bcl-6 TFH transcription completion leading TFH These cells. for required transcription contact sustained SAP consequent between factors are and B production and the

plasma Activated cells. plasmablasts differentiate antibody-secreting 10-5 B cells into and

the help border and to follicle proliferate cells received B initial migrate continue that have After differentiate. their T-cell encounter, to from (see to CCR7 EBI2 decrease B and expression increase Fig. of begin activation, of Two expression to to cells days after three 10.5). area and to bridging EBI2 interfollicular directs pulp. the the region channels, red back CCR7 the cells from the between boundary away or, a to in the the T-cell the causes splenic expression B in lymph Decreased of their regions with move subcapsular the migration sinus to and nodes, T-cell the spleen, zone: located in where emerging seen cells the some the primary spleen out red medullary aggregate B extrafollicular foci drains in B nodes called of cells the the Here, differentiating pulp. be will an as lymph in cords, in focus, the node, lymph and of is form which can splenic foci apparent Primary by 5 previously about an immunization are infection after with not encountered. antigen or days an

this several humoral immune the B for primary the of the constitutes primary cells response. first phase in and days, proliferate focus in antibody-synthesizing the cells proliferating these into focus. Some plasmablasts B differentiate of primary Not B the interaction activated the move focus. into will all by cells primary cells initial TFH with may differentiate eventually cells, the follicle, plasma as described Some migrate they lymphoid into will where into below. with T and that Plasmablasts the begun are of express that B activated secrete characteristics yet antibody, many of are have cells still interaction their allow cells cells. to dividing in primary plasmablasts days, dividing die. focus the few may stop more After the and eventually a will where will antibody continue and bone long-lived develop to production. marrow, migrate cells the plasma Subsequently, they plasma entered it is Since long germinal from rather primary but the directly many has focus the the are primary they generated cells likely center focus, B after cells do dissipated, arise from reaction. that in long-lived not plasmablasts that

plasma Fig. plasmablasts, compared The cells B and properties of are cells, resting in 10.9. the to to of commitment into of differentiation a large antibody, B all of reflect production amounts that constitute protein morphological The plasma synthesized 20% a cell by a up accompanied cell secreted can plasma is the of by many cell. a changes which plasma being Golgi Plasmablasts have endoplasmic reticulum rich immunoglobulin rough perinuclear an and in into apparatus are a synthesized and for reticulum the is prominent that of exported cells extensive secretion. lumen endoplasmic molecules the and that have fewer. of receptors have cell surface, cells numbers many large on whereas B-cell plasma the Plasmablasts relatively since cells in by may part physiologically ability their low to to This still on their determined survival antigen. plasma immunoglobulin continue seems important, of surface be to be level bind II and Plasmablasts cells the B7 down of II turn expression express molecules; MHC by contrast, MHC still plasma molecules class class molecules. co-stimulatory CD40 signals Nevertheless, for survival, still T as plasma-cell cells such ligand. and and differentiation important provide IL-6

Fig. cells at Plasma antibody can secrete antigen. rate longer no a to but high respond 10.9 and class Resting molecules on immunoglobulin IgM their MHC cells B membrane-bound and surface. naive II have (usually IgD) can somatic V helper cells. to take Although do cells mutations, carry up genes their B it present antigen T and not cells isotype switching cells amounts B cells in return and T hypermutation, and do antibody of secrete the somatic to not The this undergo during period. proliferate significant but to B induce intermediate phenotype. have an Plasmablasts to retain and continue to but take and They T MHC immunoglobulin molecules can cells. secrete antigen substantial surface up so class II and antibody present secrete Plasmablasts undergone antigens not in and class switching, hypermutation IgM. immune early activated those T-independent somatic therefore and the by response have usually and cells antibodies. are cells terminally secrete Plasma that differentiated in express while suppress surface activity MHC TFH negative a cells levels and pathway molecules of have class very differentiating. feedback but immunoglobulin Plasma low II can may immune activated and underwent in hypermutation. B entered unswitched somatic germinal the they the Early and class differentiate B secrete response activated and that from derive response the IgM; reaction center switching cells in cells later from they cells their Plasma somatic or undergo the lost the ability have hypermutation. antibody of change to class further

leave the and bloodstream the node lymph to Naive lymph via via travel cells efferent B the

the in the HEVfollicle cells efferent germinal cells encounter migrate that a cords via primary primary B to the center focus antigen follicle Plasma form or leave lymphatics focus. medullary follicle germinal Plasma the marrow B into proliferating to migrate migrate bone marrow stromal form center cells the to a bone cells Some cell

MHC pathway molecules present production evidence as cells, B-cell a that functions ongoing class Bcl-6 the even regulate low responses. feedback TFH to antigen cognate thus and Recent IL-21 II to to on cells expressed indicates acts level and of plasma to expression, suppress acting long of to for cells differentiation, antibody and for some weeks only others after are a few responses. While account survive plasma very their days persistence final lived the

germinal second a form proliferate 10-6 immune primary B-cell of The phase response centers. to

eventually B migrate outer the primary follicle to and all cells by will establish focus. cells TFH activated a Not cells together primary Instead, a follicle TFH (Fig. associated move lymphoid into with some their are form follicles. continue they lymphoid called and centers center; germinal where proliferate germinal follicles 10.10), secondary with also ultimately to a appears cells favor formation. Downregulating germinal by center EBI2 B to the germinal border lacking zone mice antigen-activated plasmablasts. remain the in are near T-cell with expression B In B cells generate able but cells, to fewer form and EBI2 centers,

provide B germinal B mainly lymphocytes to but T cells, center cells. make of indispensable about Germinal and of composed cells the 10% centers up help antigen-specific proliferating are of of that in center an active follicle. is forms germinal region the area division B primary cells The resting a surrounding within cell zone toward cells light the B mantle center of resting cells cells B follicle, the the resting the a areas the periphery forming two Proliferating around displace zone called distinguishable the of (Fig. B activated of germinal and zone dark cells, panel). left 10.11, is The the and when shrinks center immune proceeds, then germinal size finally grows as response disappears in and infection cleared. the for weeks Germinal antigen after centers present exposure. are initial 3–4 about

and in focus the they quality that antibody the primary of center germinal differ The reaction produce. emerge germinal first 4–5 days Plasmablasts, B cells, B during cells center the begin and immune memory of early an to response. protection. primarily IgM offer isotype immediate antibodies Plasmablasts secrete of in the some primary foci that in are contrast, that reaction more that in B germinal undergo produce several processes In eliminating effective antibodies cells the infections. center somatic for affinity cells genes V and These processes that which hypermutation, for antigen. which the of include the have called below), of high a maturation, enables the regions B a affinity alters selects (see immunoglobulin mutated survival process which

Fig. in form germinal 10.10 Activated B lymphoid follicles. centers cells of Activation lymph node here. is in shown cells B a chemokines they primary high cells follicle, efferent if Top do (HEV) into leave naive the cells B attracted follicle; the in enter via endothelial nodes circulating antigen vessel. and lymphatic these via are venules the not B blood the by panel: lymphoid encounter lymph from with antigen helper activate T same for panel: to that interact plasmablasts. start Second move encounter cells to cells these them have where with may the they the B T-cell cells antigen; proliferation and bound into border specific the differentiation area, and cells the activated T B the at to migrate interfollicular the B the medullary they move nodes), continue in to back Some germinal primary and activated where plasmablasts focus of border proliferate form center. regions others a a (spleen) cells (lymph into whereas or cords follicle, T-cell–B-cell form antibody-secreting Germinal of proliferation differentiation. are centers sites B-cell and sustained are have centers known secondary Follicles formed germinal in which follicles. as cells. differentiation memory center, cells plasma or B into germinal either cells their the Within B antibody-secreting begin medullary cords, migrate to the and bone the altogether via cells the and plasma panels: efferent Third to or fourth lymph marrow. node migrate the leave leave and center the lymphatics germinal

a follicle a Cyclic centrocytes zone dark of germinal is on center into representation reexpression of CXCR4 reentry on of cells the dependent Schematic with

Fig. a structure center. germinal of 10.11The The somatic occur. B-cell center for which and specialized in microenvironment proliferation, all strength of hypermutation, binding is antigen a selection germinal which CXCR5. germinal contains express zone’ ‘light packed CXCR4 densely and which the centroblasts, centrocytes, zone’ CXCR5, form of center; the ‘dark Closely the express only less packed centroblasts. zone in cells the attracts the which CXCR4-expressing dark Stromal CXCL12, produce expression again. the zone reentry the describes gain from Cyclic to B of CXCR4 process and lose can back and and thus light move which the zone dark cells by

antibodies functions. variety to switching produce class selected effector a of B addition, cells allows In with the into antibody immune cells in and cells in either primary into will cells 11. secrete described that differentiate as the or memory response, class-switched part higher-affinity latter Chapter the These of B plasma B

germinal hours. B center cells in every 6–8 divide the rapidly, their of markedly but centroblasts, particularly CXCR4 immunoglobulin, called express cells, reduce these surface receptors Initially, and CXCR5 IgD. rapidly proliferating expression B of chemokine the its the dark of the appearance for proliferate germinal packed in Centroblasts zone center, named (Fig. densely 10.12). in CXCL12 produce for that zone acts cells in Stromal CXCR4 dark retain the (SDF-1), centroblasts region. a to ligand this centroblasts levels immunoglobulin. higher cell reduce produce of the time G2/M to the on, and growth CXCR4 some begin cell pausing cycle, of division, expression, As their enter phase the of reduce surface rate phase, goes at B are centrocytes. termed These cells to CXCR5 loss abundant produce ligand centrocytes for a packed allows of the a the chemokine Fig. CXCL13 CXCR4 The containing area (BLC), (see move zone, densely less light that into FDCs panel). 10.11, right but cells proliferate The in than zone, light zone. dark B lesser to the extent a the in

Fig. 10.12Germinal and centers of cell death. intense sites proliferation cell are germinal a panel) (first a shows through section center. tonsillar The photomicrograph human packed so-called zone part the seen photomicrograph, in centroblasts, the germinal Closely lower center. dark this the of form of light packed is Above region this less zone. the densely a panel The staining shows immunofluorescent second center. of germinal found zone, and mantle in B dark light are the zone. zone, cells dividing stained the nuclei an in cells the for antigen rapidly Proliferating in of Ki67, proliferating cells, revealing are green expressed dark zone. centroblasts cells, zone. of mainly red, stained follicular occupies network light dendritic The dense the a in the degree than lesser Centrocytes light proliferate centroblasts. to zone recirculating follicle. edge at the cells B-cell the B Small of occupy zone the mantle can Large of zones, the separate T in follicles. stained which masses be T-cell cells, seen blue, the CD4 center; digest cells light with B associated There there. the the of zone that of in zone are significant numbers phagocytes, is germinal also CD4-positive that in mainly die the dark T CD4 cells staining courtesy I. of MacLennan. Photographs

of micrograph center power) germinal Light (high

cells dendritic center show stained to T cells, proliferating cells, follicular and B Germinal

MOVIE 10.1

Fig. processes gene. 10.13 modify primary diversified is repertoire immunoglobulin rearranged The by antibody three the that is from recombination panel: constant μ regions by First IgM-containing and the of (blue) segment. produced initially variable repertoire V(D)J (red) antibody primary gene regions the composed by gene this further at loci, hypermutation, of and by switch repertoire be reactivity conversion shown). (not species The modified recombination of somatic in the primary immunoglobulin by range can some class in as into panel: heavy-chain for the the the V antibody (shown somatic and Second light-chain mutations antigen. results (red), hypermutation introduced of its altering being black lines) regions affinity switch initial another modifying of (blue) yellow), the its Third by are antibody in class (shown heavy-chain the antigen activity regions recombination, of heavy-chain μ not but as effector isotype regions the replaced panel: specificity. C

affinity that and antigen cells selected. mutations with improve for hypermutation, are

producing clones few that immunoglobulin, amino hypermutation acids anywhere related mutations from affinity antigen one differ and a in closely in (Fig. that introduces B-cell to change the Somatic specificity subtly 10.13). by B genes center or the in enzyme is V an These activation-induced by cytidine initiated are AID, which called mutations expressed cells. only germinal deaminase, AID, improve mutations of antibody which the by affinity. process mechanisms Before initiated a in we overview this describing random can enzymatic first general present

pairs mutations rate mutations change the pair per base lower: around base base per 1010 division, base is immunoglobulin cell’s The of pairs per the 103 pair a cell at while genes of of DNA rate cell change much per in rest about V-region one one division. accumulate the into not also Somatic V the but C-region some flanking generally gene, DNA rearranged extend the hypermutation does exons. affects of occur encoded changes chance Since there the during each about out each to receptor. a that alter and acid about every four 360 amino B-cell by 50% three base encoded, is will division will pairs is V region about mutation the base a

mutations stepwise proliferate in 10.14). form of a the cell the as accumulate in each center to B-cell point clones manner (Fig. descendants The germinal B of B and the of to cell receptor altered bind cell will the An thus can the affect center. the ability affect fate B a in antigen germinal of have the Most ability antigen. by complementarity-determining antigen, regions the to of binding molecule B-cell the impact folding a on original correct from the immunoglobulin blocking the preventing negative by bind or receptor mutations the alter framework (see mutations may regions conserved Fig. Detrimental 4.7) basic disrupt immunoglobulin structure. and receptor B-cell longer make either such cells that can a antigen functional sibling negative apoptosis because they cannot mutations detrimental process B well are a in by no (Fig. as take or they as selection, eliminated up because of harbor Cells 10.15). macrophages, are giving the tingible by Germinal filled macrophages. engulfed that with are B quickly body to cells centers characteristic rise apoptotic in dark-staining contain nuclear their cytoplasm. debris These mutated residues reflecting is of of acid one V-region of had critical that relative loss many folding. cells for regions, are implied that any the by amino replacements the the in immunoglobulin framework selection scarcity the Negative This dividing that numbers lymphoid cells tissues. rapidly to expanding prevents overwhelm B would the process from affinity improve expanded selectively these Less be the will receptor for (see of frequently, mutations B-cell antigen, Fig. a mutations may and survival an low-affinity cells rate receptors the 10.15) have mutations with will because expressing increased compared such cells. with in evident is replacements determine antibody the amino regions, numerous Positive in accumulation the acid which complementarity-determining selection of specificity

Fig. mutations antigen into improve 10.14 Somatic introduces immunoglobulin variable the (V) regions hypermutation rearranged binding. that hypermutation tracked mice. see established V from I, sequencing The by different of regions can time of immunoglobulin cells; A-7) the hybridomas after experimental immunization be of somatic process at points Section antibody-producing Appendix (clones of depicted result The is one experiment here. region sequenced V line. Each horizontal a by represented is CDR2, shown shading. and The complementarity-determining CDR3 regions are by CDR1, pink acid red bars. are the sequence amino that represented change by Mutations course (top a Within over of a of panels). immunization, particular clone mutations, accumulate few responding acquire V next cells days to begin week more the regions B within and the the of mutations whose and longer antigen regions can have cells B no die. deleterious bind V mutations accumulated more to cells compete mutations drive whose regions antigen, able proliferation V the and receive their that B-cell of receptor affinity B are for antigen improve signals effectively expansion. acquired that the for and have this also improved antibodies affinity. have produce they The selection node process in responses immune same tertiary with multiple the This bottom cycles the (center center antigen can immunization and further panels). and mutation secondary elicited to continue lymph of by and in response germinal through of way, response time. this the In over the antigen-binding is efficiency antibody improved

and Fig. (see affinity in next process the we section. 10.14), discuss a throughout genes, in silent, and V-region be of binding protein nucleotide immunoglobulin are antigen clustered for amino alter thus of the whereas sequence and the changes is preserve tend that neutral, that CDRs protein not to acid result that the sequences, acid V amino to structure, do mutations alter or selection the structure scattered The enhanced region.

Fig. the cells. on by in Selection 10.15 mutants high-affinity for relies help center TFH germinal provided cells After cells following TFH at depicted activated events occur. migrate centers follicle the B (GCs), where they the with germinal interact here to border, V the dark panel). regions somatic immunoglobulin of In alters (first GC, hypermutation zone the the B receptor cells mutated some higher. in (BCR) BCR affinity will In B-cell be the the low antigen, have cells may (orange) the for affinity or no mutated other while B (yellow), will capture dark follicular the cells with trapped exiting (second higher-affinity present on then MHC and molecules dendritic the After on class cells antigen zone, (FDCs) it (red) and BCRs process II B panel). with low-affinity capture fail cells B BCRs to present antigen. will and will to present B TFH cells help linked promote epitopes antigen and survival proliferation. through which receive CD40L cells IL-21, that and will on molecules panel). B no help MHC cells lack and that (third receive class antigen eventually II die undergo proliferating the cells cells cells or of B B and to to plasma of entry cycles repeated undergo shown). differentiation and B the memory progeny (fourth panel), cells selection zone, other dark mutation, (not Some either

Fig. immune to complexes that the of bind trapped surface dendritic in 10.16 are cells. Antigens follicular

node). a to, persists in, lymph in nodes draining the the and representation localizes schematic showing light panel), germinal and lymph a follicles (middle center micrograph (see of lymphoid Radiolabeled antigen center days that had shows previously. the staining The been the injected localization germinal antigen of intense in radiolabeled 3 dark receptors in the and cell receptors CR1 inset. CR2 the to complexes The to complement on follicular antigen:antibody:complement of antigen surface form and of Fc is (FDC), in bound as right-hand depicted panel the or dendritic the not complexes such in are this long for can periods. form antigen as These internalized, persist J. Tew. courtesy of Photograph

B involves center CD40 contact and selection 10-8 signaling. with of Positive cells TFH germinal cells

improved B with of for antigen Selection cells increments. occurs in affinity by originally was in B-cell cell-surface vitro resting cross-linking receptors alive CD40. discovered their ligating B cells and their It kept that be simultaneously could respectively. are In and vivo TFH by delivered by antigen cells, signals these the B vivo become of in to that two-photon that a microscopic delivered receive cell cells. antigen, and positive recently A-10) ability center B take of (see cell’s show more clear signals to from by depends details on TFH the Appendix in up selection The studies selection germinal have I, its zone; light it centroblast surface somatic of thought is and B-cell centroblasts of its the the on the dark when number a where centrocyte, receptors increases a reduces there are FDCs. that becomes the hypermutation moves in proliferation occurs to rate It zone, abundant and in Antigen can (Fig. complexes the form trapped be and long in for of periods immune FDCs stored on 10.17). 10.16 Fig. and relative to antigen determines to its centrocyte’s The ability ability bind acquire

Fig. complexes FDCs taken in iccosomes, the germinal released up cells to center. by 10.17 Immune form are which bound be B and can a have cell FDCs processes. body dendritic many and prominent bound FDC clustered, to complement along Fc complexes, (a). the ‘beads’ and surface, the Immune on forming prominent receptors receptors dendrites become form are becoming that filiform intermediate others is shown, which FDC An of straight has and dendrites both beaded. from (b) cell the as beads shed (c). be to center it in taken a can complex-coated by cell bodies), germinal and These are iccosomes which B up the bind (immune formed containing has peroxidase, the dark c, immune horseradish In transmission iccosome which micrographs. electron and panels is with the been complexes appears therefore b electron-dense in and courtesy of Photographs A.K. Szakal.

related with different the centrocytes clonally antigen, competition in other mutations. harboring more molecules. surface capture better present bind MHC receptors whose class their peptides antigen will and II Centrocytes on and, these germinal before, cell center are that the the peptides signals TFH in cells as to to B activated recognize deliver survival. promote receive so less up affinity will reduce signals cells. take will survival antigen, antigen-binding weaker mutations and from whose Centrocytes TFH dark to additional Successful and undergo will the of zone, they CXCR4 centroblasts becoming return in where again. will rounds division, effect reexpress cells B FDCs become TFH will apoptotic acquire sufficient to from to engage cells lost. Germinal and B antigen fail be center cells that center This (see germinal model of Fig. process migration reentry B-cell the as the cyclic within is known panel). 10.11, right affinity Section the and B In germinal specificity the of during affinity are 10-6). response, through refined this way, center continually (see maturation cells by no center B leave or time typically The it the composed center, only selection of process stringent: size, of is few the cells. them descendants quite seed 50–100 and maximum most the can although cells reaches be a the may germinal B germinal one of progeny,

cells are the 10-4). both cells Section center, B (see important to deliver and germinal for signals In cells that interact TFH in function. to due center severely lack the defective TFH-cell deficient that responses are have and ICOS antibody reduced class-switched reaction Mice germinal survival of Bcl-2. of in signaling by relative Bcl-XL, cells expression molecule CD40 cells CD40L and increases B a TFH on the activated is the as SLAM signaling SAP, above. include by adapter family through discussed protein These also receptors interactions have and cells numbers of these CD84 lacking mice T centers, the in have to reduced has intravital cells antigen-specific Two-photon humoral B receptor between mice germinal a microscopy SLAM response conjugates that also and revealed reduced antigen.

genes cytidine in cells. introduces B into 10-9 mutations transcribed (AID) deaminase Activation-induced

involved processes the will delve the hypermutation somatic that of Now we cellular into the have process in we maturation, mutation discussed and affinity itself. details hyper-mutation recombination, processes. switch defects class somatic both The important in for mice as enzyme lacking have both AID AID is and hypermutation lack AID have deaminase switching. that cytidine the in the activation-induced enzyme—that somatic deficiency—also both with AID People is, class deficiency, mutations inactivate or gene and immunodeficiency production known a hyper type absence the syndrome of of as to antibodies condition Chapter This leads the IgM predominantly and affinity 13). (discussed in IgM maturation, 2

cytosine related and in precursors to nucleotide making is RNA synthesis. DNA for enzymes that to deaminate AID uracil closest mRNA in of RNA. context B catalytic that (apolipoprotein 1), deaminates Its enzyme APOBEC1 is editing homolog, polypeptide the RNA-editing cytosine an the AID by However, in activity cytosine its acting of DNA gene in on fulfills antibody the immunoglobulin diversification locus. When regions is deaminates when cytidine initiated; residues AID initiated. switch V recombination regions, cytidine switch immunoglobulin are somatic hypermutation in deaminated, residues in is the class

DNA AID DNA single-stranded residues (Fig. can not but double-stranded cytidine deaminate in 10.18). temporarily the AID unwound. genes DNA to For being AID act, target so are is typically transcribed, double that helix targeting center expressed in place genes takes rearranged of only in only Since the is germinal immunoglobulin the these B actively AID in and cells cells, transcribed

cells, bonding expressed which a (first panel), hydrogen double-stranded The requires access cytidine prevented by is which B molecule AID, the activity DNA single-stranded side normally DNA. the in of in only of to chain is initiates the exposed panel), the which AID nucleophilic attack panel). cytidine resolved on deamination is form of (third cytosine uridine the ring (second by to a

Fig. class somatic or 10.19 to recombination, conversion. lesions initiates leads switch AID gene whose repair hypermutation, DNA

(U) uridine are the to on converts in depends final (C) an immunoglobulin of DNA which gene, pathways the used. AID mutation When cytidine repair a produced can or result (UNG) Somatic combined the repair base-excision hypermutation repair the either (MSH2/6) mismatch from Polη, polymerase activity error-prone pathway. of pathway with the mutations generate the pair. can Acting at site C:G of and together, these point around original DNA. enzymes REV1 DNA, the enzyme a other DNA, recruit over DNA sites can that is in synthesize abasic that can damaged repair synthesize or T. site, C initially insert random insertion and help can itself a also A, the G, of it abasic nucleotide C:G result is will acted. but residues opposite can where The polymerases at recruit other AID insert that the REV1 end only recombination the switch require single-strand Both DNA. formation class gene the a conversion in of break and part removes is when the 1 residue formed A apurinic/apyrimidinic DNA damaged as break (see a (APE1) the process of Fig. from repair single-strand endonuclease panels). two 10.20, bottom recombination, switch breaks. converted in the single-strand are of switch to made upstream two genes double-strand In the class so-called regions breaks C-region of adjacent a C-region ends stages cell’s very which different rearranged recombination, rejoins to that breaks, is leads gene in later a event double-strand for machinery V The in region. to then brought the repairing the is the similar DNA of V(D)J recombination to which way a thus the immunoglobulin of the for results from DNA gene the replacing conversion broken new strand gene sequences repair synthesis, part sequences. as homologous Gene template DNA using with flanking a

polymerase regions. generates single-stranded RNA transient where V regions not actively not does Somatic transcribed. occur loci that being in are hypermutation are long Rearranged are if they and expressed rearrangements as and being VL protein, genes being as transcribed. are as mutated VH not even are they ‘nonproductive’ cells lower somatic genes much besides can process, affected a mutation in actively also but immunoglobulins at those Some be transcribed for by rate. B the

Mismatch repair following hypermutation somatic AID. contribute and to 10-10 pathways base-excision by initiation

is DNA, in is The the uridine guanosine DNA lesion nucleoside AID represents mismatch foreign the on not by opposite it normal uridine but to produced a dual only with now DNA; strand. a sequence. types The the repair—including the several DNA and trigger base-excision uridine presence can alter of pathways—which of mismatch DNA repair the in repair further DNA different outcomes mutational processes various The repair to lead (Fig. 10.19). mismatch In uridine of by repair proteins presence is MSH2 and MSH6 pathway, the (MSH2/6). the repair the mismatch detected uridine with strand. nucleotides They recruit remove DNA from nucleases damaged the along that the nucleotide adjacent complete several a the This B other base at mutations synthesis cells DNA DNA is cells, introduce error-prone all to followed by this by and ‘patch repair’ A:T unlike in polymerase; fill-in in is pairs. a tends nearby process

the in base-excision are steps in The shown Fig. repair pathway initial 10.20. uracil-DNA base in the the uridine from to glycosylase create In abasic (UNG) uracil DNA. enzyme the site the pathway, an this removes is next of mutation. If in DNA nucleotide by the insertion the DNA the at polymerase, will further random modification leading replication round of site opposite made, abasic to a no result this action of however, as of The original site the nick) 1 apurinic/apyrimidinic to another in at which single-strand create the single-strand be UNG of endonuclease (APE1), excises (known a cytidine. action abasic the the a enzyme, may, residue followed discontinuity by DNA the single-strand conversion. Repair double-strand of in gene may breaks proceeding the through nick result mice, of Gene immunoglobulin genes in in and conversion in and of the in is humans used birds. other mammals not importance but some diversification is

Fig. by endonuclease (UNG), AID, produces the apurinic/ pathway 1 and single-strand 10.20 The nicks in base-excision apyrimidinic (APE1). of repair DNA sequential glycosylase actions uracil-DNA transcription panel). DNA AID (second the can be (first locally to that made accessible unwinds panel) by helix DNA Double-stranded cells, specifically activated AID, in B residues expressed which panel). uridines is cytidine (third converts to ring uridine, then base-excision abasic UNG creating panel). The repair ubiquitous an from site can remove the (fourth enzyme uracil endonuclease APE1 DNA residue backbone The single-strand panel), a (fifth forming the to sugar–phosphate in repair the cuts (sixth next abasic panel). thereby nick the then DNA DNA by, DNA, to nick form in DNA a but single-strand APE1 backbone ribose cuts to not terminus for example, yield does removed then b. rather excise the that a is polymerase 5ʹ-deoxyribosephosphate

and the nearby AID by non-cytidine mutation original Somatic both mutation nucleotides. hypermutation at cytidines involves targeted at If original the

site (see DNA by in is Fig. then generated mismatch abasic an UNG, the recognized U:G be will 10.19). class from damage by no that further instructive this template normally by DNA be (UV) that gross radiation. as ‘translesion’ it can DNA, modification polymerases error-prone the strand If without ultraviolet base repair site, of made is pairing to a replicated caused such to new the this result original can a C:G pair. These strand site, base the site incorporate after further abasic stable replication DNA round and DNA can polymerases at in nucleotide any opposite of into of the the a mutation

pathway cells, in in the mismatch polymerases than copy types, strand. that error-prone template DNA rather by other is cell repaired accurate B the but more repair not by polymerases In lesion DNA undamaged faithfully the than Individuals with polymerase mutations at A:T, fewer hypermutated their usual translesion the in in relatively immunoglobulin defect not a C:G, V have but regions. Polη at suggests is Polη hypermutation. in this pathway involved somatic fact This of that the repair polymerase a a radiation. their to cells the damage caused of condition have repair These pigmentosum, UV resulting inability DNA form also from individuals xeroderma by of

the switching same class allow to initiates AID 10-11 assembled

be genes CH course associated in the exon immune response. VH different with of to an

the activated response its particular somatic may immune the VH in progeny gene be will bone marrow, the that same generated express B hypermutation. a gene modified cell although was development the an in All by of during the express isotypes contrast, mature B progeny proliferate cell’s as may several In response. during immune the and cells different that C-region is first antibody expressed and immune are IgD, produced in and the antigen always first IgM. an cells B IgM The receptors by response in may region IgG, IgE in or be same antibodies. the immune the expressed Later IgA, V assembled response, switching of the involves and, IgD, is DNA This it irreversible known recombination. expression as unlike change class (or switching), isotype external signals as cells. It course the stimulated by TFH by is released an in immune response of such cytokines

only after to other the IgM occurs immunoglobulin from classes Switching

5.2 MOVIE

cells by been antigen. stimulated have B switch by of achieved that DNA which DNA regions. recombination switch of is known as stretches is is recombination, a repetitive through type It class nonhomologous guided of exception (Fig. gene, with upstream the isotypes, segments Switch gene, the heavy-chain each sites genes JH rearrangement the DNA regions expression gene for the the of intron Cμ the lie between in does for at of δ equivalent its not and other and require the which first panel). 10.21, DNA immediately subtype, upstream another between and the occurs Sμ of region S recombination and of a of the When expression IgM B IgD from to switches the cell coexpression

Fig. Class 10.21 recombination signals. between switch involves switching specific class the switching. before organization heavy-chain top of rearranged The shows immunoglobulin locus a panel mouse μ between panel: ε Second the and figure the isotypes switching in locus. heavy-chain illustrates this the upstream of each class the sequences Switch with of the and regions (S) are of genes, exception found DNA switching immunoglobulin guide repetitive are δ C-region that gene. subsequently substrates from promoters as of and to the regions, (shaded APE1. regions these arrows) of through by allowing sequences, by S guided stall these can located RNA each within S. the is for the to UNG RNA as regions Due (shown upstream Switching AID, polymerase circle) polymerase for serve transcription initiation repetitive and strand of into non-template single-strand density strand. the high a DNA nicks enzymes these Third panel: introduce template and the double-strand a is converted that yet breaks nicks to not mechanism by understood. are Staggered breaks DNA-PKcs, and proteins. cell’s machinery, break recognized Fourth involves these repair are by repair other double-strand the then proteins, panel: which Ku Bottom and and the DNA in is the regions. panels: case two by of this and of Cμ the class Sε, are by (including and Sε switching the proteins, two of switch together Sμ excision repair completed and intervening Sμ Cδ) regions, region ligation brought

new the constant-region gene. intervening undergoing deleted. coding region Cμ the a regions entire are the the S rearrangement event, and between such and recombination In Cμ DNA Cμ 10.21 in from switching Figure Cε mouse. the to illustrates protein, that because in cannot a the produce cause and can switch functional All sequences introns switch frameshift mutations. genes lie events encode therefore recombination

being AID acts regions switch of only DNA The initiates on transcribed. class and enzyme recombination, of sequences switch the Certain region properties

Fig. guides activity. AID its 10.22 and processed with switch interacts introns region RNA from exon Cμ, switch polymerase region for Top panel: here, as in of transcription a by case or rearranged gene, the initiate VH regions. upstream constant each RNA shown promoters of upstream noncoding all a of other constant intron encoding In the itself upstream exons the regions. switch an lies of the region all within cases, splice donor RNA transcript switch the is acceptor and This by RNA primary sites. intronic at specific from removed splicing region its allow RNA Middle structures. region formation elements further G-quadruplex is panel: the switch putative after and the of processed splicing, repetitive are indicates RNAs able these bind AID, Evidence in to the implied cartoon. that as was which guide to it template original the the switch from G-quadruplex strand RNA panel: the DNA transcribed. ability acts the of by the bring to region a AID to hybridize with Bottom as

transcribed. they are to when the accessibility being promote AID element region of G-rich of repeats non-template many sequence strand. consists the a on switch Each example, 3 consists Sμ n but can about is be sequence as as of 7. repeats many the usually For where of 150 (GAGCT)n(GGGGGT), sequence Sε) contain Sα, and the and exact of the repeats all other (Sγ, regions but sequences GGGGGT switch differ in sequences. of The GAGCT repetitive polymerase highly region halted—called It of occasionally this RNA appears stalling. that through movement is polymerase double the be (see the R-loops, by structures, of transcribed the non-template This form strand called displaces helix DNA RNA Fig. caused bubble-like may that when on third having many 10.21, panel) tandem one residues in due strand. to G

specific being to with transcribed. AID regions connected Polymerase the stalling recruitment seems of switch closely and processing/ the multisubunit for RNA and associates generate the necessary are on RNA AID switch Spt5 stalled protein regions, to associates exosome, AID polymerase; with breaks. degradation A complex, double-stranded transcribed the accumulates with both is Recent guided indicates switch additional the that to transcribed evidence selectively by an mechanism. AID region template, completed polymerase harboring an spliced intron the transcription out. one is has the switch of RNA RNA After RNA RNA (Fig. repetitive processed structure, switch to is on an region G-quadruplex, generate element based is that G-rich called the RNA This the of a 10.22). it which serves both with purpose, AID its the was also associating G-quadruplex from and region This a dual to transcribed, binding complementarity. sequence on switch based such both on good sequences, AGCT, region, appropriate as AID to G-quadruplex switch as the cytidine where activity strands act to palindromic act allow its guides to the deaminase particular Thus concurrently. substrates endonuclease to the regions, this deliver manner similar A-35). a synthetic way, the I, specific In Cas9 described that to Appendix Section functions as in guide RNAs the genomic in G-quadruplex

Fig. the switching breaks the (see switch mechanisms lead in repairing that results switch general these cellular for regions, class regions recombination Following between nonhomologous to in double-stranded generation of breaks 10.21, panels). and fifth fourth ends different by then all to DNA region common the junction. chimeric be two sequences the regions, are switch together DNA the the of ends between leads rejoining alignment the of of joined and brought repetitive and at the to of a formation to switch The excision regions impairs of switching, deficiency blocks generating of but in DNA AID class UNG completely class in breaks. sequential both Loss and mice of UNG suggesting actions AID and switching, severely humans poorly end joining Joining classic as is in (as V(D) J as of probably recombination) pathway. mediated by a ends understood end-joining DNA well nonhomologous by alternative kinase DNA in ataxia sometimes repair by ATM, is is caused protein. which switching mutations known impaired telangiectasia, Class in the DNA-PKcs-family disease a the however. in not yet of is switching class role clear, The ATM entirely

for direct isotype cells T-dependent TFH made Cytokines of the 10-12 choice by antibody class responses. in switching

general a that response. are control mechanisms explain understand selected switching, that is Now DNA how to immune of particular class during the rearrangements heavy-chain we ready we an by this the that germinal reaction. is that function effector isotype center we see and choice by It the is that cytokines largely TFH cells the in of determines ultimately will the are controlled of antibody produced choice antibodies,

above, center cells discussed TFH germinal occur. class cells and for B are essential interactions between to switching As activated The on occur cells. interactions B the of on with required CD40 T CD40 cells ligand helper through interplay levels syndrome. of IgM, a abnormally plasma as switching and condition greatly reduces CD40 deficiency class of causes hyper IgM Genetic high known ligand of IgM infections antibodies with exhibit People common bacterial pathogens. than other classes manifested lack severe humoral this defect immunodeficiency, and repeated as with syndromes hyper that IgM be by IgM on the the patients. thymus-independent induced pathogens antigens may these chronically infect Much of in antibodies response, of interac tions initial cells. that are make indicates with deficiency IgM can to class rather a B antigens, affinity most response in Nevertheless, B-cell the than response CD40 ligand in sustained in which that important and enabling switching the includes maturation, CD40L–CD40 in thymus-dependent people activation

during by and of class the The other by selection random produced recombination the not immune the for cytokines is C particular is switch response. TFH regulated cells but region cells Different isotypes (Fig. cytokines different preferentially switching induce to 10.23). of lie RNA switch the by class gene inducing that transcripts heavy-chain switching to production the part 5ʹ in regions C induce each segment. Cytokines through of example, from IL-4, two or be are lie and transcription activated a that the B Cε occurs. regions of detected to switching for can When switch promoters before cells day exposed Cγ1 upstream in to will to these This center any recombination possible of make heavy-chain one. genes, occur it either C occur only B in but switch cell, for two particular will germinal In example in shown the class switching Fig. of isotype the the rearrangement through Sε antibody. transcription caused regions regions, making between Sμ and Sε 10.21, the IgE the region. because of upstream the STAT6, initiates of activates signaling factor Sε IL-4 the promoter the transcription which transcription This results Iε promoters antibody activate other of cytokines Other to other classes. regions produce switch other upstream to IL-21, IgG1 also TFH switching promotes which cells and produce IgG3. to switching IgA factor induces and (Cα). Transforming IgG2b growth (TGF)-β (Cγ2b) to IL-5 switching IgG2a and to interferon promotes and IgA, (IFN)-γ induces IgG3. switching

production individual or (red) induce The inhibit the certain cytokines classes. of antibody (violet) is to switching the result Much a different of class. of effect the directed inhibitory probably actions are of on IL-4. IL-21 The regulated by switching class drawn data with cells. are These mouse from experiments

Fig. Different to 10.23 classes. different induce cytokines antibody switching

Induces expression the cells of that Inhibits Inhibits production Inhibits plasma IgACytokines germinal IL-4 of cells. memory or Induces in IgG2b regulating center IL-21 IgG1 Induces differentiate Augments classes IL-5 10-13 IFN-˜TGF-°Role Induces antibody Inhibits Induces into eventually either cells Inhibits IgEIgG2aIgG3IgM Induces survive InducesInduces Inhibits B reaction InducesInhibitsInhibits cytokines

zone When into antibody. cells class large from undergone amounts and that to switching, of start plasma some the maturation affinity B have and cells differentiate produce exit eventually light of B Bcl-6 are cell for B differentiation, when the required and transcription plasma-cell and and inhibit Pax5 In both expression the cells, the factors differentiating. starts transcription Bcl-6 downregulated Pax5 factors a then that switches induces required affinity transcriptional B-cell class genes off IRF4 proliferation, for expression The of and transcription maturation. factor repressor switching, BLIMP-1, the cell-surface immunoglobulins, proliferating, increase which their B and they change in secretion cease is plasma synthesis induced and cells; the cells properties. of become BLIMP-1 Plasma and peripheral cells home and CXCR4 they centers so integrins tissues. leave can α4:β1 that downregulate CXCR5 upregulate and to the germinal

a migrate from in splenic germinal Some red cords cells to marrow, medullary long deriving where subset nodes live or for plasma spleen nodes to or period, whereas a others centers migrate the in lymph pulp. the lymph bone cells B and production, the which switched have are that system. germinal in in stay centers within tissues, mucosal been predominantly activated to IgA mucosal to plasma variant cells 1) of regulate secretory and splice XBP1 their binding in capacity. helps A protein (X-box is expressed or bone cells very whereas plasma receive essential be lived. cells their long are medullary that signals for cords can survival, red from in pulp marrow the are stromal cells Plasma not they in and long lived, for required also colonize plasma cells XBP1 to is bone successfully. marrow are the bone class-switched in cells antibody. of Plasma long-lasting the high-affinity marrow source

center Other B into memory cells. differentiate germinal B cells were and in germinal are cells center. descendants that antigen B by once proliferated Memory had the cells of long-lived stimulated only secrete do rate. or a surface at slowly very at express if low they no divide They immunoglobulin antibody, all; so but some including memory result precursors class genetic the from B the that inherit can occur the that Because of reaction, rearrangements somatic switch. center cells B germinal arise memory cells the hypermutation changes a and in there, gene that being a cell signals are B control of The investigated. still takes path which differentiation will We memory cells briefly in Chapter to B 11. return

10-14 antigens Some B-cell help responses. induce require to do not T-cell

we T-cell Section mice against with introduced Humans and antigens, antibodies thymus-independent which able are in 10-1. to deficiencies produce (TI) naive of which to include lipopolysaccharides, B certain in are and proteins, T-cell stimulate antigens polymeric absence the polysaccharides, help. bacterial able These cells yet cannot These normal responses, classical they individuals. induce in antibody elicit nonprotein T-cell products bacterial responses and and superantigens, include are derived there from that and antigens, TI parasite-derived antigens. bacteria; In mitogens not some lectins, viral are plant-derived antigens these addition,

antigens Thymus-independent fall by B two and two different into TI-2, which activate cells TI-1 classes, mechanisms. on antigens that TI-1 can without rely directly B-cell activity help. induce T-cell division cells activation is TI-1 molecules polyclonal antigens the as now B antigen of that contain cause their of most that and understand differentiation proliferation We regardless this specificity; (Fig. known panels). 10.24, top antigens are therefore TI-1

Fig. 10.24 antigen-specific low antibody concentrations, responses high antigens B-cell TI-1 responses induce polyclonal concentrations. and at at immunoglobulin. absence to secretion is delivered by to of high surface antigen and proliferation At moiety B-cell-activating sufficient TI-1 the concentration, specific antigen in the B-cell induce signal of antigens the binding antibody panels). (top cells all Thus, B respond antigen antigen TI-1 B-cell for only antibody specific B this low concentration, response gives its a cell; specific of the properties enough the TI-1 B on bind epitopes cells it focus (lower to the to panels). At onto activating

mitogen induces B-cell called that cells substance to being a undergo mitosis. a mitogens, often expressed cells example, For by act because TLRs mitogen. activate (see and LPS they antigens are B both 3-5) Section as DNA TI-1 can bacterial and a not Naive B most do of naive B-cell stimulation constitutively, cells through express levels murine they until receptor. express the human TLRs TLRs but cells B receive most high likely time responsive cell So and receptor, B by it to has antigen TLRs by a ligands to stimulation by TLR been the through that accompany the B-cell its is be antigens. stimulated express several B whose only antigens become for the B-cell bind 103–105 receptors that cells activation, lower activated. antigen are of TI-1 concentrations polyclonal used to times than exposed cells when are specifically Thus, those TI-1 those B B-cell concentrations, At this surface be low specific Fig. the (see activation B-cell TI-1 only these with on of concentrated the sufficient can of binding for amounts aid antigen bottom panels). 10.24, B require but stages maturation cells, affinity an or T-cell infection of extracellular may to B-cell in they of early against lead memory pathogens, important which responses TI-1 to be antigens defense in several antigen-specific the do not both help.

second as molecules polysaccharides. of that highly The thymus-independent antigens—consists repetitive antigens—TI-2 have of class capsular bacterial structures, such intrinsic B-cell-stimulating activity. no contain These TI-1 B 8-6, are in with by activate inactivated Section immature we can encounter mature repetitive only saw can TI-2 as antigens B epitopes. cells, B cells, activate mature and immature both antigens Whereas cells; to because do antigens, polysaccharide of make and of fully Infants children responses up cells young age their are immature. and antibody effective about might not be against most 5 this B years

cells border several the B made pulp, marginal by line by Responses B TI-2 8-9). are prominently splenic Section cells, to B-1 cells (see subset antigens zone the and of that nonrecirculating of white a therefore rare Marginal increase be are they and with might at in age; responses, which B birth TI-2 with zone physiological most responsible for efficiency cells accumulate age. simultaneously receptors a antigens (Fig. B B-cell cells cross-linking critical probably TI-2 the of antigen-specific of number mature surface act by on left 10.25,

Fig. enhanced activation is requires, by, or B-cell by antigens TI-2 greatly cytokines. 10.25 also evidence (right is of lead antibody Multiple panels), receptor to cytokines that can in (left cross-linking isotype IgM by to augment lead the there and responses, TI-2 production these switching addition B-cell but panels). greatly antigens which originate, may innate antigen It surface cytokine be cell. where it B cytokines B that cells, activate and soluble not cells, TNF-family switching the which possibility clear but on is a secrete the to the is so bind such through immune-system can able present class by their dendritic one receptors to BAFF, called

antigens to alone IgM that B lgGlgMActivated augments of TI-2 antibody and BAFF, dendritic can class switching cells BBBAFFIgMIgM12 release antibody panels). TI-2 cells cytokine, production against produce signal antigens induces a of signals by co-stimulatory cells Dendritic provide TI-2 macrophages can for activation and antigens. cells B is Fig. signals of dendritic the and can B which interacts cell BAFF, secreted One the with by on receptor co-stimulatory be (see TACI cells these 10.25, panels). right as of in critical; may of mature density epitopes cells immature B-cell insufficient be is renders too while a antigen The density B receptors activation. anergic, TI-2 cells, or unresponsive B cross-linking for low excessive

by important An of antigens class arises TI-2 during bacteria. infection capsulated pathogens surrounded resist are phagocytes. a capsule by Many that extracellular them bacterial enables ingestion by common polysaccharide to also direct escape responses bacteria avoid phagocytes stimulating presented destruction by against peptides The bacterial not only macrophages. T-cell by but destruction infection. of promoting phagocytes ingestion help coat IgM peptide-specific the produced early capsular their the by rapidly will T-cell and antibodies polysaccharide against independent the bacteria, in

bacterial produced strictly polysaccharides against are through antibodies Not mechanism. all TI-2 this bacterium. antibodies capsular of against influenzae the the type b We polysaccharide importance this Haemophilus protective of in earlier immunity to mentioned immunodeficiency by defects Wiskott–Aldrich The B cells is with Chapter that their interaction caused in impair (see disease cells syndrome 13). T bacteria polysaccharide H. susceptible with antigens and encapsulated IgG protein as and to syndrome make also unexpectedly, influenzae. Patients highly infection fail to are such antigens, poorly antibody Wiskott–Aldrich but, with to against respond IgM greatly making due responsible ubiquitous the the of make ‘natural’ zone the contains part against reduced be to B of to spleen, which development IgM IgM for antigens. cells in much failure marginal seems of antibody The carbohydrate to class-switched TI-2 humoral IgG TI-2 by Thus, in to might an and at induced response immune T-cell degree of antibodies and in antigens production infections, least, rely of many some the be antibodies important antigens bacterial to help. of are part normally on likely humans the IgM

As in TI certain to can IgM, responses switching such as include classes, well IgG3 producing as mouse. other the antibody Fig. result of (see This is probably help dendritic cells the from panels), proliferating cytokines TI secreted right as to which BAFF they respond such plasmablasts membrane-bound to signals antigens. and provide as 10.25, features distinguishing in summarized thymus-dependent, are of antibody Fig. TI-2 The TI-1, responses and 10.26.

Summary.

B-cell the the surface T requires the B antigens B-cell of activation antigen-specific B-cell cell both interaction binding receptor—and helper immunoglobulin—the by with cells. by antigen many of the as peptide:MHC class antigen Helper B cells internalized peptide and complexes. II derived the B from the displayed cells fragments T cells by recognize by on of B ligand conjugation CD40 of cell cytokines, binding IL-21. germinal by the and to the their B with such Follicular helper release CD40 T on stimulate T by centers, in cells as cells cell, B ICOSL, cells stimulate molecules, that such also cells. can express T Activated as B which migrate at initial response antigen-activated helper secondary tissue, between to chemokines. border the T B B-cell T the of The cells in areas and and interaction T-cell occurs of to lymphoid and cells cells formation into a Further after the cells the center. follicle continue germinal migration of between T interactions and B cells and

Fig. that responses. elicit different antigen antibody of classes 10.26 of Properties a for T cells TI-2 minor observed be data T-cell-deficient antigens in responses role to Some antigens; to antibody indicate responses in robust TI-2 mice. can

reaction plasma antibody-secreting a cells vigorous into of or center phase of in the induce T B the expanded memory cells B-cell germinal B either differentiation proliferation cells cells. and direct clonally (AID). genes reaction cytidine and expressed center in by in switching, cells the germinal are somatic class hypermutation deaminase initiated B diversified by activation-induced Immunoglobulin recombination, processes B only cells. Unlike occur V(D)J these in for the response through immune diversifies the region the the as antigen Somatic V are greater providing of for point that affinity proceeds. introduction mutations selected hypermutation the first immunoglobulins which antibodies. region Cμ region with not is expressed gene, increases switching produce by V IgG, Class but to IgA, affect or of the replacing C functional the diversity heavy-chain in immunoglobulin the IgE another region does with the provides effector specificity distinct antigen Class capacities. but antibodies same switching is cells. isotypes regulated to helper from different T by The antibody cytokines released switching cells Some T peptide-specific linked helper nonprotein cells. stimulate in of by B antigens recognition absence the these to Responses antigens do B switching limited accompanied cells. class are by only thymus-independent not memory induce and responses. whose However, T-cell role elicit against host such antigens defense a peptide-specific responses cannot surface in pathogens have crucial

distributions and of classes. The immunoglobulin functions

distributed and the pathogens to be so them. widely combat can equally antibodies body, must within Extracellular most invade sites Most their antibodies lungs deliver diffusion and specialized site by lining such surfaces antibodies mucosa from of the required across epithelial of are mechanisms organs as of the are distributed classes synthesis, the transport intestine. but to engage antibody isotype epithelia. deliver antibody heavy-chain of the The can diffusion that antibody limit specific transporters the across either particular or are body compartments the effector mechanisms antibody these classes particular and appropriate. the their part This them where the that functions of enter use of describes to chapter by Here the discussion and the result restrict molecules from binding antibodies chapter, protective the we to part the that their are we our functions different effector discuss pathogens, antibody of and solely in that classes. engaged cells to next specifically of

10-15 functions. in and distinct Antibodies effector operate classes places distinct of have different

damaged enter barriers Pathogens urogenital epithelial the across mucosa digestive, through skin. or and commonly body respiratory, the lining the of tracts, the most hypodermic insects, introduce directly Less wounds, often, or the blood. into microorganisms needles blood infection. and the protect a it antibodies infections; these surfaces, serve before the from to significant promote such or elimination Antibodies all mucosal establish neutralize tissues, pathogen can its body’s

Fig. antibodies classes The different (see of 5.19) body. adapted the are compartments in to function different of activities distributions functional in Their listed and are Fig. 10.27. that region of through specificity the same single share class a appropriate each of yet B produce provide become can progeny protective the with can a region given compartment. Because for antibodies cell any all functions body switching, associated V C the cell-surface and naive All IgD. cells express IgM B activated found secreted but first 10% in by cells IgM is the less the immunoglobulin is than antibody of plasma. B antibody at Little IgD contributes of important the IgE time, produced small immune while part a any is but biologically response. and the antibody are predominant classes. IgG IgA biologically response. of important but part small IgE the a contributes its plasma of also (see to The the due in predominance Fig. in lifetime is IgG longer overall part 5.20).

major pink, minor effector shown (+) dark in pale lesser functions functions dark red, functions pink. whereas of very class in each are The are (++) in (+++) shaded and with bottom The are levels actual average row. in being shown marked in serum similarly, the distributions subclasses, and two has IgA IgA1 IgA2. both. The to column refers IgA *IgG2 the receptor an the in Fc people about of an descent. act of as opsonin of of allotype, appropriate Caucasian 50% in presence found can

immune humoral low and IgM a be produced to response are in first affinity. tend of antibodies are J-chain form (see that stabilized molecule Fig. a single by IgM molecules pentamers However, capsular and higher bacterial overall such to 5.23) have as antigens polysaccharides. conferring when sites, antigen-binding multivalent binding 10 avidity the for individual the antigen-binding pentamer IgM affinity within the the higher site compensates This of low of avidity monomers. spaces the and, within in rather is the Because large of the than extent, of in IgM tissues. in the size intercellular lesser found lymph, to bloodstream pentamers, mainly a last the we The pentameric structure chapter. as activating makes in part system, in it of this the effective of will IgM especially complement see than fix can efficiently more IgM hexamers much pentamers, and complement also possibly is C1q hexamer. form, also a because these infections However, the role established. vivo been in hexamers IgM not fully has against protecting of in

the and consequences rapid important in its has Infection unless such are serious complement production is it infections. IgM bloodstream quickly, efficient of of controlling controlled the and the system of activation B switching, peritoneal zone class B-1 is conventional cells and spleen. produced cells marginal cavity the by that cells produced Some and spaces by residing have IgM most pleural is of B in undergone but not by the they that Section not preformed body including antigens, 8-9). of encountered These can a antibodies secrete require help; and provide (see invading antibodies IgM those blood do therefore recognize in cells bacteria, T-cell and repertoire pathogens cavities of carbohydrate commonly against

the blood classes—IgG, into Antibodies and of the easily smaller, IgA, other out the and IgE—are diffuse tissues. of IgA can (see Fig. form dimers and always monomeric. IgG are 5.23), but IgE cells for effectiveness antigen affinity after antibodies, The critical of their affinity the for classes therefore and the in sites the of antigen the expressing somatic centers hypermutation. these individual their of germinal most these have is been antigen-binding for for increased selected B IgG hybrid subclasses, antibodies. is of the ability the unusual has but the IgG4 abundant form to least and from heavy chain–light chain dimer split light antigen the chain forming can with and IgG4 antibody chain distinct original One different attached pair, bivalent specificities. IgG4 IgG4 a heavy-chain reassociate with a heavy two

lining the important IgA and epithelia blood IgG class respiratory principal from is extracellular antibody intestinal and most of the tracts. secretions, the the principal the those is class in in fluid, whereas being efficiently pathogens and potent IgA by for engulfment system, and a activates the opsonin less but weak of a phagocytes opsonizes complement. activator is complement IgG dimeric complement functions the antibody. and are surfaces, not mainly IgG normally epithelial operates and IgA IgA as phagocytes mainly where in where are cells therefore neutralizing molecules on a present; tissues, operates accessory available, chiefly whereas can extracellular and neutralizing by in IgA nodes cells lymph spaces cells acts and spleen, blood. it be class-switched plasma in the antibody produced that Monomeric a differentiate and as in B from IgA in IgA1 blood ratio monomeric the predominantly This is IgA1; of subclass IgA2 to the the is 10:1. of by The and predominantly gut the 3:2. IgA1 antibodies gut produced is subclass ratio IgA2; the IgA2 dimeric of of to in IgA are in cells the plasma

antibody are and low very the receptors beneath by found just mast at present but bound connective Finally, on only IgE skin cells in that or and is along avidly extracellular mucosa vessels tissue. fluid, levels is blood blood in turn chapter. in agents, as Antigen coughing, discussed this and induce later that can expel in reactions vomiting, cell-associated this powerful chemical binding triggers to mast which mediators sneezing, release as IgE to infectious such cells

immunoglobulin the regions IgM across of and binds transports Polymeric barriers. and IgA them 10-16 epithelial receptor Fc to

immune propria, In which immediately membrane IgA-secreting surface the basement epithelia. the mucosal in lies below lamina plasma are the many found system, predominantly of cells the be can gut the its the to external across there or lumen of antibodies (Fig. of to for From example IgA the surface, the transported epithelium bronchi 10.28). dimeric the synthesized in IgA associated with propria molecule chain. IgA J as is a lamina antibody a secreted single to (pIgR), specifically is the basolateral cells. of the IgA form immunoglobulin surfaces polymeric the receptor present receptor overlying polymeric of binds a called This epithelial which on luminal molecule and is transport the vesicle pIgR cytoplasm epithelial IgA, the bound internalized through in surface. a the of of complex cell its to carried the a dimeric has When is called process transcytosis. This be same by into gut can pIgR the the to the and IgM mechanism. also secreted binds of of gut lining extracellular the domain the antibody the the luminal of is the cleavage by covering released into surface Upon pIgR. proteolytic layer the reaching enterocyte, mucous the and to antibody. SC) the the cleaved as The domain remains known secretory pIgR of abbreviated associated is extracellular (frequently component with component IgA the to receptor site IgA why Fc of does the bind receptor. for the of that region the which this secretory to not Secretory binding is I, is contains bound part Fcα Secretory several roles. serves component physiological mucous to pathogens Fig. binds It acting binds the layer gut the neutralizes and in their surface and toxins (see luminal the secreted mucus, IgA mucins to on the of ‘glue’ gut bind as to epithelium, where antibody 10.28). cleavage protects also gut enzymes. antibodies against by Secretory component the

exocrine principal tear and the and salivary sites the as are such the of gut, lactating various the respiratory synthesis breast, IgA glands. glands and epithelium, other The secretion IgG protect antibodies of the epithelial just tissues. role from IgA protect that the inside antibodies as primary surfaces is extracellular spaces agents, infectious functional is It to believed of IgA toxins, a pathogens. prevent bacteria virus and against and first antibodies uptake and epithelial the of wide toxins, By binding attachment and viruses the provide variety particles, cells the line of defense bacteria, to of have the to role the Chapter also that (see regulating gut in microbiota additional 12). is an thought gut, of IgA the alveolar because The characteristic lack alveolar upper gas a diffusion the the thicker would respiratory by layer efficient tract, mucous mucosal be the spaces covering layer impeded tract of lower respiratory epithelium. in is there. responsible for the protection IgG rapidly and major transudate into spaces isotype can these

Fig. of lumen in present antibody the Dimeric class gut. IgA major the 10.28 the is of synthesized propria the gut crypts. epithelial transported through the of is lumen the in the and cells plasma of by at base lamina IgA the into cells structure mucus to to the region Cγ3 The and gut lumen the acts Fc antigen-specific (blue) with the the domains, the Cγ2 of bound one interface toxins binds as the Dimeric of gut molecule pathogens of an layer portion shown of at of the the IgG and top. IgA to overlying and a FcRn of (red), chain in Cγ2 at barrier epithelium is The green. FcRn the β2-microglobulin of component is reflecting a the of Fc portion IgG is carbohydrate The attached dark-blue chain, to structure glycosylation. in across and placenta also across and the the FcRn IgG gut mice. in humans molecules transports rats adults. IgG of role levels a has in It the maintaining also in it Although one shown IgG. is two molecule the takes of to only portion, of FcRn binding FcRn that molecules thought it is molecule Fc of to capture one Courtesy of

Fig. IgG. binds Fc 10.29 portion neonatal receptor Fc the The of (FcRn) to

Björkman. P.

body. neonatal The placenta receptor IgG carries excretion and prevents across 10-17 from the Fc IgG the

they to are infants birth. previous the environment Newborn especially to enter vulnerable the exposure in having infection, no at had microbes are infant, the to newborn until and antibody. in milk where breast antibodies secreted newly infant transferred IgA gut the can synthesize encountered provide protection from own protective they of its are bacteria the that IgA baby. to a on not only protective the is mother her antibody passes intrauterine life; the human Maternal is plasma same with their have mothers, of IgG placenta as directly bloodstream as the levels fetus specificities. range the of antigen IgG the during into at of birth and across transported babies high molecules. transport I is an Fc MHC The placenta, structure protein class related receptor), in transport FcRn mother to of from IgG to in to (neonatal is which fetus due closely IgG selective the peptide-binding groove of Despite its to similarity, because peptide this molecules, FcRn occluded. is the quite differently binding IgG class from binds MHC I Fc portion the binds IgG to molecules It of (Fig. 10.29). it of molecules bind bearing of Two molecule IgG, one across FcRn the placenta. by newborn secreted ingested the the its mother’s the milk fluid colostrum, mammary and early animal protein-rich IgG from by gland. is postnatal Maternal tissues. the gut transports and the neonatal In FcRn the blood case, of the IgG lumen into this from in cells. liver FcRn the adults and Interestingly, on in and is also endothelial found gut it Its it, of plasma, in preventing binding is antibody, levels to blood, recycling excretion adults its the it and does in function endocytosing the maintain the thus to by IgG from body. which

of their common transport systems, pathogens against supplied specialized these birth from means are By in environments. mammals antibodies with make own in of mature distributed to different and antibodies selectively all these body sites isotypes, As (Fig. they are the their 10.30). against protection extracellular of distribution and in effective provide life, antibody throughout Thus, the switching infection class the throughout classes spaces. body

and IgA 10-18 bacteria. can viruses and the IgG High-affinity antibodies block neutralize infectivity and toxins of

can cause Pathogens directly, host these both cells to by can of protect toxins damage antibodies or and blocking by producing actions. a by infecting or (Fig. the cells bacteria of Many cause function that damage host’s secreting disease by the disrupt toxins 10.31). domains To for many toxicity toxins which cells, cells. to binding affect cell-surface and of consist by for receptors they separate exerting specific enter entry (Fig. and from bind receptor-binding a protect can attack cell toxin’s Antibodies that cells prevent site 10.32). referred that to are in act neutralizing antibodies. this Antibodies way as toxins neutralize to toxin nanomolar concentrations: a toxins can kill Most are a molecule of single diphtheria active cell. at therefore, the rapidly and toxins, tissues antibodies neutralize the be To diffuse into bind able to toxin affinity. must and high with easily the ability to antibodies diffuse The IgG throughout of

Fig. are body. the distributed classes 10.30 Immunoglobulin selectively in and by (shown in blood for IgM and IgG here IgG IgA body. monomeric the major within the antibodies fluid are in IgM the extracellular predominate IgG heart), simplicity whereas and in in milk. Dimeric epithelia, predominates IgA including across breast secretions by from transport. The IgG the fetus receives transplacental mother associated is mainly beneath skin). tract, cells with mast found epithelial gastrointestinal respiratory and surfaces (especially tract, of the just IgE The of normally devoid immunoglobulin. is brain

Fig. bacterial Many 10.31 by diseases are common caused toxins. The toxins are all shown exotoxins—proteins by bacteria. secreted here the protect and IgG antibodies these toxins. against IgA High-affinity also bacterium disease. are endotoxins, nonsecreted and may pathogenesis released lipopolysaccharide, when Bacteria which dies such also as have the mediate of Host (see more receptors some system immune innate to the endotoxins, responses 3). because exotoxins complex has such Chapter TLR-4 as for are

for and taken extracellular affinity high make once neutralize maturation toxins in affinity place, has fluid, the antigen principal that their antibodies them tissues. of the antibodies body. High-affinity toxins surfaces the neutralize similarly mucosal IgA at

toxin blocking Endocytosis of binds active Dissociation cell of releases cellular chain, by receptors complexes of binding which poisons to Antibody toxin:receptor cell its protects toxin Toxin

Fig. IgG molecule 10.32 toxins cell-surface which from protects a by antibodies Neutralization receptor, damage. of molecule enables the cells binds be effects internalized. The of bacteria many damaging are to molecule the the toxins Fig. the Another due they to part then (see of toxin produce enters 10.31). are toxins These cell. cytoplasm poisons and the of Antibodies toxin distinct binding usually that several moieties. composed inhibit the these effects. or One part of prevent, can toxin neutralize,

on two Diphtheria functions toxic are toxins which tetanus the in protein toxins are bacterial receptor-binding and chains. separate and chain immunize toxin It denatured. molecules been with is modified to the as individuals, has in usually therefore possible infants, toxic which site. toxic activity These toxins, retain but lack toxoids, receptor-binding called the modified induces the Thus, protect toxoid native the immunization antibodies neutralizing against toxin. that with

or that so animal a toxic tissue death. are single Some or damage can severe exposure venoms insect cause these to protective. adaptive slow For immune the be response too is and have vaccines is rare not humans. in a Exposure venoms for protective to developed use these event, been antibodies immunizing such snake insect produce species, to Instead, are neutralizing or by venoms antibodies, as generated horses, with anti-venom other antivenins. and individuals effects The venom. the toxic of to them the against injected antivenins protect into exposed are Appendix antibodies Section immunization passive of Transfer as A-30). I, way known this (see in is

viruses to binding cells particular receptor. Animal infect cell-surface a by These virus determine that often proteins a cells tropism. which infect, its are can cell-type-specific or viruses directly do that so neutralize virus binding receptors surface Many of antibodies the blocking (Fig. by to 10.33). acid hemagglutinin sialic cells tract. terminal the binds The glycoproteins influenza carbohydrates on residues virus, on the of present to respiratory example, for epithelial of of on agglutinates residues it as to red similar blood cells. binds acid and known recognizes these is because It sialic and blood red cells chicken hemagglutinin can prevent infection virus. by influenza the Antibodies against the hemagglutinin and with antibodies are called antibodies toxins, IgG particularly antibodies, of IgA neutralization are the Such high-affinity important. virus-neutralizing as and, to viruses cytoplasm receptors. cell’s enter antibodies mechanisms by binding also with used fusion can the to after neutralize However, interfering surface the

host of to cells. them surface called molecules bacteria the bind Many that cell-surface enable to have adhesins subsequently Salmonella bacteria the pathogens the surface attached species, cell disease, whether ability crucial enter as the these to (Fig. adherence extracellular to This do cause remain to of cell, as or they is 10.34). and gonorrhea, protein has reproductive that the to of to cell-surface urinary as the the tracts infectivity. the agent its causative epithelial pilin enables bacterium to known essential and adhere cells a transmitted gonorrhoeae, sexually is Neisseria of the disease reaction can prevent adhesive infection. and against pilin inhibit this Antibodies

tracts in in and these reproductive by surfaces secreted the antibodies infection are respiratory, particularly cells. surfaces the and the IgA intestinal, epithelial mucosal important of the inhibiting of colonization preventing pathogens onto of to same protect pathogenesis, IgG protect also from surfaces. and IgA tissues tissues against can damage the of adhesins to Adhesion within in mucosal bacteria as cells much way antibodies antibodies contribute

Fig. can by Viral antibodies. be infection 10.33 cells neutralizing blocked of to within introduce it cell. must multiply genes cell, a its a into the For virus is virus usually in the binding on The to of receptor first surface. the the entry cell a step envelope enveloped cell of viral shown entry the figure, the cytoplasm in viruses, the membrane. requires into the and as fusion For environment surface endosomes, For of cell here. the shown); viruses for some within it as event (not on fusion can the more only occur shown this takes place others acidic surfaces, must endosomes. by enter also the viruses on but disrupting they cell to Non-enveloped bind cytoplasm receptors the to viral its its initial entry. proteins or surface Antibodies binding neutralize either bound cell to virus, inhibiting subsequent the

C1q. Antibody:antigen 10-19 complexes classical by to binding complement pathway the activate of

component the Chapter of system immunity. innate as 2 introduced an complement essential the antibody and lectin proceed can of absence the pathway mannose-binding (MBL) through of actions Complement via activation lectin the in ficolins. is the responses of antibody pathway. complement via also classical effector important But an an pathogen converge complement which covalently coat complement phagocytes. uptake by and C3b, acts as attached activation pathways different surfaces antigen:antibody complexes fragment The to to opsonin promote with removal or of form bacteria. damages some terminal addition, the membrane-attack that complement complex components In can a

complex C1, the C1q complement the of and pathway, and triggered activation (see proteases by Section is 2-7). serine C1r In classical C1s a that Complement to via when are bind the surface of to activation a is then initiated attached (Fig. C1 C1q pathogen antibodies 10.35). bound either can be C1q by

Fig. Antibodies cell can 10.34 surfaces. prevent attachment of bacteria to the receptor. and a cell-surface Many between interaction require bacterial an bacterium infections the particularly infections surfaces. is for true This of mucosal specific process cells; bacterial against bacterial on receptors involves antibodies host adhesins very block interactions The can infections. between attachment their such adhesins and molecular

Fig. on antibody surface. complement the initiated of C1q is a of pathogen 10.35 to classical by pathway binding activation The globular the to pathogen IgM surface, of heads panels). identical into a of epitopes conformation, molecule binds (left the ‘staple’ When regions to a C1q it the allows IgM is bind of bent Fc on several which allow regions of IgG single molecules Multiple (right of to a Fc C1q of the or of surface more pathogen the panels). molecule a bound two binding on complement change a the of regions (see 2). activates classical which the cascade Fc active In associated an the a that induces C1r, C1s, binding both that the pro-enzyme cleaves protease enzyme Chapter initiates conformational the generating that becomes C1q to cases, serine

Fig. of IgM. two conformations 10.36 The bound right panel the The shows flagellum. ‘staple’ conformation the of of bacterial shows soluble left panel the IgM conformation to planar a IgM; K.H. of Photographs courtesy (×760,000) Roux.

solution; to of complement of C1q, these neither on antibodies to reactions of normally when a bound are activate antibody are classes the or multiple initiated IgG surface, can because that requirements sites binding structural the a the only but, IgM pathogen. of already complement cell antibodies, in

region, C1 Each or heads of two activates Fc a globular can molecule and of more binding head C1q complex. bind to one the molecule C1q not conformation has planar plasma, In IgM bind does pentameric (Fig. the a that the IgM to so of like a binding it a surface staple panel); pen-tamer pathogen that deforms 10.36, (see however, left the Fig. looks distortion this exposes for and binding heads. 10.36, sites right panel), the C1q can Section less form 10-15, than of also total IgM. 5% IgM serum mentioned but As hexamers comprise in C1q its 20 efficiently possibly form, complement is because than pentameric activates times IgM a more about Hexameric also hexamer. The and against fully be are been hexamers harmful. in IgM not too suggested infections protecting established, has of has role and may that reactive in vivo it even IgM been hexamers

of activation C1q 30–40 IgG the antigen. each to held is result solution, molecules can C1q Although or required within binding in are achieved for affinity C1q nm two subclasses IgG energy as that of binds more molecule a of bind other low binding single of with when some a only multiple antigen pathogen a or be This single to requires solution. of to in bound that an IgG molecules reason, IgM than complement. this more much in efficient IgG activating For is Fig. or molecules IgM or single C1q two (see more a The binding to molecule, of bound to bound IgG protease of the leads to activity of triggering cascade. complement C1r, 10.35), activation the

both Complement 10-20 and contribute immune the receptors receptors removal from circulation. to of complexes Fc

isotypes the to interacting effector regions. distinct functions the their receptors antibody various Fc by Fc with confer cells complexes dead or complexes), can and bound microorganisms, function (immune circulation by the such One which host of from from the antibodies. neutralizing debris antigen:antibody toxins, clearance is include phagocytic by in to various the cells region of Fc expressed the antibody’s on Immune can binding cleared Fc be complexes tissues. receptors activates activation occurs is when This by helped also C1q. clearance Fc last in (described section), complement the region the which on Section complex receptor different the 2-13 of of aids clearance 1 the erythrocytes description onto complement and types C4b of for (CR1) immune receptors). The of binding a complement surface by C3b (see the deposition to antigen, transport liver to The the bound of erythrocytes complement complexes antibody, spleen. and and the and Fc Here, bearing macrophages CR1

of circulation. the immune important in surface role complexes has the CR1 an clearance on the from erythrocyte components. them are for complement and to to where bound receptors bind which expressing complexes transport the CR1 macrophages Fc and Immune removed both liver by erythrocytes, spleen, on they

surface complexes and remove from degrade erythrocyte the receptors (Fig. then without cell, destroying the the complexes the 10.37). debris, coated aggregates complement, up such be and for erythrocytes, as particulate bacteria, with and cell destruction. picked by the of transported larger to spleen Even antigen, can viruses,

are the that is the notably the most Complement-coated of tend to membranes not where blood small vessels, to from glomerulus, basement form filtered blood removed complexes deposit urine. of renal immune those in circulation the membrane CR1 that renal membrane. beneath basement basement pass through on lie of podocytes, the glomerulus to bind complexes the Immune cells present the that the significance autoimmune receptors these an have role the they in kidney the in important of diseases. of however, pathology functional unknown; some The is disease. their podocytes, on of amounts failure in systemic the Section this danger levels immune disease 15-16), is to In glomerulus; (see lead damaging principal the autoimmune the circulating in deposition (SLE) complexes kidney the large excessive lupus erythematosus risk factor deficiency, SLE The this strongest although is rare. genetic very C1q is for FcR increased to both of the and associated susceptibility complement Fc lupus, receptors and in Mutations receptor implying pathways are FcγRIIIa in 3 develop immune and 2 receptors the involvement clearing complement also with complexes.

Antigen:antibody C2, early complement of the deficiencies with in in pathology C4). a cause components patients be of also complexes can and (C1, deficiencies tagged activated These immune effectively not complement do cleared become the being they complement. and result classical pathway not properly, because not complexes in with being damage a patients tissue of the also suffer in kidneys. result deposition, especially immune-complex as These

Summary.

quickly with begins of the additional progresses IgM production The antibody response secretion classes. antibody T-cell-dependent to but is in in body specialized in perform. and the functions it the localization its can both Each class pentameric in IgM they antibodies structure. found in are mainly are blood; to IgM antigen specialized compensate and for binding to site. typical upon a antigen-binding the IgM efficiently complement is activate of low affinity bacteria, they system. the extracellular IgG blood them are in and and antibodies found complement for can affinity opsonize and are activate viruses, fluid, higher and of phagocytosis, where in usually neutralize toxins, fluids, antibodies of tissues. enter blood as extracellular cells various plasma dimeric propria synthesized by monomers, are which and are mucosal or as IgA the they lamina secreted in molecules viruses sites gut, intestinal toxins as layer epithelium. and bacteria block where of are across dimers IgA and epithelial the of selectively they transported into lumen neutralize entry the such the the the across antigen reside defense just triggers this the surface; bound mainly to surface cells that Most binding is below the IgE IgE of antibody reactions. body to local mast Antibodies in can against body products their several the pathogens ways. toxic defend extracellular and direct is and specific of the products, their by with pathogens receptors. or host binding active simplest by blocking The to or their example, for sites through ability neutralizing by cells to bind to toxins interactions them antigens, activate they When leads classical antibodies to complement, can of of isotype which pathway appropriate bind the the

Fig. clear complexes from Erythrocyte circulation. to the helps immune CR1 10.37

in complexes antigen:antibody circulation form the Small

the pathogen receptor phagocytic to bound 2. in the C3b liver, the complexes surface on from the the binds Complement remove via by mechanisms immune elimination erythrocyte described immune spleen FcRIn Chapter CR1 CR1 the and of various complexes the erythrocytes cells immune blood receptors also complement on via red circulation complexes fix are of and and cells. Soluble antibody cleared from the complement antigen

receptors. destruction Fc antibody-coated The via pathogens of

antibodies but on neutralization bacteria body. high-affinity the or their toxins, remove solve The not, against does infection pathogens the and products the protect own, can its how by of viruses, of to from problem Moreover, must be pathogens means. by other and be cannot antibody destroyed by neutralized many targets linked other effector and host on be Many thus not their defense. need antibodies bind play pathogen to neutralizing to to surfaces mechanisms in pathogen-specific do part to the can antibody seen binding complement. of activate already antigen how to We have effector is for of activation of variety Fc specific antibodies. of because cells receptors Another a mechanism portion receptors important defense accessory they are bearing the called the Fc These macrophages, facilitate the phagocytosis receptors of dendritic cells, neutrophils. extracellular and antibody-bound pathogens by of basophils, cells mast cells, (see the and nonphagocytic eosinophils, Fig. cells immune system—NK Other, mediators their triggered pathogens. stored by are secrete Fc to 1.8)—are engaged when antibody-coated receptors where These effectiveness of antibodies the they bind. maximize all regardless mechanisms of

accessory are different of 10-21 classes. receptors receptors of immunoglobulins for Fc signaling specific cells The

are Fc Fc a portion cell-surface family the of that of bind receptors The immunoglobulins. molecules Fc recognizes recognition the chain member the family of α Each closely heavy-chain Fc receptor. immunoglobulin related a of a on through the one domain or few of isotypes receptors Fc of gene are superfamily. members the themselves immunoglobulin Most of given isotype sets which types Different in engaged will Fc of thus determines cell of types bear antibody be and cells different response. receptors, the the a The express are them, cells different classes their shown for that and the receptors, Fc Fig. specificities antibody different in 10.38.

Most complex. part function Fc a of as receptors multisubunit when to recognition; chain an is required the transduction is α of bound. are the and cell Only region transport antibody other signal Fc receptor for chains the surface for required for the chain use IgE Some receptor signaling. (FcεRI) receptors, for all and I, the a Fcγ for Fcα high-affinity the γ receptor (see T-cell receptor chain, 7-7), is complex which chain. to associates chain the closely Fc-binding Section ζ the This of noncovalently with the α related is of single-chain the of in domain chain. FcγRII-A α the human a the the which cytoplasmic replaces function receptor chain γ The are contain engages Section single-chain the FcγRII-B1 receptors (see an FcγRII-B2 7-25). SHIP function but and as also because ITIM receptors, inositol 5ʹ-phosphatase that inhibitory they contribute to pathogens, The attack of but ways immune cells of Fc in activation most receptors also the function they other prominent to accessory responses. is macrophages, FcγRII-B receptors immune by neutrophils cells, example, the cells. threshold For cells, activities negatively regulate B activate mast will adjusting of at the and these which complexes thus to cells. efficiently them ingest by Fc process their cells and to dendritic complexes T peptides these expressed receptors antigens enable and antigen:antibody present

kDa Induction Inhibition Fc˛RI cells IgG2 IgG4 kDa IgG4 Degranulation IgA, 3) kDa Fc˛RII-A Neutrophils IgE 40 M–1 1) stimulation kDa of 33 cells 2 kDa cells cells Macrophages IgG2 Eosinophils M–1 Binding cells (CD32) 3) ˙ of 106 type ITIM M–12–7 5 Eosinophils† M–1 ˜-like Macrophages ° killing of kDa M–1 ° B domain Neutrophils 70 2) Eosinophils of cells) IgA Uptake Eosinophils kDa 1) × 106 (trimer) ˜ afÿnity IgG1=IgG3 Mast of 1) 45 3) IgG2 ˝ (CD32) B 2–7 1) Neutrophils of IgA1=IgA2 ˜ IgG1 Order 2) Macrophages IgG1 trimer 3 of or Fc°RI Uptake 3) IgM ° Cell IgG4 release 9 N kDa IgG1 × 1) (CD89) Macrophages UptakeSecretion IgM 106 Fc˛RIII (CD64) domain IgE 1010 Langerhans × Structure Induction 9 2 granules ° ° stimulation ligation IgG1 ˜or 109 IgG3=IgG2* 2) (eosinophils) of 106 Platelets Mast 107 Eosinophils ° Fc˛RII-B2 × cells 72 NK lectin No Uptake Uptake (NK IgG1 (CD32) Neutrophils 105 55–75 M–1 M–1 2) (monomer) Induction IgG1 IgA2 Activation Stimulation ITIM Mast M–1 (CD23) 108 kDa IgA1, 50–70 2) × uptake × Neutrophils cells killing Macrophages IgG4 IgG1=IgG3 Inhibition Macrophages M–1 Granule Effect 107 2 ˜ burst respiratory IgG1=IgG3 ReceptorFc˜RI Basophils killing IgG1=IgG3 × cells M–1 Fc˛RII-B1 (CD16) B Eosinophils of Fc°/˝RFc˜RII

Fig. expressed Fc cells. in is transmembrane it a chains, of associated different molecule region membrane Distinct γ 10.38 accessory with on anchor the without immunoglobulin whereas receptors NK are glycosylphosphatidylinositol cells different for the classes The subunit binding and structure chains. of properties γ them are the differs and expressing cell the types The receptors by these shown. presence the FcγRII-B2 from FcγRII-B1 region additional the yellow which FcεRII, All an triangle). members in immunoglobulin (indicated exon superfamily of intracellular are except by and form being trimers. from lectin This can prevents internalized the FcγRII-B1 exon a is cross-linking. composition after The chain exact data taken any one of from binding The can receptor on from another. type to are affinities cell vary For human receptors. some bind allotypes IgG2. of *Only FcγRII-A kDa. chain with a as example, 70–100 is expressed weight a molecule eosinophils, in is the neutrophils the †In FcγRIII molecular of CD89α

receptor 21) types. immune the of novel enter a and is (tripartite viruses nonimmune by that class motif-containing expressed a a variety system are cleared employs TRIM21 that Fc Antibody-coated that called cytoplasm by of cell affinity ligase cytosolic receptor, IgG activity. is a has a has and E3 also higher than Fc that for TRIM21 any other IgG it receptor TRIM21 to its bound to enters When E3 IgG the the viral virus ubiquitinate and attaches ligase that proteins. activity cytoplasm, antibody a uses has of proteasomal the virally leads occur. genes can of encoded This before translation to degradation in cytosol virions

phagocytes enable ingest the phagocytes are and to destroy bound by pathogens. Fc 10-22 of activated the and antibodies surface to pathogens on receptors

are important cells in monocytic macrophages myelocytic the Fc-bearing of humoral and The and lineages, most phagocytic the immune particularly neutrophils. cells responses individuals. phagocytes, bacteria bacteria and and pathogenic ingested, Many not by destroyed are are in directly these recognized, normal the structure some pathogens capsules, However, engulfment large membrane have direct a that and bacterial cell polysaccharide outside by resists phagocytes. lies bacterial phagocytosis that and (Fig. uptake to with complement Such and triggering become receptors or Fcγ they bacterial the cells, complement engage when phagocytic CR1 coated pathogens receptor antibodies the are only susceptible Fcα on 10.39). stimulation The

membrane-enclosed the Bacterium receptor, vesicle, antibody and creating fuse, coated bacterium vesicles, When bacteria that IgG Fc phagosome Macrophage with binds phagocytosed binds CR1 FcreceptorsC3bbacteriummacrophagelysosomeCR1 and membranes to to a these degrade enzymes Lysosomes the antibody is complement delivering fuse C3b with are

Fig. phagocytes and uptake 10.39 Fc and of degradation the bacteria. complement trigger on receptors antibody-coated Many bacteria macrophages and resist neutrophils. by phagocytosis Fc be surface. on of to interaction phagocyte to ingested on these Antibodies the bound with bacteria arrayed the the multiple the through Fc enable receptors bacteria, surface bacterial the however, domains and degraded binding coating components induces of system surface. to of activation Antibody and the also the complement complement bacterial the example, can CR1) with (for These the phagocyte. complement receptors on interact and Fc complement in phagocytosis. receptors receptors inducing synergize IgG than coated antibody IgG those alone. with with Bacteria are ingested coated and more complement readily therefore increase activity. and the bactericidal complement to its of lysosomes to phagocytosis, of signals to Fc fuse the increase and phagocyte receptors phagosomes, with rate Binding

to and of been destruction is does phagocytosis of cross-linking have Fc immunoglobulin Free activation of of leading not binding receptors of Aggregation to receptors early by surface antibodies particularly No of immunoglobulin bacterium made. cross-link response, receptors complement-coated allows Activation complement before of bacterial in Fc Fc macrophage, on macrophage bacterium receptors no bacterium macrophage, destruction antigens important phagocytosis the isotype-switched immune complement the polysaccharides of very system. antibodies, Capsular thymus-independent which belong class effective early antigens, the IgM production can at TI-2 stimulate and the are therefore to activating of opsonization bacteria binding IgM receptors. bacteria and phagocytes ingestion their to of prompt thus and by by these complement bearing destruction the complement encapsulated triggers discovered binds and both as Fcα/μR receptor was IgA Recently, that a IgM. cells and expressed germinal Fcα/μR and the on macrophages of propria in intestine centers. B primarily lamina is the in to Staphylococcus thought in the is have aureus. such antibody as of IgM complexed with role bacteria endocytosis It a

causes much number molecules larger damage, activation pathogen response inflammatory able tissue of to Phagocyte antibody can to must bound that on to a receptors not bound an that the phagocytes antibody molecules anything. and are distinguish free from Fc be initiate so antigens aggregation occurs as made to viruses such multimeric antibodies possible that the by is when distinction of and to they bind bacteria. antigens particulate or multivalent This with Individual high but affinity, receptors the surface bound by particle, monomers by avidity, bind multiple when binding a from which mechanism antibodies an the in on results cell free receptors this antibody with principal antibody-coated binding and of presented distinguished immunoglobulin are (Fig. free low simultaneous of Fc Fc is 10.40). via enable antibody bound the molecules to is detect pathogens them. The receptors result Fc to cells that specificity their remove to intrinsic cells from Fc products identify and specific and the therefore the pathogens give receptors lack that spaces. phagocytic ability extracellular

Fig. state is its immunoglobulin of from free distinguishable 10.40 Bound by aggregation. antibody bind Free receptors. molecules very with and Fc cross-link immunoglobulin affinity cannot low most Fc receptors receptors several surface to surface the of cell. multiple to the to same are bound that however, receptors antibody Fc avidity because on binds bind accessory molecules immunoglobulin, the Antigen-bound with Fc high Fc a sends This it. bearing to cross-linking signal cell the activate receptor ITIMs, have that the inhibition. receptors is Fc result With

opsonized microorganism the enhanced interactions greatly Phagocytosis on between surface. is phagocyte receptors molecules by the and coating an the antibody to surface to antibody-coated pathogen example, of When the the the cell regions binds for extends Fc binding receptors, bound phagocyte of the an to the pathogen of pathogen. Fcγ around surface successive through receptors Fcγ the the process is receptors. active by stimulation is Fcγ that the This an triggered of of Phagocytosis (or acidified an the phagosome. pathogen particle) leads in cytoplasmic to vesicle—the enclosure (see are lysosomes the a lysosomal destroy vesicle generate one to more or then with released bacterium fuses enzymes interior, they This into the where phagolysosome; Fig. 10.39). killing phagocytes The of more 3. in was in intracellular detail by Chapter process described

large ingest; a for particles example. too parasitic are Some worms phagocyte to are one this the Fcα, Fcε or granules parasite the its lysosomes secretory attaches surface are antibody-coated the the the exocytosis. to of receptors, contents phagocyte In and or of via phagocyte by of the released case Fcγ, surface damage The parasite contents of it. directly are the onto discharged the and and internalization by of Fcα either receptors internal exocytosis. phagocytosis Fcγ trigger or particles externalization of can the stimulation by vesicles of external Thus, the leukocytes destruction parasites are in by as macrophages principal large and attacked eosinophils the involved (Fig. are The such bacteria whereas neutrophils, helminths usually of low-affinity cells CD23 that parasites via nonphagocytic antibody-coated (see Fig. can 10.41), bind Fc receptor different receptors, IgE, the several including for Fcε 10.38). to granule Fig. include receptors release contents, these activates which the toxic antibody-coated proteins eosinophil its by to parasites (see surfaces of Cross-linking 14.10). antigen on Cross-linking in their bound by high-affinity to below. contents, basophils also we as cells the and mast granule describe FcεRI results exocytosis IgE of of

antibody-coated targets. activate NK destroy to cells 10-23 Fc receptors

Virus-infected destroyed MHC bound cells molecules. cell-surface are peptides cells that recognize to usually by T virus-derived the surface envelope intracellular produced can by originally infection be recognized on by expressing antibodies Cells that the infected such particle. signal of some presence by viruses also as viral against virus their proteins, proteins, natural called bound 3. the in antibodies cells met killed be with of (NK by Host cell killer specialized a Chapter a non-B lymphoid cell cell), them we can to lineage which non-T, NK a with prominent large lymphocytes. fraction cells of intracellular granules blood peripheral up small are and make cells lymphoid belonging part are lineage, viruses; Although limited cells express repertoire (see Section NK on a those cells ligands induced be immunity receptors to considered of such a invariant that are as the infected to recognizing of 3-25). abnormal innate with cells, range of NK the cell the NK of without the antibody. for ligand, recognition kills On need target a cell directly immunity role cells play first their innate the early virus discovered an of important ability infection. to cells, in tumor some stages in kill Although for NK

innate target cells (ADCC). called cell-mediated cytotoxicity this antibody-coated as recognize and NK in process can As a function, well cells antibody-dependent destroy interacts Fc a surface NK cell with triggered cell the on antibody of to bound the This (Fig. when is receptors 10.42). the which express IgG3 FcγRIII receptor cells NK recognizes the and subclasses. IgG1 (CD16), that cytotoxic and killing to release (see containing 9-31). involving The of perforin the mechanism Section granules T is cytoplasmic analogous of granzymes cells, against ADCC to defense shown been in role a the have has

Fig. the presence schistosome attacking Eosinophils in patient. serum an 10.41 of infected a from larva

antibody, attack worm via can receptors the IgA. such Fc for ingested worms, when by cannot IgG coated however, it parasites, Large be through their is binding with as eosinophils and phagocytes; can receptor-bearing be attacks by cells. targets on large Similar Fc mounted other release as granules known their directly target, the exocytosis. the contents a of These process onto toxic cells Photograph courtesy Butterworth. of A.

Fig. IgG can Antibody-coated rapidly cells with cell. antibody, target antibody-dependent 10.42 by they killed target be coated cells cells cell-mediated cells cytotoxicity the in NK encounter kill can NK one contribute cells to which in only is (ADCC). ADCC way are granular host cells NK Chapter (see large non-T, non-B defense. 3) their surface. that have (CD16) cells on FcγRIII lymphoid that an viruses, lacks by mechanism by these specificity When another represents direct an by cell antigen-specific can and antigen. which itself for effector attack antibodies infection

high-affinity antibody basophils bind via and cells IgE 10-24 receptor. Mast Fcε the

growth. them epithelial pathogen of host the its a and When direct to focus and barriers of site the defenses local establish mobilize infection, cross pathogens must this in which to activate achieved cells. is the way One as mast cells known is blood cells Mast cytoplasmic more containing of that permeable. local to cells that rapidly contain including are mixture make mediators, a granules histamine, act distinctive chemical vessels large have readily cells that dye toluidine distinctive with blue appearance identifiable them makes in tissues a the staining after Mast Fig. (see 1.8). of the including are the tissues tracts and beneath vascularized dermis submucosal in respiratory surfaces, the in the high particularly just They connective skin. tissues of epithelial found concentrations and gastrointestinal

receptors and and granules Mast (FcεRI) Fc IgG their antibody activated cells have can lipid mediators bound via release to for (FcγRIII), these to inflammatory specific secrete IgE cytokines and and receptors. to be multiple bind have bound of the regions of strong needed is Fc antibodies and receptors Most for themselves Fc stably cross-linking only antigen, receptors to antibodies binding. Fc when the binds affinity—approximately antibody contrast, very FcεRI In a IgE high monomers with M–1. 1010 of and tissues cells even IgE IgE bound circulating FcεRI in present mast portion circulating basophils. is normal substantial at the in to of on total the Thus, a individuals, levels low the on

activate nor IgE. with bound usually mast binding does Although cells not own will them, this stably its of antigen the monomeric the associated on are to IgE, Mast-cell bound only by IgE multivalent occurs the cross-linked when activation antigens. is in cell mast which seconds signal (Fig. This occurs to granules, contents the of activates the release its release prostaglandin as synthesize D2 initiating to TNF-α, to lipid C4, inflammatory thereby 10.43), and such as mediators local secrete leukotriene a and cytokines and such response. flow increases leads an stored which blood vascular also histamine, releases permeability; accumulation quickly and this to local Degranulation

mast granules IgE release cell histamine contents antibody Resting has antibody, mediators contain antigen causing cross-links Fc˜RI bound infammatory cell IgE granule that Multivalent Activated of mast and other cell mast Resting

Fig. rapid of cross-linking surfaces leads mediators. IgE 10.43 antibody to release mast-cell on inflammatory a

inflammatory be large can by cells and granules, secretory connective mediators. distinguished many are tissue which cells their Mast contain found in through monomeric stably very antibodies They the to high-affinity receptor IgE bind FcεRI. IgE rapid bound antibody into releasing the molecules tissue. mediators triggers Antigen inflammatory surrounding the cross-linking of degranulation, inflammation, required These trigger host infection. defense cells to recruits for which mediators local of sites proteins and IgE allergens allergic are when cells. cells during to reactions also mast bind on These triggered A.M. Dvorak. Photographs courtesy of

antibodies, including blood fluid surrounding tissue. and in the of proteins, blood-borne there an later, lymphocytes. and effector such neutrophils and, cells as is Shortly of afterward monocytes, influx eosinophils, from to at influx last can minutes the few and This produces inflammatory a response an a infection. of hours few site are the front-line defenses epithelial Thus, across of host against body that pathogens cells mast part barriers. enter the They 14. of are IgE-mediated are their importance discussed in of responses, allergic also because which Chapter involvement medical in pollen, a described way response cells responses, individual which the mounted mast in exposure produces immune to such that IgE. by are allergen-specific antigens above the In innocuous to normally activated has previously allergic (allergens), as sensitizing

cells an activation IgE-mediated important resistance in has parasite to 10-25 accessory role infection. of

least important Mast cells at thought are three serve defense. functions in host to elements, their and such near surfaces to effector First, where neutrophils, antigen-specific enter the sites them body likely and location macrophages, as to most infectious pathogen-specific as lymphocytes, such basophils, are allows milieu. to agents internal recruit nonspecific both elements, eosinophils, increases flow are lymphocytes from of first of where they the lymph lymph nodes, deposition the to regional the sites inflammation activated. Second, naive cause antigen contraction Third, or to pathogens the the gut. the can expulsion mast-cell from trigger physical muscular products of lungs the ability to contribute of response cells binding eosinophils, inflammatory recruitment and contribute and further response to activation of leads initiation an Chapter the to activation their IgE 14). and to of (see to antibodies, of surface-bound and the inflammatory rapidly antigen respond basophils the the which Mast responses evidence is There increasing that defense against are infestation. IgE-mediated such crucial to parasite

a mastocytosis, accumulation as that in mast in the cells accompanies mutant helminth mice, suggested a caused infection, cells the by have role which gene observations W/WV of c-kit. mast by intestine, parasites and the of mast-cell in known clearance by the mutation deficiency profound A for is in mice These spiralis nematodes mutant intestinal clearance Strongyloides species. Trichinella impaired and show of the Clearance mice impaired Strongyloides IL-3 that produce in and of also to fail lack W/WV is so more even basophils. helminth and to contribute cells Thus, to seem against parasites. these basophils both defense mast

the the evidence to parasites. Other IgE defense importance points and against eosinophils antibodies of in numbers production large and strongly of eosinophils of of types parasites, Infection and (eosinophilia) tissues. with the certain is multicellular IgE with associated of in presence blood particularly antibodies helminths, abnormally the antisera by Furthermore, anti-eosinophil show mice of polyclonal with the mansoni. depletion parasitic infection increases experiments that of in eosinophils severity helminth the Schistosoma shows vitro Eosinophils infected that and the tissues helminths, presence shown destruction; in IgA of responsible seem (see to Fig. IgG eosinophils can degranulated directly to anti-schistosome for in be of or experiments helminth eosinophils mansoni kill antibodies adhering S. examination have 10.41).

be seen cells, in ixodid IgE, can also the of feeding mast to eosinophils The role and basophils, resistance of ticks. blood-sucking and an accumulation of recent mast indicator degranulated site tick eosinophils, at has of the and bite basophils cells degranulated an a Skin of activation. immunological these mechanism. suggesting by ticks to specific Subsequent first develops the feeding exposure, after resistance a deficient basophils polyclonal reduces mast in and of show no in the also resistance eosinophils antibodies specific to by depletion tick ticks, or feeding. such Mice resistance guinea to either pigs acquired cells experiments mediated mice is in antibody. resistance that specific by showed ticks to Finally, IgE system pathogens in studies and as or to it. ticks IgE bound a such this enter to resistance exoparasites many Thus, breach support of that role high-affinity that across host epithelia the FcεRI experiments clinical for

Summary.

through the receptors by bind of effector antibodies. Fc recognized array constant Antibody-coated pathogens pathogen-bound to that provided by cells (Fc are regions an portions) phagocytosis, and destruction granule both. activates cell release, either pathogen, the through Binding of triggers or the comprise proteins, recognizes Fc immunoglobulins receptors a particular family isotypes. each of of of which or a the destruction neutrophils and IgG such trigger constant IgA to of bacteria. bound the Fc of recognize antibodies regions engulfment macrophages receptors pathogen and on and production the induces intracellular Fc phagocyte. the in the of of microbicidal the receptor agents also to vesicles Binding onto aggregation too of substances for the toxic the in engulfed; IgG, release they of specific receptors the are receptors bear as parasite. parasites of for be important elimination region as these Eosinophils the Fc triggers IgE; of large the receptors to of constant well surface granule their tissue are also and Fc when NK their receptors engaged. cells, basophils mast cells, blood release contents for receptor basophils. is high-affinity IgE expressed constitutively by cells and mast The from to differs antibody, enabling an free the Fc site receptors bind can it of thus monomeric pathogens tissues. into their first other that immediate It in response at entry antigen, mast many cells histamine by effector aggregated mediators the IgE the other and recruits antibodies bound to sites. sites flow binding a these to infection; surface When of the increase to it that thereby of blood of to triggers release cell and it is digestive of Mast beneath below are skin respiratory the found of basement membrane and surfaces the the and principally epithelial cells tracts. in of Chapter acute of Their activation will as for by described innocuous symptoms reactions, the allergic is responsible many 14. be substances

Chapter 10. to Summary

antibody the pathogen, lymphocytes, system. the production molecules response the by of humoral phagocytic The by to of to humoral cells and the antibody this immune from the involves the of pathogen cells of B immune plasma binding derived infection elimination and peptide requires the of action antibody specific cell, the The usually a by called recognized a production of helper T linked fragment B phenomenon the recognition. of antigen for cells cognate cell and lymphoid activated to An it cell proliferate. to its where encounter moves begin T-zone–B-zone B tissues, secondary the in first boundary may T switch where class center, recombination to and hypermutation place. move the germinal plasmablasts, B while somatic take others Some become cells for leading differentiation, the maturation to are antigen cells the and affinity antibody survival selected affinity highest that bind B further response. of with T of to compartments. classes Cytokines of body leading can to distributed the direct various antibody various cells class helper production be switching, made by that

IgM the cells produced by B made in of in also of infection subsets particular natural cells conventional an B by antibodies nonconventional early absence in are antibodies). and are locations (as infection later an as whereas a has IgG, bloodstream, adaptive tissues. in infection in role into secreted against immune diffuse the protecting the response, IgM such major isotypes in provides immune antigenic of elicit this independently have repeating contain determinants help, response. TI that that and and some mitogens— and T-cell called highly IgG antigens—can Antigens IgM early protective an receptors propria in in whereas Multimeric on small avidly made binds is and is surfaces, produced mast is to amounts IgE transported and IgA of cells. surface across epithelial and lamina the basophils the

with them. to high on critical neutralize can bacteria and Antibodies viruses, bind that sites affinity toxins, and these pathogens the into phagocytes destroyed inside are their degradation through products removed largely uptake cells. body from and However, and are Antibodies which coat on thereby receptors to phagocytes, destroy and engulf that bind pathogens triggered to pathogen. the Fc are antibody this parasite Fc mediators; leads Fcε-expressing mast of to binding in mediators to IgE to directly particularly important antigen C Binding is which by surfaces. the onto exocytosis of release infections, on cells inflammatory other receptors the stored of parasite cells in regions triggered antibody to of complement destruction system. by Antibodies pathogens also the can the activating initiate phagocytes, components uptake infection. to Complement for and recruit by phagocytes of pathogens opsonize sites can in and and Fc complexes. synergize destruction uptake components pathogens and the receptors complement often of activating for immune Receptors the by of specific the are immune pathogen actions isotype. heavy-chain of response through infecting the effector targeted determined to antibody; is production however, Thus, antibody humoral its that the

Questions.

not an is Multiple Which antibody following Choice: the effector function? 10.1 of

A. Opsonization

B. Neutralization

activation C. Complement

D. Linked recognition

NK-cell E. cytotoxicity

degranulation initially polysaccharide The of capsule Haemophilus the antibody responses. b F. Mast-cell type Short Answer: mount to composed 10.2 this but of potent (Hib) failed only organism, was vaccine influenzae the very potent diphtheria yielded a and formulation. vaccine current however, Hib, or to Hib is antibody the toxoid, polysaccharide to conjugating tetanus Directly responses the by of toxoid, a elicit advantage a to immunological works polysaccharide capsule-derived antibody it Hib conjugating which is phenomenon to potent how and taken response. the Indicate

During activated cells. responses, occur events between numerous T-dependent antibody cells cytokine signaling and B and receptor/ligand Matching: 10.3 interactions TFH both neither (TB), this For produced surface cells they cells of are or the (T), whether by list (B), cytokines, (N) indicate in context. T and receptors/ligands following B

IL-21 A.

ICOSL D. CD30L C. CD40L B.

II Peptide:MHC E. CCL21 F.

the G. defect. Matching: 10.4 SLAM human disease associated to Match the genetic

A. Translesion i. Polη polymerase X-linked lymphoproliferative disorder

ii. 2 IgM Hyper type B. family (a ATM kinase) DNA-PKcsimmunodeficiency

iii. C. pigmentosum Xeroderma protein (SAP) SLAM-associated

D. Ataxia iv. telangiectasia (AID) IgE, Matching: the IgD, Activation-induced apply to and/or IgA, following deaminase 10.5 cytidine whether Indicate properties IgG, IgM.

A. produced response during humoral First

Monomeric (predominantly) B.

(predominantly) C. Dimeric

D. (predominantly) Pentameric

Contains a chain E. J

F. deposition eliciting complement of Capable

mucosal and abundant G. surfaces in secretions Most

Low-affinity H.

I. cells Bound onto mast

to (pIgR) immunoglobulin receptor J. polymeric Binds

different Fc TRIM21, receptor, a from Answer: neonatal receptors? is class of the (FcRn) 10.6 Fc Short Binds K. other novel How receptor Fc

10.7 Choice: by the elicited Fcγ is Which antibody to of receptors? not functions Multiple binding following

cytotoxicity via cells NK cell-mediated (ADCC) Antibody-dependent A.

by Phagocytosis neutrophils B.

Mast-cell C. degranulation

activity Downregulation D. B-cell of

dendritic the false of a 10.8 Multiple Ingestion Which immune cells statement? is following E. of complexes Choice: by

A. which B-cell BAFF, induce signals Naive expression. on in follicles to through BAFF-R, survival BCMA Bcl-2 and dependent TACI, is

macrophages filled of that of retain the with sinuses not do areas Subcapsular specialized similar functionally and spleen marginal are lymph antigens. sinuses B. but nodes digest

T their transcription for c-Maf. C. signaling cells the of Bcl-6 in factors expression of ICOS TFH is and essential completion and differentiation

MHC B-cell of B7 cells molecules, high class II and Both and co-stimulatory receptors. plasmablasts levels D. express molecules, plasma

class in E. TFH determine responses. cells switching isotype the antibody choice of for T-dependent

10.9 True or zone. dark and a light contain Germinal a centers False: extensively are called the centroblasts. cells and In zone, light proliferate B switching. leading maturation chemokine and CXCL12–CXCR4 and by undergo are affinity somatic there maintained signaling class hypermutation They to proliferation are zone, the In B centrocytes. called cells dark and cease interact B-cell CXCL13–CXCR5 and they Here, of chemokine with higher extensively express maintained are by receptor, TFH levels signaling, cells.

statement: Multiple Choice: Choose 10.10 correct the

V that AID. formed somatic regions immunoglobulin accessibility are hypermutation during to R-loops of promote the structures A.

replication. deaminated a of removes residue results during base APE1 random that DNA the cytosine in B. next of an to abasic the create insertion round

switch C. switch during do regions occur Frameshift class not recombination in introns. because lie mutations

MSH2/6 promote error-prone D. hypermutation. repairs mutations lesions that causes The polymerase somatic DNA and

Fc functions 10.11Fill-in-the-Blanks: receptors the antibody of effector diversify distinct the isotypes. Most antibodies affinity. can receptors regions of Fc Fc with bind _________ the affinity. FcεRI contrast, In with ________ binds lipid Multivalent as antigen-bound in and such _________. mast release of can _________ cells cause and bind mediators _________ IgE also release of FC and a degranulate flow as causes Mast __________ in receptor-bound the increased, consequence IgE, inflammatory cross-linking of which to local and response. __________, an response initiating cells blood are

references. General

Batista, Harwood, N.E. F.D., and where cells. The presentation and to antigen who, of : B how Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2009, 9:15–27. F., J.V. Nimmerjahn, and Ravetch, : receptors responses. regulators Fcγ of immune as Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2008, 8:34–47. learning Clonal antibody in and system. the K.: Rajewsky, selection 1996, Nature 381:751–758.

references. Section

the antigens. microbial either TFH by receptor involves signals cells of B and antigen 10-1 or B-cell Activation cells from

Crotty, helper differentiation, roles in and follicular disease. T cell S.: function, 2014, 41:529–542. Immunity

Casanova, J.B., Bossuyt, Simchoni, E., L., Meyts, J.R., Radigan, Overbey, et S., Black, Bagiella, J.L., Bussel, P.J., N., X., Maglione, I., al. impair : deficiencies IgM MyD88 against IRAK-4and antigens. T-independent responses bacterial 124:3561–3571. Blood 2014,

of Medzhitov, R.: Control Toll-like B-cell and by Pasare, responses C., receptors. 2005, Nature 438:364–368.

Seumois, al. et Abdul-Wajid, P., Panduro, L.J., Brown, S., D., Djuretic, X., Baumjohann, J., I.M., Simpson, Interlandi, G., M., Huang, Vijayanand, D.R., conserved production T cells site Immunity enhancer requires 2012, 36:175–187. follicular Interleukin-4 : the by hypersensitivity V. helper Il4

responses. cells B 10-2 T recognition promotes and robust antigen of Linked antibody cells by

M., M.C. Rothstein, X., Jonsson, Pierce, Cherukuri, Barrington, A., and S.K., N., Zhang, R.A., T.L., H., Carroll, Zhong, Holodick, B responses. CD21/CD19 : promotes signaling primary survival during coreceptor immune cell J. Immunol. 175:2859–2867. 2005,

H., Rekola, J., Takala, Samuelson, J.S., H., M., Kela, Karanko, Eskola, al. P., V., A.K., Hakulinen, Kayhty, E., Peltola, P.R., Ronnberg, et toxoid b of conjugate vaccine Haemophilus in polysaccharide-diphtheria : infancy. type Efficacy influenzae

N.Engl. J. Med. 1987, 317:717–722. S.L. Kalled, the axis BAFF/BR3 production. Impact : maintenance of antibody survival, and center germinal on cell B Semin. Immunol. 18:290–296. 2006, Browning, J.L. Mackay, and F., fundamental cells. for : B BAFF: factor a survival Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2:465–475. 2002, BAFF P.: the F., Cracking code. and Mackay, Schneider, Nat. Rev. Immunol.

9:491–502. 2009, Casamayor-Palleja, MacLennan, K.M., Gulbranson-Judge, A., Toellner, I.C.M., M.,

and D.M.Y., Orbea, Sze, Chan, H.A. Luther, E., S.A., as T responses The B and changing antibody of partners : cells for preference develop. T-dependent Immunol. Rev. 1997, 156:53–66.

and M.G. McHeyzer-Williams, L.P., McHeyzer-Williams, L.J., Malherbe, cell immunity. Helper B cell-regulated : T Curr. Top. Microbiol. Immunol. 2006, 311:59–83.

activation. inhibitory Nitschke, co-receptors L.: CD22 other The role B-cell of in and Curr. Opin. Immunol. 17:290–297. 2005,

Rickert, R.C. of complex. and B : C3 complement lymphocyte Regulation by the B cell coreceptor activation Curr. Opin. Immunol. 2005, 17:237–243.

in spontaneous does B systemic Kashgarian, autoimmunity not and IL-10 mice. M., MRL.Fas(lpr) Teichmann, L.L., cell-derived C.T., Müller, A., regulate Weaver, Shlomchik, M.J.: Roers, W., Immunol. J. 2012, 188:678–685.

lymphoid that boundaries B-cell antigens in B 10-3 their cells the encounter migrate tissues. and toward secondary between areas T-cell

Foss, F.W., G., Lam, Zachariah, Jr., O.M., Cinamon, M.A., J.G. and Cyster, shuttling : antigen of zone transport. facilitates marginal Follicular B cells Nat. Immunol. 2008, 9:54–62.

Holers, of on strong a response. and antigen-specific receptors Fu, Fang, Y.X., IgG generation of for dendritic necessary Xu, the 1 Expression V.M., is and H.: 2 Molina, complement C., Y., cells follicular J. Immunol. 160:5273–5279. 1998,

Okada, and T., Cyster, J.G. migration antibody cell of responses. phase early interactions : the and B in Curr. Opin. Immunol. 2006, 18:278–285.

Phan, Gray, J.G. and T.G., E.E., Cyster, microanatomy B activation. cell : The of Curr. Opin. Immunol. 2009, 21:258–265.

activate that promote molecules surface 10-4 cytokines TFH-cell turn in and development. T cells express which B cells,

Lao, T.C., effector R.J., R., S.: via repressor cell Monticelli, Crotty, Bcl6. cell helper induction instructs L., Eto, the ICOS T Johnston, Choi, C., of and Kageyama, transcriptional D., differentiation Y.S., receptor versus follicular Escobar, 34:932–946. 2011, Immunity

F.M., P.J. F.M., Lane, and Kim, McConnell, Bekiaris, Raykundalia, M.Y., V., Gaspal, C., and cell in signals CD30 memory Mice because responses of : deficient OX40 CD4 memory. lack T deficient antibody J. Immunol. 2005, 174:3891–3896.

Tonti, Bosurgi, L.G., E., and S.E., S.P., Moseman, M., Andrian, U.H. T., E.A., Henrickson, Junt, Whelan, L., Guidotti, von Iannacone, macrophages on virus. a sinus invasion with Subcapsular : prevent neurotropic infection peripheral CNS Nature 2010, 465:1079–1083.

Guo, et Horan, Whoriskey, M.A., Sarmiento, Khare, J., Zhang, M., G., T., S.K., J.S., Shih, T., al. Kohno, S.D., U., Yoshinaga, Coccia, and ICOS. T-cell B7RP-1 co-stimulation : through 402:827–832. 1999, Nature

plasmablasts cells. 10-5 B into cells differentiate and plasma antibody-secreting Activated

R.A.: Manz, survival. plasma cell Stromal I., and Radbruch, differentiation K., and niches, A., Tokoyoda, MacLennan, K., Moser, Curr. Opin. Immunol. 18:265–270. 2006,

McHeyzer-Williams, Fazilleau, N., L.J., M.G. Pelletier, McHeyzer-Williams, and N., Urich, Wong, K.A., E., : the Plasma T negatively program. cells helper cell regulate follicular Nat. Immunol. 11:1110–1118. 2010,

cell. a Smith, T., challenge Competence Muehlinghaus, and A., F.: Radbruch, Hiepe, the Inamine, competition: of A., K.G., plasma becoming Luger, Dorner, E.O., long-lived G., and Nat. Rev. Immunol. 6:741–750. 2006,

and Sciammas, R., M.M. Davis, to and cells. plasma Blimp-1; secretion : switch immunoglobulin the Curr. Top. Microbiol. Immunol. 290:201–224. 2005,

Calame, and of Shapiro-Shelef., Regulation K.: development. plasma-cell M., Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2005, 5:230–242.

phase activated when cells migrate proliferate into a B of The B-cell second immune to response and 10-6 centers. primary form germinal occurs follicles

Allen, and C.D., T., Cyster, Okada, J.G. : and cellular dynamics. Germinal-center organization 2007, 27:190–202. Immunity

K.L., and Cozine, Waldschmidt, in mice. Wolniak, primary germinal C.L., T.J.: response The center Curr. Opin. Immunol. 2005, 17:298–302.

E.J., Kunkel, E.C. Butcher, and : Plasma-cell homing. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2003, 3:822–829.

Victora, Meyer-Hermann, Nussenzweig, M.L., Kamphorst, D.R., M., T.A., and M.C. Dustin, Schwickert, A.O., Fooksman, G.D., reporter. center with microscopy by fluorescent dynamics photoactivatable revealed : Germinal a multiphoton 143:592–605. 2010, Cell

with V-region cells selected. hypermutation, somatic 10-7 center B cells undergo mutations that are Germinal improve affinity antigen and for

A.M., M.J.: U., death but Haberman, and S.H., A., Hershberg, Y., Shlomchik, have advantage: Kleinstein, cells. in germinal similar Khalil, the S.M., cells rates, center rates of high-affinity Anderson, Taking B low-affinity lower division, to compared Uduman, M., Louzoun, J. Immunol. 2009, 183:7314–7325.

Shulman, Nussenzweig, A.D., M.C. Gitlin, and Z., hypermutation. centre germinal the selection : and regulated proliferation Clonal in by Nature 509:637–640. 2014,

mutants of Kelsoe, generation Rajewsky, G., Weiss, Intraclonal in U.: J., K., germinal antibody centres. and Jacob, 354:389–392. 1991, Nature

Scharff, Z., Ronai, M.D. and Iglesias-Ussel, D., M.D., Woo, Li, C.J., class and : recombination. antibody of hypermutation somatic through The switch generation diversity Dev. Genes 2004, 18:1–11.

Z., and Karras, Howard, T.L. J.G., Wang, R.G., Rothstein, rescues : apoptosis Induction CD40 sIg-induced engagement in B bcl-x cells. of murine by Immunol. J. 1995, 155:3722–3725.

with Positive B 10-8 selection CD40 germinal cells TFH involves of cells contact signaling. center and

O., J.G. Nagasawa, T., Cyster, Horton, J., C.D., Allen, R.M., and An, Bannard, to timed to for phenotype : depend dark centroblasts a selection. on centrocyte according transition center zone Germinal and a the effective program 39:912–924. 2013, Immunity

J.L., E.K., Qi, Cannons, K.T., R.N., Gomez-Rodriguez, Dutta, M., J., J., Cheng, H., Lu, P.L. Schwartzberg, Wakeland, Germain, and center a and CD84. cell:B involving responses T process require cell Optimal protein, adhesion SLAM-associated integrins, germinal multistage : 2010, Immunity 32:253–265.

Shlomchik, cell Mempel, of A.E., von S.H., U.H., vivo B T.R., germinal-center patterns. intrazonal Definition M.W., Haberman, circulation in A.M.: Junt, predominant Sneddon, T., S.E., and Henrickson, Kleinstein, M.J., Hauser, reveals migration Andrian, 26:655–667. Immunity 2007,

Jumper, J., of and chain cells. B transcripts multiple sterile Lipsky, isotypes CD40 induces H of in human K.: Meek, Splawski, P., Ig Ligation M., Immunol. J. 152:438–445. 1994,

P., BLyS and He, CD40-independent APRIL. A.: DCs B., immunoglobulin and switching A., Litinskiy, Nardelli, B., Cerutti, Casali, induce Hilbert, through Schaffer, class D.M., M.B., Nat. Immunol. 2002, 3:822–829.

Flavell, Nussenzweig, R.A., Gitlin, E., Esplugues, J.E., B., and M.C. Weinstein, Z., Craft, J.S., Shulman, Lainez, A.D., germinal helper selection. : signaling during center by cell follicular T B Dynamic cells 2014, Science 345:1058–1062.

into (AID) cells. genes 10-9 deaminase Activation-induced introduces B in mutations cytidine transcribed

Scharff, R., Bransteitter, and M.F. M.D., Pham, P., Goodman, RNase. cytidine but deaminates DNA of requires on action Activation-induced : single-stranded deoxycytidine deaminase the Proc. Acad. Natl Sci. USA 100:4102–4107. 2003,

Y., K., S., Muramatsu, Class require Kinoshita, and deaminase S., Honjo, enzyme. hypermutation cytidine activation-induced a M., and switch editing (AID), Shinkai, Fagarasan, RNA recombination T.: Yamada, potential Cell 2000, 102:553–563.

R.S., S.K., Petersen-Mahrt, M.S. Harris, Neuberger, and antibody diversification. for DNA coli deamination a suggesting E. mutates : AID mechanism 418:99–103. 2002, Nature

R., J., Bransteitter, M.F. Petruska, P., Goodman, and Pham, single-stranded deamination stimulates somatic Processive hypermutation. on AID-catalyzed DNA : cytosine Nature 2003, 424:103–107.

M.R. and Yu, Lieber, K., F.T., Huang, deaminase affect activation-induced the length DNA cytidine. substrate activity at surrounding sequence : and J. Biol. Chem. 2004, 279:6496–6500.

base-excision and by initiation following AID. to pathways Mismatch repair contribute hypermutation 10-10 somatic

Alpert, F.W. U., Ranganath, Dutt, J.P., Alt, Chaudhuri, and J., S., J.P., G., Manis, Li, Schrum, Basu, C., S., enzyme by regulated kinase : is A The protein AID phosphorylation. antibody diversification 2005, Nature 438:508–511.

Khuong, Chaudhuri, and F.W. J., C., Alt, AID interacts : Replication promote somatic to protein hypermutation targets. deamination with of A 430:992–998. 2004, Nature

M.S. and J.M., Di Noia, Neuberger, somatic hypermutation. Molecular mechanisms antibody : of Annu. Rev. Biochem. 76:1–22. 2007,

Schatz, V.H., and Odegard, D.G. hypermutation. Targeting somatic of : Nat. Rev. Immunol. 6:573–583. 2006,

lambda sequences and in antibody. mouse of Cesari, M.: I.M., Cohn, Weigert, Yonkovich, chain the light S.J., Variability M.G., 1970, Nature 228:1045–1047.

switching AID be with the assembled response. genes class to associated in CH an allow 10-11 immune initiates different VH same of course exon to the

al. Wasserman, V., D., Pefanis, Keim, Eccleston, Myers, C., Wesemann, C.R., T., Meng, et Grinstein, F.L., E., D.R., U., Basu, Zhang, J., AID : DNA exosome cytidine targets transcribed strands both The RNA of substrates. to deaminase the duplex 2011, Cell 144:353–363.

Alt, J., Chaudhuri, F.W. and Class-switch DNA deamination of transcription, repair. and recombination: DNA interplay : Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2004, 4:541–552.

A., al. Gazumyan, B., San-Martin, Pavri, Resch, W., A., Yamane, I., Klein, Barreto, Reina R., C., M., M., Virgilio, Jankovic, Ansarah-Sobrinho, V., Di et at Activation-induced Spt5. interaction targets stalling of with DNA polymerase RNA II cytidine sites deaminase by : 143:122–133. 2010, Cell

N., F., M., O., al. T., A., et Forveille, Catalan, Dufourcq-Lagelouse, A., Geissmann, Y., Levy, Gennery, P., Revy, Plebani, Sanal, Muto, R., deficiency hyper-IgM recessive causes the Activation-induced (HIGM2). the syndrome deaminase form autosomal of cytidine (AID) : Cell 2000, 102:565–575.

R., M., F.W. Fujiwara, K., Shinkura, Tian, Alt, Chua, Y., and M., Smith, of orientation influence transcriptional on switch function. : region The endogenous Nat. Immunol. 2003, 4:435–441.

Wilson, T.E., C.-L., M.R. Hsieh, F., Lieber, Yu, and K., Chedin, in R-loops of : B the class switch cells. chromosomes at immunoglobulin stimulated regions Nat. Immunol. 4:442–451. 2003,

10-12 in of isotype Cytokines responses. for made cells the antibody direct switching TFH class by T-dependent choice

differentially switching and IgG IgA Malefyt, V.L., Bryant, regulated to Ma, Tangye, by C.S., by S.G.: cells R., Avery, B isotype naive de IL-4. human IL-21induced D.T., Waal and is J. Immunol. 2008, 181:1767–1779.

U., H.D. Ochs, and Francke, T :The ligand, syndrome. is X-linked gp39, cells activated CD40 defective with hyper-IgM from in patients 1993, Cell 72:291–300.

S.R., Choi, A.J., P.H. Seo, and G.Y., Stavnezer, Park, J., Kim, for Analysis transforming growth its IgA transcription of germ-line : Ig implication switching. gamma2b and isotype factor-beta1-induced Eur. Immunol. J. 2005, 35:946–956.

differentiation and J.: J.P., Ray, Craft, factor are Staron, T corepressive Transcription Kaech, Marshall, helper STAT3 and for cells. helper and B.J., H.D., I follicular insulators S.M., 1 Laidlaw, of interferons M.M., type 40:367–377. Immunity 2014,

and Seo, Park, P.H. Kim, G.Y., S.R., germ-line Analyses of TGF-beta1-inducible Ig : involvement and promoter gamma2b of activity: NF-kappaB. Smads Eur. Immunol. J. 39:1157–1166. 2009,

Stavnezer, Immunoglobulin class J.: switching. Curr. Opin. Immunol. 1996, 8:199–205.

Brown, D., X., M., D.R., Simpson, Panduro, Vijayanand, P., et Abdul-Wajid, J., Interlandi, Seumois, Baumjohann, Huang, I.M., S., Djuretic, al. L.J., G., requires Interleukin-4 the Immunity by Il4 V. cells helper conserved site T follicular 2012, : 36:175–187. hypersensitivity production enhancer

cells reaction B or eventually 10-13 survive plasma germinal the that cells differentiate cells. either into center memory

S.K., Love, and H.L. Dougan, Ploegh, J.C., C.C., Hu, McGehee, A.M., bone factors regulates transcription colonization transduction, signal marrow and : cells. in B XBP-1 J. EMBO 2009, 28:1624–1636.

fate. Pax5—a Nera, plasma cell and inhibitor Lassila, O.: of critical K.P., Scand. J. Immunol. 64:190–199. 2006,

K., and Shapiro-Shelef, R.C. Puri, S.A., Rickert, Cato, Omori, K.D., Anzelon-Mills, Calame, M., A., M.H., class-switch signaling. and of plasma recombination Regulation by : 3-kinase phosphatidylinositol cell differentiation 2006, 25:545–557. Immunity

long-lived K.G., E.O., Smith, plasma Competence G., of and F.: a the Hiepe, A., Muehlinghaus, Dorner, cell. and competition: T., challenge Luger, becoming Inamine, Radbruch, A., Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2006, 6:741–750.

Heavey, control of B-cell Busslinger, Transcriptional M.: Schebesta, development. and B., M., Curr. Opin. Immunol. 2002, 14:216–223.

B-cell to 10-14 help T-cell responses. Some do induce require not antigens

of Lernhardt, lymphocyte. W., secretion Coutinho, F.: A., vitro J., growth-inducible to and maturation Melchers, and growth Clonal every in Anderson, B immunoglobulin Cell 10:27–34. 1977,

Zhou, marginal and J.: zone Martin, F., splenic initiate T-independent cells immune responses. Kearney, cells to M., Balazs, with dendritic interact T., Blood B 17:341–352. Immunity 2002,

I., response. the receptors—sentries and in Toll-like G.: Jego, Bekeredjian-Ding, B-cell Immunology 2009, 128:311–323.

E.J., Craxton, Ryan, A., Magaletti, E.A. D., and Clark, requires of the cell-dependent : B-cell BAFF. Macrophageand dendritic family human TNF regulation ligand proliferation 2003, Blood 101:4464–4471.

T-independent and S., Fagarasan, B of T.: Honjo, biology. new cell immune response: aspects 2000, Science 290:89–92.

De and G.G., Gulbranson-Judge, Klaus, A., Vinuesa, M., P., O’Leary, Wabl, Khan, Owen, C., Cascalho, M., I.C. M.J., Garcia MacLennan, M., cells : Dendritic with associated plasmablast survival. Eur. Immunol. J. 29:3712–3721. 1999,

and responses. MacLennan, in C.: BAFF, cells, and I., antibody innate players Dendritic APRIL: Vinuesa, adaptive Immunity 2002, 17:341–352.

J.J., Mond, C.M. A., Lees, Snapper, and : T type cell-independent 2. antigens Annu. Rev. Immunol. 13:655–692. 1995,

as of receptor B for Ruprecht, A.: and stimulation Lanzavecchia, required naive C.R., human Toll-like third activation a signal cells. Eur. Immunol. J. 2006, 36:810–816.

W.C., Zelazowski, Khan, A.Q., P., and Colino, Wu, J.J., Snapper, J., Y., Mond, C.M., Shen, Gause, Z.Q. pneumoniae. types Streptococcus help : a of for T-cell of humoral immune Distinct to the induction response Immunol. Trends 22:308–311. 2001,

T., J.D., Yanaba, Tsubata, and K., T.F. T., Matsushita, Tedder, Bouaziz, function diversity The cells) and of signals. B TLR : antigen receptor regulatory cells (B10 requires IL-10 expressing development and J. Immunol. 2009, 182:7459–7472.

Yoshizaki, and D.J., Spolski, Leonard, A., Tedder, Miyagaki, T., E.I., Horikawa, W.J., DiLillo, R., T., T.F. Kountikov, J.C., Matsushita, Poe, M., cognate through IL-21-dependent B Regulatory T-cell interactions. : autoimmunity control cells 491:264–268. Nature 2012,

places distinct effector functions. in classes Antibodies and different 10-15 of operate distinct have

Ugurlar, A.J., Strumane, Voorhorst, Lindorfer, Diebolder, Koning, de Heck, Beurskens, M.A., C.A., F.J., R.I., D., Rosati, M., al. Jong, K., S., R.N., et activated assembled surface. cell IgG the is : hexamers by Complement at 343:1260–1263. Science 2014,

Corley, Rosse, Hughey, C.T., W.F., A.D., Brewer, J.W., Colosia, and R.B. autoimmune hexameric Production physiologic and cells: implications by role IgM. hexamers : B IgM of normal of for the J. Immunol. 1998, 161:4091–4097.

Stojicevic, humans: Marinkovic, L.: M., desired in I., V., Hexameric Dimitrijevic, and immunoglobulin Živkovic, Stojanovic, Petrušic, E., or M unwanted? I., Med. 77:959–961. Hypotheses 2011,

den Rispens, R.C. T., T.H., and Aalberse, Bleker, by SDS-PAGE demonstrated or size-exclusion IgG4/IgG4 Hybrid exchange as form Fc chromatography. antibodies ‘Fab-arm’ upon : Mol. Immunol. 47:1592–1594. 2010,

expansion Honjo, Y., M., T., S.: Aberrant Doi, in Suzuki, of K., IgA-deficient T., Muramatsu, segmented gut. Meek, and filamentous bacteria Fagarasan, B., Chiba, Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 101:1981–1986. USA 2004,

Ward, for functions therapy. The Ghetie, immunoglobulins: and E.S., V.: of implications effector Ther. Immunol. 2:77–94. 1995,

IgA barriers. and immunoglobulin and IgM regions transports binds across to of receptor epithelial 10-16 the Polymeric Fc them

V., Ward, and Ghetie, E.S. Multiple receptor : I-related complex class major the FcRn. histocompatibility for roles Annu. Rev. Immunol. 18:739–766. 2000,

Kaetzel, C.S. and F.E., Johansen, in immunoglobulin stimulate : the of IgA in and polymeric that pIgR environmental transport: role its factors immunity. receptor mucosal expression advances and Regulation new Immunol. Mucosal 2011, 4:598–602.

Lamm, M.E. Current concepts : immunity. in mucosal IV. relates host epithelial IgA to defense. antibodies transport How of Am. Physiol. J. 274:G614–G617. 1998,

K.E. Mostov, of immunoglobulins. Transepithelial : transport Annu. Rev. Immunol. 1994, 12:63–84.

excretion receptor from IgG prevents the the carries Fc The across 10-17 body. IgG placenta and neonatal

J.H., Wang, D.C., T.B., IgG Unanue, Miner, use basement membrane. Huber, and G., FcRn A.S.: Hartleben, Podocytes Roopenian, Wu, to Shaw, from H., Kopp, Akilesh, B., J.B., S., the E.R., clear glomerular Proc. Acad. Natl Sci. 105:967–972. USA 2008,

Blum, and L.N., Gastinel, P.J. M.L., Burmeister, N.E., Bjorkman, Simister, W.P., neonatal the Å Fc receptor. resolution : of 2.2 at Crystal structure MHC-related Nature 372:336–343. 1994,

the and FcRn: comes Akilesh, S.: Roopenian, age. of neonatal receptor Fc D.C., Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2007, 7:715–725.

block neutralize infectivity 10-18 antibodies toxins High-affinity and can IgA of the and bacteria. IgG and viruses

P.: Role antibodies infections. Brandtzaeg, against the defence of secretory in Int. Med. J. Microbiol. 2003, 293:3–15.

H.: Neisseria serogroup for S.N., F., candidate and Recombinant S.D., Zeighami, Peerayeh, B meningitidis. a outer vaccine as secretin membrane PilQ(406-770) Siadat, Haghi, 2012, 30:1710–1714. Vaccine

Diamond, Holdaway, Chipman, Fremont, P.R., M.S., R.J., Rossmann, Kaufmann, S., Kuhn, M.G. and B., H.A., Johnson, D.H., intermediate. Capturing : a pre-fusion flavivirus Pathog. PLoS 5:e1000672. 2009,

therapeutic Fremont, T., and Structural antibody. virus Diamond, S., neutralization Johnson, Nybakken, M.S., D.H.: Burke, of a by G.E., Oliphant, basis Nile West S., Nature 437:764–769. 2005,

S., C., Sougioultzis, al. et Monath, Keates, P.J., S., Pothoulakis, C.K., L., Lee, T.P., Maroo, Giannasca, Warny, S., Kyne, Drudy, D., M., Clostridium difficile vaccine difficile-associated toxoid recurrent in : diarrhea. C. 2005, Gastroenterology 128:764–770.

of complexes Antibody:antigen by classical complement the activate binding pathway 10-19 to C1q.

N.R. Cooper, complement pathway. The : classical the component. and regulation complement Activation first of Adv. Immunol. 37:151–216. 1985,

human C1r2C1s2. A.S.: Perkins, Nealis, quaternary complement S.J., and structure solution of subcomponent The in Biochem. J. 263:463–469. 1989,

complement Ding, Sörman, How regulate A., and L., use Z., responses. Heyman, B.: Zhang, to antibodies antibody Mol. Immunol. receptors Fc contribute 2014, 10-20 and 61:79–88 to of the removal circulation. complexes Complement from both receptors immune

J.D., G.S., et T.S., Ptacek, D.T., C., Jr., Brown, Dong, G., McGwin, Edberg, J.C., Zhang, Alarcón, al. E.E., Reveille, K., Redden, R., Ramsey-Goldman, human and nephritis IIIa Fcγ Americans. receptor and in binding with African haplotypes : single-nucleotide associated polymorphisms are affect lupus IgG Rheumatol. Arthritis 66:1291–1299. 2014,

The systemic lupus system update. J., Blom, in Bengtsson, A.M.: Leffler, erythematosus: complement A.A., and an Ann. Rheum. Dis. 73:1601–1606. 2014,

Immune P.J., Norsworthy, M.J.: C1q-deficient processing K.A., Botto, Davies, Taylor, P.R., Nash, J.T., Walport, in complex and M., mice. Clin. Exp. Immunol. 123:196–202. 2001,

Botto, C1q K.A., lupus and and systemic Davies, M.J., M.: erythematosus. Walport, 1998, Immunobiology 199:265–285.

The different receptors receptors immunoglobulins of cells for 10-21 of accessory are classes. Fc specific signaling

family? first Kinet, in Launay, single born member and J.P., Fcα/μR: or the P.: Nat. Immunol. 1:371–372. 2000,

McEwan, W.A., and L.C. D.L., C.M., Johnson, Mallery, S.R., Towers, Bidgood, James, G.J., immunity : mediate Antibodies motif-containing (TRIM21). tripartite 21 through intracellular Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 2010, 107:19985–19990.

S.: receptors. and IgG Bolland, Fc Ravetch, J.V., Annu. Rev. Immunol. 19:275–290. 2001,

complement Fc Divergent roles J.V., for receptors vivo. and and Clynes, R.A.: Ravetch, in Annu. Rev. Immunol. 1998, 16:421–432.

Sakamoto, Hiroyama, G.R., al. A., T., Fujita, Y., Shibuya, Sutherland, Shibuya, M., K., Eyre, et N., Shimizu, Endo, Osawa, H.J., Y., T., microbes. IgM-coated receptor of endocytosis : mediates Fcα/μ Nat. Immunol. 1:441–446. 2000,

Liu, M., receptors: Olferiev gene from Fc Y., to L.: Stefanescu, Pricop, Inhibitory R.N., and gamma disease. J. Clin. Immunol. 24:315–326. 2004,

10-22 enable receptors pathogens. destroy surface antibodies of the are pathogens phagocytes to bound to and activated on by Fc and phagocytes ingest the

Conrad, RII/CD23. Dierks, H.J., the Bartlett, murine Rao, The of epsilon D.H.: Gould, W.C., R.L., M., Fc nature Edmeades, S.E., and oligomeric for function. Implications Immunol. J. 1993, 150:2372–2382.

M.E. P., R., S., Hogan, H.F., Foster, Kay, Moqbel, S.P., P.S., and A.B., Rothenberg, Lacy, Rosenberg, Phipps, : and properties in biological and role disease. Eosinophils: health Clin. Exp. 2008, Allergy 38:709–750.

A., A., R., W.W., Karakawa, Schneerson, Vann, and Karpas, Sutton, W.F. : antibodies of induce capsulated leukocytes. Staphylococcus human polymorphonuclear aureus type-specific Capsular phagocytosis by Infect. Immun. 1986, 56:1090–1095.

Fc to destroy cells antibody-coated NK 10-23 activate receptors targets.

E., activation antibodies. NK Stratov, HIV-specific by R.J., Rapid of A.W., Chung, S.J., cells I.: Rollman, following degranulation Kent, and Center, Immunol. J. 182:1202–1210. 2009,

and Lanier, Phillips, L.L., J.H. cytotoxic human of three types Evidence : for lymphocyte. Immunol. 1986, Today 7:132.

Leibson, P.J. killer. of cell the inside transduction natural activation: mind a during killer Signal : 6:655–661. 1997, Immunity

Metes, Herberman, Sulica, R.B. Morel, A., D., P., and molecules. NK surface human : receptors effector Ig-binding cells and as on regulatory Int. Rev. Immunol. 20:371–414. 2001,

Takai, functions effector of in mice. T.: loss Multiple cell FcRγ-deficient Int. Rev. Immunol. 13:369–381. 1996,

Mast high-affinity receptor. basophils via IgE bind antibody 10-24 cells the and Fcε

by transduction H.: Fc M.A., Metzger, Beaven, case. the and Signal receptors: FcεRI Immunol. 14:222–226. 1993, Today

and Kalesnikoff, J., IgE V., J.E., that cell M., Krystal, Huber, to and Damen, Zhang, pathways stimulates production J., lead Siraganian, Lam, survival. in cells cytokine signaling Monomeric R.P., mast G.: 2001, Immunity 14:801–811.

B.J., Sutton, H.J. Gould, and IgE network. human The : 366:421–428. 1993, Nature

in resistance infection. an 10-25 accessory cells of important parasite role has activation IgE-mediated to

clinical Riveau, to G., from in Schistosomes: Capron, F.: A., interactions Trottein, road trials. and the host-parasite M., vaccines Capron, Trends Parasitol. 2005, 21:143–149.

R.K.: Grencis, immunity infections. nematode to Th2-mediated protective intestinal host Philos. Trans. Soc. R. Lond. 1997, 352:1377–1384. B

R.K., and S.I. Grencis, K.J., Nishikawa, J.F., Else, Huntley, : intestinal mice. the of factor (c-kit in spiralis in cell ligand) Trichinella role mastocytosis on nematode to The vivo and protective stem immunity host Immunol. Parasite 1993, 15:55–59.

H., from Nakama, Nippostrongylus small T., intestine. Arizono, Infection Morimoto, blood M., S., to M., brasiliensis A., peripheral Okada, invasion M., N., Tei, Kitamura, Y.: cell Yamada, precursors Kasugai, of mast and Hirota, induces with 1995, Blood 85:1334–1340.

ticks. with Protective responses and mast Ushio, Higuchi, Watanabe, larval Y., in cell Matsuda, longicornis and S., eosinophil infested and Haemaphysalis Kiso, N., immunity H.: H., mice Parasite Immunol. 15:209–214. 1993,

and of Innate Integrated Dynamics Immunity Adaptive

which the book have ways examined pathogens. immune and adaptive separate against the the responses this protect Throughout we invading innate in of immune the molecules cells and this integrated control protective we adaptive immunity. eliminate defense system consider an immune long-lasting and the as how to also provides how or agents, the system types of infectious work chapter, In system different in environment. infection the is brought how into most by encountered probably immunity Chapters 3, is and microorganisms In colonization an and to earliest of of the the play prevent phases 2 saw we of innate the body in sufficient which, We developmental introduced (ILCs), CD8 features pathogens. with target antigen-specific and T-cell to and cells generate early types effector during CD4 although responses cytotoxic lymphoid cells also innate immune functional T specific that subsets infection and distinct of overlapping of types share lacking receptors, act to to to Unlike naive ILCs such in B respond and poised impair as respiratory reside barrier are where the rapidly they pathogens mucosae, cells, their or T eliminate tissues, spread. intestinal and

a infection. strategies defenses and focus have developed However, innate evade immune of to pathogens most establish response, clearance. about sensor In adaptive coordinated and pathogen that the emanate for these from by to circumstances, effector which orchestrated of cells innate innate immune is sets an is immune the response bring induction with scene signals innate the cells rapid respond a sensor a against response, encountered few to first to of over first occurs immune days time, primary hours pathogen response ILCs which pathogen the the In to innate invasion. mount cells for the and effector and differentiation clonal sensor into with of Concurrent guided cells innate expansion and cells and B lymphocytes cells initiated is ILCs. T naive this by antibody-secreting response, the to adaptive largely days However, mature, precursor fully requires to of the several weeks due rarity to antigen-specific response cells. T expansion target migrate cells elimination cases, and the in enhance effectively cells, for secondary and, immune with functions tissues, innate along most Following lymphoid infection differentiation pathogen-specific antibodies, sites effector the in pathogen to the effector of of (Fig. and, 11.1).

4. 3. phase Memory phase 1. Effector infection of 2. Establishment Inductive phase

of microorganism Level

antigen response level immune activate adaptive of Threshold to

of infection Duration

and to Integration of adaptive in immunity specific types innate of response pathogens.

T innate Effector cells effector immune functions cells. of the augment

Immunological memory.

Fig. an infection 11.1 acute typical adaptive a of response. course is immune The cleared that by 1. increase The agent its numbers colonizes and infectious replicates. it as pathogen. the of is response innate The detection following initiated immediately 2. system. required the adaptive continues When pathogen the restrained is dose the immune for to grow, of innate initiated; numbers the of antigen response, response exceed threshold by responses the of pathogen an to stage, also this immunological starts induced. memory be At 3. the infection. effector days, After start clear and molecules adaptive 4–7 the to cells of response 4. response the provide reinfection memory been antibody, fallen has and has the immunological antigen below of cases. but When the response lasting dose cells, and effector infection against threshold, cleared protection in residual most ceases, the

also adaptive cells. immune immunological is specific period, During memory by this established thus with on rapid the providing a encounter secondary lifelong against a antibody immune reinduction often and same the antigen-specific and effector long-lasting pathogen This cells response, during protection T pathogen. ensures of the memory in chapter. is part of last the discussed Immunological responses. Memory from responses several in primary ways differ memory immunological this, We reasons the is what for is known discuss about and maintained. how

innate to immunity types in adaptive response Integration of pathogens. specific of and

dynamic over immune and intensity its is nature and change its both response The process, time. a adaptive pathogen on matures. begins response powerful responses the the with more becomes antigen-independent as of immune and innate the focused It immunity more and antigen-specific both of on The the contingent character differs the of response type pathogen. of effective (for 1, induced different effective intracellular helminthic of the and pathogens so for example, and most 2, response parasites, viruses, 3), type extracellular types types elicit elimination example, immune immune the fungi) that or pathogen. response of Different is (for bacteria, effector throughout initiates the but to and and of anticipates of pathways cells immunity continues system types Tand only innate different immune reinforcing the adaptive B-cell infection. The not responses, provide by innate cells. activated are produced different response, cells cytokines lymphoid (ILCs) sensor in subsets of by Early innate the infection develops. to the the acts constrain response entry site while of prevent dissemination response pathogen This at initial early adaptive to the cells specific T required infection, often effector of immunity. sterilizing of the actions and However, more and affinity-matured antibodies are elimination complete class-switched, sensitive or for chapter, response an lymphoid to provide different and of the overview the innate pathogen-specific an activate part and invasion the cytokines phases response while then in we restrain In pathogen cell sensor distinct of are of how immune developing. subsets cells discuss is direct from time how this orchestrated defenses innate space adaptive and different

of The divided 11-1 course phases. infection can an distinct into several be

and be 2, of grouped induction innate discussed underlie different of below. others responses, not, of patterns these adaptive type into broadly 1, are (MAMPs) are the and can type and distinct will differences microbe-associated shared, Although as pathogens that types the type 3 immunity of some be of molecular patterns and provokes, down is inciting and response of response it host the (Fig. the various into of however, tempo Irrespective stages pattern the similar the pathogen immune can of broken be Fig. 11.1, see and 3.38).

an In shed environment. is particles in infected the to by stage a new infectious host the exposed infection, of either individual present or first its an infectivity. The transmission, of infectious of outside agent mode stability and determine the host numbers, route, epithelial occurs or respiratory, or as the mucosal gastrointestinal, The skin with contact a the through surface, tracts. host new of the urogenital first an surfaces such contact, infectious making must focus After a establish of infection. agent an it, the surface penetrate and (Fig. epithelial to or it replicate either tissues must colonize It to in adhere the 11.2). and microorganisms some barrier entry (insects breach and ticks) gain the help arthropods wounds the skin. epidermal Bites and by through

response innate and of to of Integration adaptive types pathogens. immunity in specific

Fig. divided lymphatics series (second can to into Infections responses cells stages. dendritic antigen-loaded them 11.2 and antigen and of a the be to local a and lymph are pathogenic illustrated panel). These nodes thence to panel) here for (third in This wound to entering microorganism a an (red) epithelium. across leads first response and involves the further B cells activation of (first with adaptive the into beyond epithelial cells adheres the in T microorganism an immune panel). The underlying cells differentiation lymph the to and invades then node epithelium tissues and that helps of local clear and infection, the the response panel). cells, effector contain eventual infection delivers production T to immune (fourth innate A and antibody which

disease focus successfully microorganism Only the of a in (see occur established host has Fig. a does infection when 11.2). that With caused secretes the toxins few original unless the spreads pathogen focus other be to will from the little of or body. damage spread exceptions, parts by infection direct of the bloodstream. spread Extracellular through pathogens the lymphatics the extension or usually system the into lymphatic has Spread occurs overwhelmed. bloodstream the only been after both cells. so pathogens or one they to to next into and spread the transmission cell; from adjacent fluid cell either cell by intracellular direct by extracellular do distant from Obligate the reinfection release and of extracellular the of the in after pathogens same a do period can survival intracellular Facultative environment. their bacteria that exert without gastroenteritis into the In contrast, effects tissues. spreading of cause some the They secreting the the and the of the lining toxins luminal circulation. on that damaging epithelial epithelium crossing infection surface or the either establish a of cause in epithelium site barrier damage gut pathology and entering the by situ after cause or by

the produce immediate and in system infection environment. the establishment tissues a changes in of response focus of innate of the immune The as stimulation by (see the triggered in innate check 3). epithelial cells, expressed of and Chapters innate cells, tissue-resident sensor by and or stage cells—such dendritic various kept are Many are at mast 2 macrophages, defenses, pattern which by microorganisms recognition repelled receptors this germlineencoded cells innate also ILCs. Cytokines activate sensor initiate by and local produced and pathogen-activated inflammation, cells chemokines at and activated days. least several for are minutes responses hours, to sustained within are These of inflammatory activation venules is Fig. post-capillary local endothelium induced response of the The through (see 3.31). neutrophils monocytes, the circulating innate phagocytes available recruitment and increasing of clearance. cells, microbe leads This particularly of effector to for the numbers thereby reinforced. infected the that so and into inflammatory monocytes attracted tissue are activated, additional As enter the maintained response cells become tissue inflammatory and is (see which endothelium a of activation mainly to also of occurs via and Leakiness the in including Fig. influx serum primary the leads of lectin infection the proteins, alternative pathways complement, inflamed 2.15). opsonizes endothelium; activate C3b, for more and results the recruited C3a This by vascular which production the microbes which C5a, and further anaphylatoxins clearance the phagocytes. in effective of largely early of pathogen. type the response for This inflammatory is nonspecific of phase the

Concordant production the activate specific within innate of cells cytokines of activate the cytokines with as TNF-α, sensor differentially hours such infection. which produce ILCs that inflammation, additional subsets an first pro-inflammatory of nonspecific sensor due cytokines of MAMPs—by is of expression combinations the innate from pathogens, of unique different MAMPs—or different cells. which of elicit unique patterns to types This sensor mounted pattern are the type directing effector on and cytokines in contingent consequences by of will their has cytokines This pathogen, subsets cells the of that produce innate be (Fig. important of the immune produced activated own as ILCs differentially response against to chemokines 11.3). types of or granulocytes basophils, site innate effector neutrophils, resist pathogens, amplify and are recruitment local specific and innate infection. like tailored eosinophils, myelomonocytic The and to the of monocytes) activated also (that ILCs of different of that at products the maturation coordinate better is, cells and alter responses by acting TH2, TH17 subsets may of to activation T cells TH1, directly indirectly or distinct to example, naive of effector the prime or on cells cells. naive produced lymphoid modulating (for that tissues development by Cytokines the by migrate guide also regional ILCs naive T dendritic cells)—either themselves T cells into ILCs adaptive the immune an perform defense In of few by that bridging providing type important way, response influencing innate during the an follows. both function for and this days of response, first

or a threshold level mechanisms innate overwhelms the of and eludes Adaptive is an Fig. defense immunity when infection antigen (see generates triggered 11.1). responses in then initiated immune lymphoid are the local Adaptive

humans , lacking Normal T/B–) (PMN– RAG-defcient humans (PMN+ innate and and mice MAC+ , mice or and immunity Mice MAC–) , humans SCID

in adaptive innate Integration pathogens. of types to immunity of response specific and to the (see 449 of dendritic the during Fig. by tissue, presented innate immune antigens response activated in response cells course second third panels). 11.2, and innate effector several cells mature. by orchestrated cells and ILCs differentiation during generated responses ‘buy Antigen-specific are T and time’ clonal days, response B adaptive to antibody-secreting over expansion which by the for enter site the T into are several released antibodies and Fig. cells infection blood, of days antigen-specific (see then from can of infection, there Within the and fourth panel). 11.2, more precisely. effector because responses eliminate powerful pathogens antigen-specific innate targeting can more are mechanisms of Adaptive arm the cells capabilities can opsonize last (ADCC). pathogens; complement as cell-mediated directly known and cytotoxicity they for Fc-bearing (NK) can can effector cells—these to kill phagocytosis; antibodies antibody-dependent recruit pathogens killer enhanced of or cytocidal microbicidal innate factors of activate they actions example, for natural release For antigen-bearing T CD4 effector can onto microbicidal target and to cells can Effector directly cytokines their actions. cells similar release kill cells cytocidal CD8 macrophages actions, cytotoxic enhance directly via T

an of the over complete as Resolution (see 11-16). weeks, the known to source and of clearance clonal contraction days antigens, most stage pathogen, effector infection typically lymphocytes following which of thus Section the of die—a involves course months the that numbers also and of an future are antibodies years, with for T pathogen. of sustain response antibody-producing persist encounters long-lived to accelerated memory that circulating small What in may B poised years, and cells event cells plasma adaptive same remain the for for immune the adaptive in prevents clearing effective response reinfection. to infectious Thus, an agent, addition agents, protection is or infectious reduced infection essentially on only reexposure the some For is absolute, this attenuated whereas to pathogen. others for

innate the many little the in how with such of infections and by infections mechanisms of is solely It or dealt pathology. immunity, produce because way are nonadaptive known early symptoms are not eliminated seem essential that immunity shown of (Fig. however, mice in immune to lack effective infection system intact have for does, an components defense, Innate host be as the adaptive but of by progression innate immunity 11.4). the be immunity. not absence infections many adaptive curbed—but can Conversely, of cleared—in

of pathology infection, types an residual no many little or adaptive effective primary response. After follows infection induces, some response however, causes significant the damage. it In tissue itself, the or cases, as latent In in form. not other is can the contained or pathogen eliminated, but and such infection with yet a cases, Mycobacterium cytomegalovirus persist tuberculosis, If virulent to is syndrome response pathogens immune cause the these in acquired weakened, is (AIDS), infections. may later adaptive systemic resurface it as immune deficiency establish chronic, in subvert by or immunity, adaptive thereby on used focus strategies 13. a certain the or We to pathogens will evade Chapter infection, and persistent,

infection clear are an that on the depend The mechanisms 11-2 agent. recruited infectious to effector

both Most are Tand both or in protective the adaptive containing clearing infections B-cell-mediated in immunity. pathogen immunity, setting many and ultimately helpful engage cases and up the pathogens. effective of vary the importance and mechanisms, antibody of classes involved, However, different effector with relative the different Section (see immune types on is are that there focused effector that 1-19). modules emerging different activation distinct of of responses the concept are immune An each together of immune type innate a mechanisms adaptive In collection and of response, act specific

infection of Duration

Fig. The course mice and in time normal 11.4 and immunodeficient humans. infection of (PMN) (MAC) curve leukocytes in immunity, when absence macrophages are polymorphonuclear of shows the rapid growth the of red The and innate microorganisms lacking. innate lack immunity immunity. green so the that lymphocytes shows of course have The B curve T but or and and adaptive no mice have in humans infection The curve normal shows an the mice infection in of or course humans. yellow immunocompetent

a to eliminate type of pathogen. specific Each cells tissue-resident antibody T they sensor of effector microbicidal or and cells, which recruit myelomonocytic subsets with isotypes, (Fig. enhance coordinate effector subsets includes module cells, of and ILCs, functions innate circulating whose 11.5). Circulating following cells functions important ILCs, cells innate cells, myelomonocytic infection. recruitment that sites and heightened are into their are effector antibodies by for of targeted effector T and in activated blood, and include into enter macrophages), these (which inflamed differentiate neutrophils, of circulating basophils. order monocytes tissues abundance eosinophils, In their function. basophils, which for heightened targeted with also functions are many share Tissue-resident mast cells,

cells. immunity to integrate different enhanced pathogens: optimal and classes TH2 by cells; adaptive cells; appears with, (ILC1/ILC2/ILC3 It and basophils, eosinophils, pathway CD4 three enhance each arms and macrophages of effector respectively) by T-cell and the neutrophils and TH1 for and monocyte major of of, mast myelomonocytic the are and by cells subsets functions different the TH1/TH2/TH17, evolved TH17 coordinate that eradication of ILC of major and are of three networks, below. responses chemokine discussed cytokine controlled as by The types immune

Fig. T-cell effector subsets, into Integration innate modules. cells ILCs, immune effector 11.5 and of T-bet, and major and factors transcription are that and The with effector GATA3, AHR), module effector cytokines, are (e.g., RORγt, ID2, inductive associated shown. each text See for details.

1 IgG1 are and cells, parasites 1 and IgG2), response and characterized including to example, isotypes Fig. actions (see the ILCs bacteria, of pathogens, intracellular group in TH1 IgG Type (ILC1), opsonizing viruses, by intracellular (for macrophages responses 11.5). function eosinophils, of Type receptors. innate are the IgE, 2 basophils, surface tissue the group TH2 ILCs actions two responses for IgE latter and cells 2 bound (ILC2), effector cells, to by by armed are of characterized Fcε and which the mast cells, are 2 target, Type or multicellular helminths. parasites, by, induced responses and extracellular 3 response in and by ILCs characterized group are of neutrophils fungi. (ILC3), 3 IgG actions Type TH17 the isotypes, opsonizing bacteria cells, to responses and type activation responses. sets subsets 1, in for response is type polarized innate different early of the 3 that of the or stage It ILCs type 2, the priming cells. in with able they features, the respond rapidly require are which innate acquire order recruited effector T effector functions; they share activities to hence do CD4 resident functional to of to amplify cells Unlike effector not ILCs the and and overlapping differentiation their these as subsets, the we and adaptive induction and responses with detail Here precede integrated ILC in will responses. more consider actions are of T-cell

cells and pathogen-activated dendritic ILC1s NK by to in IL-18 discussed macrophages. and Chapter related response produced IFN-γ by As 3, in IL-12 production their and characterized cells of are most and respectively. cells NK CTLs, cells resemble and Functionally, TH1 ILC1s closely lack the NK macrophages through cells the promote infected of by granules IFN-γ. release that to clearance pathogens of and appear and intracellular characteristic are ILC1s of cytolytic their activation of CTLs, recruitment of can macrophage development on of through their and prior of and to which several induce intracellular cells. TH1 Thus, its killing to production IL-12 macrophages induce days pathogens back the rapidly ILC1 the production of IL-18, IFN-γ, acts heightened the contribute cells, early to may to effector production that of of TH1 cell the the TH1 follows. response IFN-γ Moreover, of the by induction cells of linking the function these ILC1s polarization of of cells the development CD8 killing on the antigen-driven the pathogen-infected cytolytic of T target of Similarly, cytolytic of a 3-23), molecules the NK expressed in enables activity cells, deployment the induction range the are of that Section advance cells and rapid recognition through of (see surface cells. Also, the IFN-γ of cells. to TH1 activated of differentiation of production IFN-γ may similar to cells the contribute T cells on CD8 by by enhanced production effect ILC1s, the cytolytic NK

(TSLP), tissues ILC2s mucosal that are in to thymic are which IL-33 each lymphopoietin reside helminths. preferentially by activated response and STAT5-activating IL-25, in cytokine, the of produced cytokines or stromal a that a such polysaccharide constituent that primarily are some patterns molecular exoskeletons as a chitin, helminths, polymer of fungi. β-1,4-N-acetylglucosamine of produced is by cells widespread to insects, common epithelial These helminths, the cytokines and of sense ILC2s expulsion; of facilitate that that and stimulates eosinophils in IL-5 can smooth production produce amounts Activated worm large IL-13 production by IL-13 of epithelium mucus the rapidly muscle stimulates worms. cells the goblet and and IL-5; and kill mucosal activation contractions vivo, functional promote features, which with ILC2s they little or not TH2 they that to appear produce suggesting cells, no might Unlike share differentiation. in directly TH2 IL-4 that ILC2s to activated and indirect produced produced an by produce which is providing IL-5 by differentiation by IL-13 by in are to IL-4 directed basophils by recruited are chemokines mechanism ILC2s. possibly the TH2 eosinophils response However, ILC2s, and also activation differentiation, migration IL-13 cells and by is IL-4. Moreover, these ILC2s promote it unclear can the that lymphoid dendritic regional to produce cells regulate to dendritic although appears whether produced tissues of TH2

defense extracellular bacteria barrier play fungi at ILC3s and early against in tissues. a role critical IL-1β; and responsive promote responses. which ILC3s and Similarly IL-23 the IL-17 toTH17 cytokines production of IL-22, early type these cells, are to 3 elicit acts (for production pro-inflammatory factors epithelial IL-1β), is and other and a cells, cells, monocytes. of cells, that hematopoietic growth stimulate including of cells, variety stromal and example, that a cytokines pro-inflammatory myeloid cytokine to IL-6 neutrophils chemokines GM-CSF), IL-17 the and and on (G-CSF recruit (AMPs) integrity. induce cells and on peptides their production promote acts of epithelial enhanced to IL-22 antimicrobial barrier act indirectly type IL-6 IL-1β. enhance in by other and produced ILCs, cytokines As feedback the 3 to via loop with of local IL-23 by increasing a responses production and positive IL-1β ILC3s found of lymphoid differentiation mucosal numbers. IL-6, induction may IL-23, IL-1β, the in and tissues, substantial elevated can TH17 where be also promote of they cells ILC3s Through in

is expulsion innate a they cells ‘license’ or they of In for CD4 effector T do parallel so themselves. cells, feature ILCs immune further microbes, not do an important with that other killing but of produce. cells the these are of cytokines T and through are of the effector activated the chemokines Instead, cells, and cells; mucosal even cells agents that lymphoid they pro-inflammatory myelomonocytic and/or CD4 epithelium, and ILCs recruited which, cells is An target intracellular T cells, that cells, pathogens. harbor exception directly NK like effector CD8 kill target to provide lethality additional cells production we licensing on maturation because their ability of of antibodies, below, microbial cytokines class-switched cells their innate increases will antigen-bearing T focus to the effector As layer of and effector clearance. and that ability discuss to induce of effector an and B-cell CD4 cells achieve

Summary.

required for is immune the pathogenic of host Integration of innate protection the against responses adaptive effective microorganisms. and the immune The time pathogens adaptive the to initiate to longer develop. fully act of simultaneously takes a helping system which immune restrain innate response, early to responses while of sensor of the types pathogens cytokine patterns Different cells. innate of different by activation cause production parallel the different differentiation. to activation differentiation promotes infection programs of turn, effector the T-cell of (ILCs), of to patterns sites cells lymphoid innate cells of of contribute CD4 innate in which and recruit This, effector T composed pathogens. the against different different of Coordination types subsets class-switched the innate effector of related immune effector antibodies immunity of of ILCs, directed induction are of of CD4 modules and that cells, types underlies cells, different

cells cells. innate augment immune of the Effector functions effector T

we enter antigen where with their the immune Chapter 9 initiate tissues, tissue infected cargo through to secondary In how response. lymphoid away cells migrate they loaded described adaptive the dendritic lymphatics the from infected I become MHC cells for cytotoxic that molecules. discussed killing class specialized to that T how We primed are effectors cells CD8 target are express T saw how activated transcription CD4 networks differentiation of specific TH2, distinct We into of cytokines classes cells effector naive factor cells—TH1, and CD4 also direct Fig. by (see TH17 T the 9.31). antigen-bearing cells class and in Chapter the role which 10 TFH 1, the cells, context to type of discussed type type switching control In specialized maturation 2, antibody centers B-cell engage germinal B we responses. of 3 and in of the their effector of that to innate functions of immune secondary after at orchestrate of attention to cells CD4 now tissues specialized infection. the T cells lymphoid emigrate subsets We differentiation from roles turn our sites

produced is the of in they during microorganism cells course the how subsets of pattern sections, innate influences early ILCs discussed immune different the by determined As cytokines and innate by sensor preceding of the the the engage. behavior infection response of the interactions contact these cells cells conditions effector a determining during of T major produced how on impact are initial T dendritic differentiate The the have 9). thus cells, (see local subsets their with Chapter by that generated inflammatory sites effector antigen-specific to T via antigens, recruitment cell or responses through of cell effector infection targets amplifies contact that initiated cells sustains pathogen-specific cell–cell turn, recognition, and through antibodies. by CD4 of bearing T cognate or ILCs CD8 between the their and innate cells In mechanisms whether require effector generated of tissues part this to sites causes surface cells receptors of adaptive infection. home chapter, alters during In and effector we how CD4 and will differentiation of to the of them lymphoid discuss leave expression secondary the response T immune their the sites development TH1, consider how the will TH17 then pathogens about and We elicit innate infection that to of interact of immune and at TH2, cells recruitment. with cells bring specific the clearance their is consider primary Finally, terminated the how we is effector pathogen will as response the eliminated.

of Effector molecules expression receptors. are guided of changes sites to their tissues and by chemokine specific in cells infection and T 11-3 adhesion

lymphoid in other cells, case of specific When molecules expression cells. TFH T-cell of occur differentiate T in from T cells, effector into to redirect the of that surface trafficking tissues, changes or their effector case from the zones, naive cells T B-cell the into nonlymphoid zones in required cells tissues, in within selectins secondary the expression 3–5 including the lymphoid differentiation integrins, and molecules, cells changes of in chemokine into of T of naive occur effector the days During and T trafficking ligands, for these receptors. alterations marked display their of all T CD4 see, CD8 are effector As common and will to we are these generic, cells. some changes and in the were back recruitment facilitating primed. T of are tissues cells to the tissue-specific, Others they which of TH2, are they sites centers, or which effector recruit developing directing the cells chemokine they enhance. to patterns help germinal myelomonocytic provide whose tissue to TH1, B directing TH17 TFH the functions will subset-specific, where the T-cell same others Yet as and receptor cells, are expression, and in in to cells cells particularly important

TFH that by of the Section T cells lipid sphingosine S1PR1, expression cells CCR7 activated antigen are and the receptor lose expression and 1-phosphate acquire become chemotactic CD4 (see of and Naive for 9-7). CXCR5 can into they B the follicular interact present that B-cell B attracts cells border they center developing of CXCL13 The zone and the the establishes gradient of dendritic follicle, a TFH provide their by follicle, first cells that cognate expression T-cell antigen, germinal help with where cells. to where constitutive a B-cell with to cells then infection TFH cells, developed have to cells sites they other must nonlymphoid leave in interact CD8 myelomonocytic T at CD4 which in effector Unlike lymphoid cells of and tissues. the tissue with cells S1PR1. effector is exit The T of reexpression their CCR7 loss of induced of by their and downregulated is normally following by S1PR1 rapidly CD69 stimulation antigenic

Fig. to allowing molecules, T infection. them surface to of 11.6 Effector cells home sites change their high endothelial to such cells carbohydrates on to (HEV, venule nodes sulfated by proteins, home T and Naive the upper displayed L-selectin lymph as (not various shown), GlyCAM-1 CD34 through binding panel). of the lose cells VLA-4 lymph increased LFA-1 (not about of 4–5 express of the with days expression antigen, integrin the L-selectin, T After leave node the differentiated later, many encounter of and levels shown). now and effector to and (lower inflammation on peripheral endothelium sites bind These of VCAM-1 panel). respectively, vascular at ICAM-1, their the of cells T the cell-surface effector splicing On mRNA alter encoding cells, protein differentiating into CD45. also more T T effector antigen. and in by effector by or T one more the extracellular specific domains CD45RO expressed that by encode present cells, naive lacks The somehow sensitive stimulation to isoform cells cells makes expressed exons isoform CD45RA

to expansion cells (see tissue the cells of in undergo and as effector clonal order the naive developing T retain Section they lymphoid in differentiation 9-6). inflammation venules on P-selectin favor in sialoglycoprotein of such homodimeric also by major lymph endothelial that a secondary at is as the mediates lymphoid shed which on rolling (Fig. rolling and effector cells high ligand-1 glycoprotein Most of L-selectin, the activated tissues T endothelial cells tethering the expressed Pand of E-selectin nodes, for sites ligand (PSGL-1), 11.6). granulocytes T express In to cells express after contrast constitutively biosynthesis which T-cell for development. ligands, enzymes necessary of only glycosyltransferases monocytes, and effector these selectin E-selectin the expression VII both induces (FucT-VII), differentiation key Pand α1,3-fucosyltransferase a ligand generation. for glycosyltransferase required enzyme Effector of is and binding for cells. selectin Thus, by only by naive expressed it cells, effector T both although T is PSGL-1 appropriately effector glycosylated

cells that recruitment also molecules The of other for inflamed as (see increased to T Fig. important adhesion is effector are expression integrins such of tissues the 11.6). effector Naive express develop cells naive mainly is cells as T T-cell which from retained (αLβ2), T precursors. on LFA-1 they only is integrin However, these not LFA-1 that the cells express. to the the the to ICAM-1. cells immunoglobulin a member related binds VLA-4, integrin T superfamily or of which Effector VCAM-1, α4:β1, also synthesize molecule adhesion activated binding by T altered to so affinity, When it is chemokine that ICAM-1 VCAM-1 Section greater are VLA-4 of similar to cells (see to with LFA-1 can signaling, bind activated chemokine-induced 3-18). activate effector chemokines extravasation to of VLA-4 T Thus, VCAM-1 cells. of near allowing sites endothelial on bind inflammation, vascular cells dependent some others. on cells in and of recruitment of to expressed beds: dependent and Although one surfaces, T be cell on more two preferential ICAM-1 adhesion in is effector there in appears inflamed are activated pairs of tissues, endothelial VLA-4 on the LFA-1 vascular VCAM-1 more some both utilization tissue

active of within that molecules back during Induction is at so of adhesion or compartments expression tissues of an immune primed compartmentalized lymphoid home T effector some those response them, to cells homeostasis. whether priming of tissues. with to T Thus, site particular to appears the traffic to the effector ability cells imprint that expression adhesion to selectively the tissue-specific This by of is achieved molecules bind addressins. context, as (Fig. often the receptors this are homing In molecules known 11.7). adhesion Fig. endothelial mucosal in of which the gut shall cells that expression the 12, lymphoid by prime the binds in vessels blood the As see T of tissues Chapter is cells integrin, (see (GALT) addressin induce constitutively gut-associated cells mucosa dendritic that to α4:β7 expressed within we MAdCAM-1 vascular panel). lower left 11.7,

cells in that the chemokines express primed the receptors also specifically—by T bind specific chemokine constitutively—and GALT gut produced epithelium. on in homeostasis at lymphoid expressed CCR9 primed Thus, T cells

bind CCL25, cell which small laminapropriaintestinalepitheliumCCR9MAdCAM-1˜4:°7 vascular cells gut-homing CCL25CCR9˜4:°7integrinCCL25bloodvesselLymphocytes and chemokine T binds on homing endothelium on to MAdCAM-1 the the intestine effector express CCL25 Intestinal CCR9 epithelial

Fig. chemokines tissues. of integrins their 11.7 specifically Skinand particular cells gut-homing target to use and migrate to T combinations on (upper expressed migrate a in circulating CCL25 chemokine endothelium α4β7 to move the then gut-associated epothelium gradient traverse the (upper binds MAdCAM-1 to CCR9 left to panel). intestinal tissues right initally lymphocytes primed and uses along lymphoid panel), cells bind lymphocytes (CLA) skin Similarly, lymphocyte draining the antigen endothelial and by (lower left on in constitutively E-selectin lining a lymph endothelium blood cutaneous panel). to interactions nodes circulating vessel cutaneous expressed between primed the the the adhesion is interaction by CCL17. chemokine an and receptor lymphocyte CCR4 The chemokine endothelial strengthened between (lower by binds to on endothelium, chemokine lymphocytes the are epidermis CCL27, CCR10 the the T receptor to which right effector lymphocytes the through panel). Once of attracted keratinocytes

gradient along to of epithelium the the back cells tissues (see those propria the CCL25 subjacent small of the T intestine to lamina Fig. a small intestine recruits panel). 11.7, upper right skin. skin-draining cells preferentially home to the T contrast, back In nodes primed lymph in its PSGL-1 induced and endothelium vascular Fig. (see an in of cutaneous are that isoform on differs glycosylation lymphocyte the molecule express pattern antigen cutaneous adhesion to of binds to E-selectin (CLA), They panels). 11.7, lower bind receptors and which chemokine express vessels which and CCL17 the the chemokines in levels respectively, CCR4 (CTACK), CLA-expressing also lymphocytes cutaneous highest CCL27 sequentially T are (TARC) epidermis. the CCR10, and present blood at as tissue-homing homeostatic to at are produced referred these Because steady chemokines they state, are chemokines. along (Fig. CCR7-bearing CCL21, that T They gradient naive constitutively from are direct the lymphoid produced endothelium a to CCL19 of HEVs T-cell at and zones to as steady cells chemokines analogous in state, 11.8). such tissues contrasted chemokines immune the are infection inflammation. are context recruit Homeostatic with to circulating elicited which in of sites cells inflammatory to be of to chemokines,

Chemokines families structural basis XCL, into CXC3CL. the are CXCL, of and CCL, on classified four differences: can as mixed function and be pro-inflammatory (red), also classified (yellow). (green), homeostatic Chemokines subfamily chemokines of CX3CR the Chemokines class the which CXCR, G-protein-coupled seven-transmembrane bind bind. XCR, and they of CCR, a to classified as of basis receptors, on are coordinate Many, all, not that immune here. represented chemokine-chemokine are receptor but networks modules the of they are lines connecting receptors types cell indicated which and representation expressed The ‘circuit’ the of and connection nodes. by on between is a to type. receptors and shapes) and To node; at rhomboids one each chemokines cells, target vertical horizontal link connect follow (diamond a to cell on turn the the lines their line vertical multiple receptors most that bind chemokine can Note chemokines. et Modified Mantovani al., from Nat. Rev. Immunol. 6:907-918. 2006,

Fig. coordinate interactions 11.8 Chemokine innate adaptive the populations. immune-cell and of networks

general to CCR7 subset-specific addition there that changes chemokine receptors the expression the accompanies loss induced trafficking is of expression. and molecules T-cell during In of tissue-specific effector in differentiation, guide of inflammation of (Fig. on types to TH1, pathogens to inflammatory receptor their contingent immune cells innate of results sites distinct different This in chemokine recruitment response by TH2, the local chemokines the induced of expression patterns by and patterns that differential TH17 11.9). cells that on expressed site. express into they For CCR5, which mature monocytes inflammatory enter the example, is TH1 also macrophages as tissue same (see by the effector TH1 to Fig. are cells both effector cells same the whose enhance the site and they innate Thus, recruited functions chemokines 11.8). the induced different by has 1 targeted and be ligands CCL4, cellular chemokine pathogens immunity. As (CCL3, case by multiple receptors, CCR5 by for is type sources CCL5, many which CCL8), other different may and by these their the activated following are site. recruitment produced inflammatory to of themselves macrophages Some further This macrophages, activate antigen-dependent provide next which innate the amplified the and by then discuss ‘help’ the feed-forward the TH1 is in contributes emerging to as we which to response then recruitment of cells, provides mechanism a section. also express TH1 and NK is CXCR3, T cytotoxic cells CD8 cells. cells by shared which cells the same Listeria CXCR3 CXCL9 as In CXCL10—these or killing the monocytogenes, to such to response to site targets gens, patho certain viruses. inflammatory cell-mediated and coordinate intracellular are infected recruited by ligands— of

shared with receptors, cells, some myelomonocytic chemokine those TH17 with tissues in display interact inflamed of and patterns inflammatory of which, the they which (see cells are expressed Figs. TH2 by cells TH1 like different and 11.8 11.9). effector effector different the pathogen in response shared and integration represents to Fig. for types by receptors of important expression pattern chemokine of immune adaptive an of and (see cells modules spatiotemporal The mechanism coordination innate 11.8). of the release has Thus, infection at of the local cytokines and chemokines consequences. site far-reaching enter constitutively enable In newly their receptors induced recruiting generated specific circulation, chemokine effector also express monocytes, which complement changes granulocytes to walls to infected vessel while the in lymphocytes tissues. in of addition T and blood an effector further additional immune cell tissue, increase production helper tissue. type–specific in recruited cell further the cell cells cells by the into Once effector that and chemokine T trafficking T innate cytokines in feed-forward innate that results in produce specific T mechanism similarly of of polarization chemokines major ILCs, the are in represents coordinating this of module-specific drive differentially local responses. another early function Because effector production that ILCs pathogen-specific produced by cytokines the

are effector as Pathogen-specific infection enriched at sites adaptive T 11-4 immunity cells progresses. of

only cells specific In pathogen. the of infected adaptive enter effector will response, T of tissues the be early the immune that minority for a stage activation recruit antigenic memory irrespective by appropriate because cell trafficking specificity. circulating or inflammatory local and is can that expresses induces vessels selectins, integrin expression its any of chemokines ligands, This that of cytokines of blood receptors, T effector the of endothelium the retains increases increased cells tissue reaction pathogen-specific the the within of specificity them and T as the rapidly number is inflamed of there. antigen However, recognition of thought secondary it the antigen-activated antigen-activated T same tissue controlling that tissues entirely during Although inflamed retain effector in within cells not lymphoid mechanisms is are the mechanisms naive the understood, T precise effector retention of cells that

Fig. 11.9 expression of is chemokine effector during T cell The differentiation. adhesion altered and receptors

T TH1, system TH2, (T-bet, primary (indicated CD4 immune unique During into specific master TH17 transcription RORγt) cytokines diverging factors or a along to cells GATA3, direct the and cells. arrows) three and immune innate from effector response, derived differentiate naive the T chemokine L-selectin and of and expression receptors. characteristic subset (CD62L) CCR7, express each Effector of lose cells

Fig. become highly TH1 11.10 to activate macrophages cells microbicidal. ligand. to macrophage-activating express is the TH1 peptide specific CD40 contacts macrophage, to T bacterial an an a and for effector secrete the induced cell infected IFN-γ factor When cell the activate macrophage. newly these synthesized Together TH1 proteins

at might be development play. T-cell a for pathway, although signals This may includes participate. the S1P other role chemokine response, T differentiation, recruited several cells pathogen. By of after days the specific peak and a infecting an large of clonal adaptive the immune expansion for of be the will fraction

cognate do T retained Effector antigen enter not but that tissues are their cells recognize there. not return or eventually to bloodstream. to afferent and apoptosis nodes lymph lymphatics undergo either enter the draining the migrate the They locally and the CD45 isoform Thus, effector afferent of L-selectin Fig. and memory cells CD45RO tissues T cell-surface cells, T molecule are express in lack that or characteristically drains the lymph the which (see 11.6). of some in the infection. (see Effector 11-22), trafficking primary similar cells both that cells to be to through, within, have T and Section as retention tissues some migration committed discuss barrier later and seem memory cases, we phenotypes, are and T sites to protecting cells, effector to them allowing memory with reinfection pathogen. against to addition cells to In contribute, same with clear of T migration along infection, of all host pattern the allows sites the this

host through activation classical cells of response the intracellular amplify macrophages. 11-5 and pathogens to coordinate TH1

(see 1 Fig. responses Type mechanisms of and can survive intracellular the protozoan pathogens macrophages—for inside vesicles. evolved bacterial viruses, example, within replicate have and to that for eradication important that survive and 11.5) are those macrophage pathogens that them of case In cytotoxic helping viruses, in activate will cells generally the to TH1 and Chapter is a recognize virus-infected response cells involved T CD8 the (see destroy 9). cells blood fluid. and differentiate antibodies virus IgG that responses particles induce in extracellular type TFH production the of of 1 the subclasses in neutralize that heighten residence TH1 role which protozoa macrophages of and function inside microbicidal case take to (Fig up bacteria Leishmania such such as cells intracellular all Toxoplasma, In to mycobacteria as is the and of and their Salmonella, activate 11.10). the of macrophages,

of types without macrophage the need additional are macrophages from Pathogens often the fluid, for and ingested all destroyed by activation. extracellular are ingested even clinically macrophages incapacitate and them. and a infections, such killed, pathogens are set infection as those not in up important mycobacteria, chronic In several caused by can the microorganisms or to lysosomal inhibiting and maintain preventing the proteases. fusion the and effects required environment activate of hostile from lysosomes, cells—by antibodies shielded phagosomes— to of Such of themselves in T phagosomes both cytotoxic are the by able acidification surface, recognized derived they peptides II are by the displayed can be antigen-specific cells. by Nevertheless, TH1 on microorganisms effector where class from macrophage MHC such molecules enhance either and macrophage’s eliminate cell soluble cytokines defenses stimulated The enable synthesize membrane-associated that and to growth spread. is it the to and antimicrobial its TH1 pathogen the or proteins control result macrophage so-called ‘classical’ or M1, the to which macrophage is as activation, boost is antimicrobial of (Fig. known This mechanisms the classically-activated, 11.11).

activation, cells for classical main both. two signals Macrophages require can and effector deliver TH1 One IFN-γ is CD40L, to respond cytokine the Fig. the other, signal sensitizes the (see macrophage to IFN-γ; 11.10). cells for which M1 in ligand secrete activation. substitute CD40 can TH1 also macrophage lymphotoxin, antimicrobial effector potent a macrophage The M1 cell. is with Phagosomes reactive oxygen microbicidal lysosomes, fuse and and

Fig. the changes by and response. Macrophages TH1 immune 11.11 activated amplify that antimicrobial increase greatly undergo cells their effectiveness

their Activated and TNF receptors, and CD40 macrophages increase secrete to TNF-α. are of expression of stimulated macrophage of secreted induce or cells oxide by activation and with production synergizes the nitric characterized superoxide autocrine classical, (NO) IFN-γ to M1, TH1 by This stimulus (O2–). activation ligand to increases T of molecules macrophage upregulates its the also cells. its II thus molecules The further class CD4 expression in of T cell, CD40 allowing to resting MHC on IFN-γ, binding in and response to B7 response

described generated, Section are as 3-2. nitrogen species in TNF-α, these the through molecules, also activated the through macrophage by When stimulate receptor M1 macrophages LT-α. stimulating macrophages cells TH1 TNFR-I, further same secretes the viability infection that macrophage macrophage. to macrophages setting; the by it 9-28), within of of release seems TNFR-I dissemination apoptosis signalling this the cause and an before maintain leads that results excessive killed lacking not to normally opportunistic required pathogen the to infected be the of in TNF receptor disease, does the pathogen intracellular mice Section in be (see Mycobacterium avium, can in from activate cells MHC proteins presenting molecules. class can produce T CD8 on I derived IFN-γ cytosolic also antigens and macrophages particularly amounts and latter important IFN-γ IFN-γ. when this be primary CD8 can are bacterial T more made be sensitive may Macrophages very of LPS, of source pathway the cells the small also by to

in killing, cells In against to pathogens. intracellular changes response to immune that the other increased induce amplify adaptive macrophages TH1 help intracellular addition the of include (see II class Figs. on receptors These macrophage number molecules, and CD40, changes molecules, an B7 in TNF M1 MHC surface increase the 11.10 more ligand T and making and cells, effective more the CD40 and TNF-α. to at cell presenting to antigen responsive 11.11), TH1 In by cells. ILC1s the amount addition, M1 and which of IL-12, produced macrophages IFN-γ secrete increases also TH1 and Sections differentiation into 9-20 effectors CD8 naive (see cells, the 9-18). and T This activated of promotes cells T into CD4 naive cells effector cytotoxic

Another phagocytic of recruitment infection. cells important of to function of additional the TH1 sites cells is recruit TH1 (Fig. two mechanisms by cells macrophages 11.12). factors growth which the hematopoietic in marrow. new GM-CSF, First, and bone monocytes IL-3 the make they of stimulate production the TNF-α TH1 the that so properties adhere Second, of cells change surface lymphotoxin endothelial monocytes at infection the cells to of sites them. secreted by and at the where infected the migration vascular endothelium differentiate into (see TH1 cells through sites, 3-17). induced monocytes they such direct of and as tissue, macrophages CCL2, are by Chemokines inflammatory which into Section the sites important M1 by are in secreted monocytes themselves and infection. to Cytokines also of macrophages other chemokines recruiting sustains amplifies loop feedback Collectively, pathogen and TH1-mediated positive or responses until type 1 provide is controlled that effects the these a eliminated.

activated including the no of bacteria, escape and vesicles actions and where cytoplasm, to microbicidal the monocytogenes, are Listeria Certain macrophages. from phagocytic some intravesicular mycobacteria enter susceptible they longer cytotoxic presence by T however, cells. can, detected be Their CD8 phagocytosed by these when pathogens The in antibody-mediated freshly macrophages be recruited macrophages. CTLs the extracellular can released by killed be can by or killed environment mechanisms, are CTLs, play TH1 an of this provision TH1-mediated may responses. the In coordinating of IL-2, development the the in as and CTL of important role the ‘help’ provision such circumstance, for

Fig. is to of bacteria release differrentiation The response intracellular the and 11.12 other immune potentiates cytokines. activated IL-3 by TH1 cells. coordinated cytokines and that cells bone the in the production macrophages synthesis monocytes in stimulate on marrow. by hematopoietic GM-CSF by of stem cells of results The of the infected acting activation new TH1 macrophages to coordinate actions the secreted response immune induce site by of macrophage are of intracellular New recruited pathogens. M1 the the and infection to both engulfed to allows and which LT-α, endothelium, other which it and the synergize ligand TNF-α, on pathogens. activating cytokines vascular CD40 in kill IFN-γ macrophage, enter monocytes macrophages. lose they tissues to ability infected the signal macrophages and to where Chronically the the bloodstream become leave intracellular kill (CCL2) to into activity kill ligand the with these monocyte or infection Fas can bacteria, and chemokine there. signals TH1 migrate LT-β engulfed A cell macrophages, of the releasing and monocytes sites by accumulate produced membrane-bound chemotactic fresh taken cell killed coordinates TH1 the bacteria, and by macrophages. up Thus, are which highly LT-β a of destroying the intracellular infectious agents. response that is In effective removal synergize in way, this IFN-γ intracellular and in macrophage bacteria. tightly IL-2 be macrophages by produced cells regulated 11-6 augments tissue damage. to TH1 of must effector avoid cells T-cell TH1 by Activation

cells molecules formation cytokines requirement functions for of efficient secretion Chapter co-stimulation, discussed also features synapse effector are cell in effector through or of 9-25). an the Section expression for cell-surface and of antigen-bearing immunological As and molecules—often delivery of with T antigen-induced without their (see activation effector capacity of through polarized distinguishing 9, their an effector requires expressed After recognizes cognate hours. the secretion antigen by of molecules cell macrophage, its TH1 a several a therefore T far cells target than to must adhere cytotoxic do TH1 CD8 their cells. cells longer cell there of Fig. becomes the and the macrophage synthesized TH1 of oriented toward the are cytokines secretory secreted with to the contact Similarly cells, (see machinery site newly cytotoxic T 9.38). the be contact delivered also CD40 to site. seems ligand same to antigen far that although macrophage macrophages. for to to have IFN-γ, likely receptors infected the macrophages presents the activated So more uninfected nearby TH1 than cell is become all

induction In play an antigen-specific in injury. macrophages, infected of to role addition signals macrophage limiting efficiently tissue on important activation focusing more the activating may infected tissue: inflamed to TH1 oxygen as result to components normal well through toxic might NO, proteases host otherwise pathogen for are to ‘collateral radicals, cells destruction. that only targeting that minimize as cells MHC:peptide is recognition, By the macrophages of targeted damage’ the that and activation tissue to a damage. cells TH1 local powerful this minimizing by maximum Thus, antigen-specific deploying means is while defensive effect mechanism macrophage of are activation. that of for In infected also on the it producers although lack receptors cytokine more macrophages can antigen IFN-γ, is efficient focus that they regard, ILC1s notable this ILC1 IFN-γ to but play onto cells they the direct mechanisms with inflammatory more the in known they other a local whether in macrophage produce limited important yet It macrophages, IFN-γ not enhancing response. or activation, which indirectly role is have is whether

pathogens formation to cells cleared. of TH1 intracellular 11-7 the of mediates macrophages that activation granulomas be Chronic cannot contain by

a notably by incompletely eliminated of most the that macrophages pathogens, activated resistant intracellular 1 sufficiently effects they microbicidal are Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Some are type response. to that response TH1 gives infection and spread. prevent This low-level pathogen proliferation an requires to ongoing to rise chronic, macrophages a activated macrophages granuloma, underlies between reaction the central held and this immunological which in area within coordination by chronic in of In formation the lymphocytes cells are circumstance, (Fig. check TH1 of microbes the surrounded called 11.13). activated border found which have the can activity. giant of heightened that cells, multinucleated to of macrophages of form macrophages the feature central characteristic is at lymphocytes the focus be which antimicrobial the surround and to of several them granulomas fusion appear and A ‘wall destruction. resist to serves granuloma that off’ pathogens A activated lack and of of cytotoxic In can combination there and from tuberculosis, effects oxygen large probably of centers of the the granulomas cells a become the isolated die, macrophages. the process center dead is this necrosis. tissue the resembles called ‘caseous’ in As cheese, cells chronic of cause TH1 activation significant can pathology. the Thus, to infection. the with frequently concomitant death AIDS absence infection, the however, more disseminated and is leads from serious in The TH1 consequence which of mycobacterial response, now patients seen of

1 immunity pathogens. reveal in in 11-8 important the of its intracellular elimination type Defects role

gene Leishmania is whose gene sublethal succumb Mycobacterium, impaired; has CD40 by for IFN-γor animals consequently, ligand activation classical macrophage species. mice targeting, deleted doses been In Salmonella, the to and of vaccinia crucial virus. activation also in is (M1) controlling macrophage Classical that cells the synthesized Fig. the by TH1 macrophage TH1 probably in and to are important immune secreted be other by However, cytokines effector most (see vesicles crucial is molecules may and ligand CD40 also complex, pathogens IFN-γ proliferate although response cells, 11.12).

are of lead CD4 that TH1 cleared HIV/AIDS the to The responses macrophages. normally microbes T that causes people dissemination with depletion of in cells by can ineffective case Chapter This jirovecii 13). fungal pathogen opportunist the Pneumocystis also is the with (see of P. by by intracellular healthy killing phagocytosis macrophages. and of kept alveolar people are jirovecii clear lungs The is, AIDS. cause people Pneumonia death of jirovecii P. a however, by frequent with caused in intracellular macrophages cells, and the the phagocytosis are killing of lung In jirovecii of CD4 by T and absence P. impaired,

giant IFN-˜Partial live T cells TH1 of mycobacteria tuberculosis cell Granuloma cell multi-nucleated epithelioid M. removal

Fig. cannot an eliminated. when or be pathogen Granulomas its form completely intracellular 11.13 constituents characteristic localized a of the inflammatory resist granuloma mycobacteria response effects called a activation, macrophage When (red) develops. of of a macrophages. consists infected This central core mycobacteria by fused macrophages cells, called but multinucleate often giant in by caused core cells, usually necrotic. core include which becomes the are large The may granulomas macrophages, surrounded epithelioid can of granuloma. cells the in Mycobacteria persist the by CD4-positive. many core The central surrounded which is T of are cells, balance achieved, is down, and unknown. it this The by which breaks how mechanisms are exact a infection. form the panel, in as may caused Granulomas, in elsewhere known which by disease bottom and as seen sarcoidosis, the mycobacterial inapparent lungs in also be J. courtesy Orrell. of Photograph

in Panel embedded parasite Trichuris that the intestinal a: is whipworm lives trichiura cells. a epithelial partly helminth mouse electron parasite an the epithelial cell and of micrograph its This scanning buried colon of the shows in in lumen. posterior the free head lying shows a of mouse of epithelium. T. the production the with cells the mucus b: cross-section by intestinal increased of infected Panel colon a in goblet trichiura from crypts markedly in droplets stains vesicles goblet mucus and with cells the acid–Schiff as large blue dark inside seen is reagent. periodic The ×400. Magnification

colonizes tissue. pathogen invades and the the lung lung of surface epithelium macrophage-activating CD4 least by cells in part, The for requirement cytokines cells. requirement IFN-γ a to for due, to produced TNF-α T at be the and TH1 seems

type coordinate helminths to expel 11-9 TH2 2 repair injury. tissue intestinal and responses cells

flatworms—tapeworms immunity two types against (trematodes). and and 2 (cestodes) of roundworms Type helminths: parasitic (nematodes) flukes is directed which Unlike replicate helminths sheer pathogens, overwhelm microbial host fungi, numbers, in host. replicate most protozoa), and viruses, mammalian defenses rapidly by ‘micropathogens’ (bacteria, not their or and can do size mm over very large—ranging for engulfed helminths from Moreover, approximately to host require that multicellular; defense. in host 1 strategies metazoan cells, are be they are are 1 far therefore phagocytic meter—to and different ‘macropathogens’ too by 11.14). all by are the intestines virtually colonized world, humans and helminth animals developing parasites (Fig. In the of Many although the burden, resulting generation response, may host disease. completely an but of is 2 response of in be these in type clearing rapidly parasite, worm reducing often in not the infections effective by successful chronic the cleared injury. expel for with to the circumstances, it, causes disease by and nutrients, by causing persists attempts long or these the host’s parasite local despite periods for competing the In tissue host

adaptive of Irrespective helminth TH2 involved, entry, response host the is by orchestrated cells of the host of or site (Fig. type its 11.15; see Fig. also 9.30). and different on is The of the TH2 ILC2 products epithelial of cells. by actions cells, cells: cells, worm response mast innate induced variety cells, dendritic a cells Dendritic cells development naive of cells helminth favor cytokines, which as and that CD4 of innate the differentiation. presentation to repress TH2 activated to of by required dendritic TH1and TSLP, cells cell produced epithelium-derived be cells for dendritic the T promote appear ILC2 antigens TH17-inducing in such by IL-13 redundant. source to and be of differentiation for The the required initial TH2 IL-4 context-specific appears cell cell iNKT cells, several to none the proven Thus, cells, be as these types mast of been basophils, have although source, proposed and has essential. been including

lymphoid cells—eosinophils, the development of draining they tissue tissues helminth type sites mast recruitment and of circulating 2 to in their by cells where invasion, is followed exodus innate cells, basophils, effector macrophages. and TH2 function of enhance The guiding complement (see cells ongoing cells, cells effector express innate with thus chemokine TH2 of a they interact, TH17 responses receptors 2 is shared type with Figs. to circulating Like that them TH1 sites distinct of the which and selectively and 11.9). 11.8 and a by is activated by prostaglandin eosinophils mast which by produced as and is cells. expressed that is CCR4 tissue CRTH2, for and TH2 CCR3 lipid mediator D2, are ligand the basophils, cells both for (for Ligands CCL26) induced by are and the produced CCL11, example, and helminth IL-13 eotaxins and infection multiple CCR3 tissue innate CCL24, signaling. immune of in IL-4 are by sites cells can Hence, basophils amplify cells, network. TH2 and of cells ILC2 cells, and through the this chemokine type 2 other recruitment each eosinophils

the enhancing invade direct tissue response a 2 cytokines. killing the effector some are TH2 focus the of the is of host—functions cell worms type coordinate the both limiting worms they cause the when that they can functions, major antihelminth response by and innate damage mediated Although expelling by effector mucus cells for the in IL-13 of and goblet tissues cells hypermotility, enhances in mucosa activates (see Fig. of by and epithelial the production the directly migration smooth turnover muscle cells, increases mucosal 11.15, first panel). the of worm have of is infestation, most area parasites and that critical as to the these surface In a of the the are attached epithelium decreases host intestines, each colonization. available to eliminate response, actions component site the it helps common for which

TH2 in concert to antibody, by that with TFH Section of IL-4-producing cells IgE response high (see 9-20). generates develop induced helminths cells levels The mast arms expressed which IgE them and to for and eosinophils, by Fcεreceptors antigen-specific activation. cells, basophils, recognition binds 2 engages IgG1, which adaptive in also and type responses macrophages them of the promote 2 Type production by recognized is response. macrophages). (also the alternatively by and of IL-4 produced called TH2 macrophages also activated result differentiation IL-13 cells in M2 after which differentiate are (see macrophages, classically M1 activators potent interaction TH1 Fig. Unlike with activated, of inflammation and cells 11.10), promote expulsion, remodeling worm killing repair Fig. and also in (see and and macrophages participate M2 tissue 11.15). their arginine between macrophages metabolism and is products. produce A M2 different to difference of M1 antipathogen major Section the arginine. and potent express produces (see from M2 which express proline nitric intracellular which (NO) arginase-1, 3-2), macrophages produces M1 microbicide iNOS, oxide Whereas ornithine macrophages tissue promotes Fig. Along the with ornithine other remodeling and increases muscle (see contractility of mucosal factors, repair smooth and 11.15). has mechanism been be Through certain is IgG-coated that larvae directly a helminths. to also toxic unclear, found to of ornithine ingested eosinophils of (ADCC) large are helminths worm macrophages, macrophages, onto targeted attack that extracellular invaded well by to mediators cell-mediated below), (see pathogens. enables toxic by directly too tissues the to these have be the cytotoxicity release as as antibody-dependent large Because

damage appear invading migrate tissues. Macrophages tissue to caused worms off important be as through worms, cells by host activated walling well also as repairing as in TH2 which macrophages proline dependent arginase-1 in production, M2 activity. is that by collagen include are remodeling and of on tissue stimulation generated These repair’ of requires formation factors the secreted functions of important ‘tissue entrap induce of also macrophages tissues. that larvae can worm the TH2-activated Moreover, in granulomas formation function has macrophage responses. In type activation TH2 cells antigen-specific regard, in 2 this by non-redundant M2 to this cells, macrophage promote IL-13, ILC2 may sustain and cells, are activation response. innate via they unable Although effector antihelminth TH2 activation macrophages of impaired mice, in of considerably in models alternative cells. infection, responses requires several Thus, that are worm RAG-deficient sustained or T-cell-depleted demonstrating

cells and (see cells and TH2 produced by ILC2 activates IL-5 eosinophils Fig. The recruits granules, cytotoxic protein by releasing such toxic stored effects basic molecules secretory major as 11.15), worms direct their on in (MBP). have which and that Fig. with Fc against ADCC IgE, mediate can to receptors addition for In for IgG (see receptors them arm degranulation Fcε parasites IgGcoated eosinophils bear 10.38). stimulation Fcα by also degranulate response receptor the They in and express (CD89) to secretory IgA.

activate (see mucosal IL-3 and cells a mast known mucosae IL-9 population produced specialized in cells and recruit, cells the as expand, mast of TH2 by Fig. 11.15). mucosal also mast cells in a activate to IL-33 early helminths. The and cytokines response innate IL-25 and receptors by tissues producing having histamine. their very differ in from of counterparts IgE little Mucosal numbers other cells mast only small into When tight inflammatory mucosal junctions (MMCP-1), fluid proteases, mast and including permeability leukotrienes, antigens protease IgE, mucosal secretory are prostaglandins, stored of the increase lumen. or that flow which binding the and granules: the can cells large by of cytokines, worm epithelial mediators to preformed degrade release activated amounts several by in receptor-bound mast cell mucosal to the increase parasites to the from leukocyte intestinal induce goblet stimulate permeability, sweep’ motility, and mediators of ‘weep helps epithelial mucus and all increase expel Together, the response of vascular contribute to that by production cells, which the and recruitment, host. the mast-cell-derived

responses enhance bacteria 3 cells of TH17 to clearance the and type 11-10 fungi. coordinate extracellular

infection generated and effector bacteria T fungi by of to TH17. in subset is cells The extracellular response in are mucosa, host the to intestinal bacteria deployed cells mutualistic is intestinal they and microbiota—which the of the homeostasis, relationship At and almost extracellular between exclusively where some TH17 composed the contribute fungi. also critical as sites, are result function barrier when may enter as host and well infection. the epithelial pathogenic fungi they of whether of trauma defense is against the bacteria at extracellular for components microbiota the pathogenic or that that However, invade normal compromised, as barrier type cell. principal function a effector cells which of TH17 innate type are of the of orchestration in neutrophils the principal In responses, settings, 3 is these

is pro-inflammatory cells As discussed development TGF-β combined (see the induced the 9, of cytokines IL-1, Fig. IL-6, the by and in of TH17 and Chapter actions IL-23 9.31). is by or produced conventional β-glucan TLR5; polymers yeast recognized fungi, by of extracellular bacteria, fungi MAMPs is expressed by by preferentially latter by and that by as glucose such MAMPs CD103+CD11b+ Dectin-1. recognize such are as flagellin, dendritic produced that which recognized The produced cells for (see and lymphoid TH2 of and ILC3 altered TH17 is activated well of is CCR6, from cells, which induction As produced tissues tissues skin, cells epithelial secondary themselves and with mucosal expression: for TH17 (CCL20) the associated cells as in by ligand Figs. the TH1 cells chemokine cells as primarily egress the and 11.8 11.9).

IL-17F antigen they TH17 (Fig. sites release encounter cells and at are stimulated when of to IL-17A infection 11.16). recruitment the of A cytokines neutrophils. primary is effect enhanced and these of production The for receptor

peptides inhibition epithelial cell induce increases epithelial to peptides produced TH17 by of colonization attached production growth produced IL-22 shedding IL-17 cells cells killing TH17 Direct the by and IL-22 the IL-22 epithelium IL-22 bacterial division of cell IL-17 turnover and TH17 antimicrobial bacteria epithelial by impairs or antimicrobial Increased turnover

Fig. by that to some stromal produce activate cells. and to extracellular is response cells activated coordinated local 11.16 fungi bacteria and immune epithelial cytokines The TH17 coordinate types extracellular to some cells and and response macrophages the by dendritic antigen-bearing activated cells bacteria immune fungi. TH17 of (e.g., barrier skin) tissues mucosa, and respiratory or in intestinal

stromal cells G-CSF, to produce in myeloid activates which produced stimulates myeloid cells stromal cells TH17 cell bone neutrophil marrow G-CSF bone production marrow by IL-17 and neutrophil IL-17IL-17 production cell

to innate of short-lived supply Increases numbers at site infection of sustain circulating neutrophils effectors

Fig. do IL-23 as IL-12 receptors. a cytokines 11.17 in have their common, The and component the IL-12Rβ1 binds have IL-12 for IL-23 both subunit, receptors the contain IL-23 the subunit and heterodimeric which The in common, cytokines and IL-12 subunit. p40 the and p40 the STAT4, activates IL-12 activator which IFN-γ primarily production. transcriptional increases signaling STAT4 STAT3, weakly IL-23 (not shown). but activates primarily also activates of and IL-23R, the but express TH1 for shown). express express them; Both can of CD4 augment (not IL-12R, activity levels express primarily and cytokines also cells the that TH17 receptors IL-12R proliferation cells subsets low of and manifest these p40 activities. in result both expression in Mice deficient TH1 and of a as cytokines, deficiencies lack TH17 immune of both defects

keratinocytes. fibroblasts, on expressed IL-17F and such cells and widely cells, as is IL-17A epithelial cells factor (G-CSF), IL-6, the including granulocyte amplifies induces response, factor secrete and to various by production IL-17 increases TH17 bone neutrophils marrow. the colony-stimulating cytokines, hematopoietic of the these which which the by (see for expressed and uniquely CXCL8 the IL-17 of Fig. also CXCL2, and stimulates (CXCR1 neutrophils which CXCR2) receptors production are the chemokines 11.8). action infection IL-17 Thus, at chemokines of is to attract local that cytokines of and induce secrete neutrophils. to sites one important cells

IL-10 family also epithelial (see IL-22, cells the acts antimicrobial with expression member of by cooperatively Fig. TH17 cells induce of a to that produce the IL-17 proteins 11.16). lectins RegIIIβ and the Section 2-4). and kill directly β-defensins C-type bacteria all which (see RegIIIγ, These can of include proteins and metal-binding IL-22 and bacteriostatic induce are fungistatic. epithelial cells to can produce IL-17 that also manganese to which from microbes. bacterial limits antimicrobial and antimicrobial zinc calprotectin, that and S100A8 are heterodimerize S100A9 two form availability the iron Lipocalin-2 peptides to pathogens; protein sequesters of antimicrobial to produced site third a has the up infection; calprotectin to Many neutrophils. these been to neutrophils also of reported cytosolic comprise are of recruited agents protein the of by proliferation surfaces. to of as of for a cells fungi a epithelial deprive shedding and stimulates colonization bacteria epithelial and ‘foothold’ also at mechanism the IL-22 production of IL-22 tissues sustain to While and TH17 produce barrier pathogens pathogen-specific shown cells have of to been at infection. IL-22, cells ILC3 sites in amplify respond rapidly to the

large destruction and and effector and response in that 2 the type the in for by adaptive part integration of neutrophils, type complement. mediated of production pathogen-specific cells macrophages, 1 opsonize responses, 3 bacteria extracellular antibodies is by and type innate As in fungi sites IgA and plasma cells develop infections to type can and pneumoniae. express 3 bacteria primary arm localize reactants thereby promote of the such neutrophils by and clear principal that Staphylococcus responses, where IgG responses are that TFH tissues, barrier that can they TH17 with the cells aureus that production CCR6 Streptococcus ‘on-site.’ Antibodies elicit and extracellular type in high-affinity coordinately by 3 common immune cells as macrophages antibodies of

effector T Differentiated continue carry out as they their cells to functions. effector signals 11-11 respond to

in occurs cells as to commitment peripheral of of effector lymphoid T lymph nodes. cells tissues, such lineages CD4 The distinct received tissues. activities the in defined simply not the these signals are lymphoid cells effector However, by the of sites the and there of is suggests in infection. the differentiated effector that expansion CD4 enter TH17 cells, cells, they regulation activities TH1 of particular and of continuous those of once Evidence

to IFN-γ. triggered cells to commitment in cells become exposure TGF-β become by to initially noted TH17 triggered is TH1 cells Chapter of T is and 9, IL-6; commitment naive by As These initial effective responses. generate TH17 or to sufficient TH1 are however, conditions complete not, or by the stimulation of also and the requires cells. case subset T-cell TH17 IL-23 IL-12 TH17 of cells, In in each another case addition, in cytokine: a closely and are in structure; have (Fig. related is and in a IL-12 common subunit IL-23 heterodimer each they 11.17). the p40) (IL-23 subunit composed and p35 p35) is (IL-12 p19 one of unique a p40) p40 IL-23 and p19) one IL-12 whereas (IL-12 p40 has (IL-12 subunit. subunit, express IL-23, IL-12. the below, low be TH17 and, receptor for receptor of levels will for as cells a Committed discussed IL-12. TH1 cells for express the receptor IL-23 IL-12 are and The related. for receptors also IL-12Rβ1, subunit, expressed is cells. by They T common a have which naive the of receipt heterodimer; signals, of differentiating TH17 developing IL-23R, component cytokine mature inducible cells IL-23 Upon synthesize receptor the

cured from L. major major cells Rag2– transferred infection with or which with mice mice, L. IL-12 TH1 p40–defcient are into of are injected then

component IL-12Rβ2, synthesize IL-12 the TH1 inducible the of receptor. cells mature

and of respectively. IL-12 amplify activities cells, IL-23 the TH1 and TH17 Fig. act JAK–STAT (see many both they the intracellular other through signaling cytokines, pathway Like 9.32). activates STAT3, primarily but also activator signaling intracellular STAT4. IL-23 the transcriptional activates activation with STAT3. STAT4, IL-12 activates strongly minimal of contrast, In naive commitment cells initiate cells, their T of does the contributes but to it does become their expansion not CD4 IL-23 stimulate maintenance. TH17 to and IL-23. of on Many in depend responses absence the that IL-17 vivo in are diminished in lacking IL-17F the p19 Klebsiella the lung and subunit IL-17A of after IL-23-specific mice decreased For pneumoniae. example, production by show infection

cells TH1 effector regulates infection. committed at of IL-12 the sites of activity continuous required. and that sufficient TH1 initial shown protection, is have Studies different of that differentiation signals not of two for cells are pathogens the gondii Mice initial by resist is deficient long as continuously. IL-12 p40 infection as IL-12 can administered in Toxoplasma If containing characterized during mice by latent 2 IL-12 initial infection, establish the infection cysts administered chronic survive the weeks the and first a pathogen. infection is p40-deficient of these reactivate eventually mice the die stopped, latent however, cysts animals encephalitis. toxoplasmic of gradually IL-12 the administration When is and can but production IL-12 pathogen-specific T be absence cells IFN-γ by of by IL-12 restored the decreases in administration. the from major major, Similarly, mice protects adoptive but of by of Leishmania differentiated transfer RAG-deficient p40-deficient mice (Fig. L. infected mice cured cannot IL-12 cells TH1 protect 11.18). cells least some at of to these the IL-12 differentiated against to during continuous continue infection, signals experiments an effectiveness needed TH1 that is respond that cells Together, and TH1 to indicate pathogens. sustain

release activated T to antigen of can recognition. be Effector 11-12 cells cytokines independently

requirement have mature the in a induce their central As lymphocytes the antigen cognate we for adaptive naive by seen, differentiation paradigm immunity effector receptors cells. into recognition to is of cells T-cell recognition ability acquire be the cytokines, also pairs by However, by of independently of to effector antigen receptor. T their activated pairs to this as cytokine subset that each the parallels same differentiated cells activate ‘noncognate’ the appear mediate that (Fig. T-cell function effector The subset of be that those ILC 11.19). pair cytokine that one via member receptor a receptor that activates of activates via includes signals a that that in case, a one IL-1 receptor signals each factor, NFκB—typically family. stimulating of the And STAT cytokines and the a of and induces both for IL-18 IL-12 Thus, cells by stimulation ILC1 TH1 (STAT4) plus cells, production IFN-γ. plus produce and (STAT5) by of cells ILC2 cells IL-5 produces plus TH2 by stimulation stimulated Similarly, IL-13, IL-1 and and ILC3 IL-22. IL-33 IL-17 TSLP TH17 IL-23 and both and (STAT3) immune functional of them cells effector amplify for CD4 different innate-like that to In responses requirement without properties mature acquire antigen allow this recognition. types way, T the inflammasome in 1 IL-1, family cells. type produced IL-1 involved activation by case cells, in that myeloid 3 respectively) the of and (IL-18 member Note and type is the IL-33, Conversely,

but lacking subunit cells growth progressive parasite of Rag2-defcient the the show TH1 mice mice, protect IL-12 p40

Fig. resistance necessary for to is requiring TH1 IL-12 11.18 responses. pathogens Continuous IL-12, to produce major source B and Rag2-deficient IL-12 were which cells L. which can cells of or into T and adoptively lack mice, infection Leishmania pathogen IL-12. major have have an T that as that used cells generated lacking with transferred and either Mice mice were a control TH1 cannot cannot specific produce into the cells but eliminated p40, infection lesions the transferred not of because cells conferred immunity. On the infection mice, subsequent TH1 did enlarge Rag2-deficient IL-12 were But differentiated to TH1 already confer they TH1 fact that function. lacked mice, the despite not a transferred support cells, source to the p40-deficient which did IL-12 of cells resistance

Fig. independently release cells activated to T can recognition. be Effector cytokines 11.19 antigen of

cells receptor stimulated to via T the actions Analogous of ILCs, cytokines to cytokines. produce of coordinate effector of signaling pairs be T-cell can independently effector

by basis the is type 2 2 between or another which type 1 indicating and responses, type immune type 3 counterregulation inflammasome, responses. for inactivated activates of by (see recall, be may rapidly provide clearly in memory, effector cells Section is cytokines the defined, noncognate of a recruited cells not tissue-resident T or activation by responses role memory 11-22). mechanism Although which it could precise T

demonstrate enable cooperativity adaptation anti-pathogen cells during that and T 11-13 plasticity Effector responses.

is CD4 subsets as intrinsically Thus they unchanging far discussed development. have of such their their that we cells T after are phenotype though stable, functional effector immunity as is of one are unimodal, have different they given only discussed though to type Similarly, we response pathogen. of that the is, recruited types clear a not the it always often so. is Although is case, this can these pathogens. adapt modify the cells to as T Just too can evade destruction, tactics clear so of the pathogens host elicited in the their order to effector on contingent individual T local in changes inflammatory referred occur Adaptation wherein flexibility in environment. the plasticity, transition different T by to as cells T-cell can into programming cells, can effector of the phenotypes cytokine subsets can cells. occur result as cooperation of a It between different T of also develop applies applies antigenic of antigens, that clonal clonal from typically specificity, cells of different cells to Plasticity same cooperation whereas different precursors origin different an at identical and to infection. and stages the target

subsets, 3 responses. Although it has of major plasticity some each the CD4 of experimentally be demonstrated prevalent in type degree appears for been effector most to or TH1-type cells is TH17 deviate, for ‘reprogrammed,’ be common to into It cells (Fig. 11.20). expression reporter identified the and controlled which TH17 by could isolated Il17f gene. in cell-associated mice, molecule discovered on IL-17F cytokine a that was express their be using reporter based This of originally cells When progeny in cytokine TH17 isolated restimulated the IL-12, and expression of were IL-17 IFN-γ. expression using the acquired TH1-polarizing of presence lost rapidly cells the their reporter of to with the acquired cells that of TH17 TH1 TH17 lineage features restimulation Moreover, of progeny cells. subset lead repetitive of a also IL-23 cytokine could T-bet cells activation both of TH17 receptors. TH1 factor transcription both and cases, the cells the into of RORγt, of were required which loss IL-12 on TH17-associated IL-23 factor expression STAT4 reprogramming TH1-associated and the by of of transcription In contingent plasticity.’ failed TH1 transition into cell STAT4 for or ‘TH17 either to T-bet cells, Thus, cells TH17 demonstrate deficient or

between activated obligate effector pathogens, subsets T-cell that intracellular of in which, is importance found macrophages also survive Salmonella, are have within the bacterial as evolved cooperativity protection An by not such of IFN-γ. against unlike facultative example plasticity host bacteria, extracellular to mechanisms and the colonize pathogens. Salmonella infection, Early to epithelium in similarly can intestinal other Gram-negative enteric and bacteria restrain in period, bacterial TH17 dominates, that in resulting that a of extracellular antimicrobial robust engulf release lumen. growth influx During IL-22induced of IL-17induced proteins a the intestinal response this neutrophils of to of appears are much During intestinal T-cell TLR5. response antigenic bacterial which be activators flagellins, against within epitopes of directed infection, this the potent phase of thereby expression by cells and induces innate immune this CD11b+ classical intestine, sensor promotes Activation type dendritic response. a in the IL-23 3 plasticity. may arise also cell during TH1cells phase from a and intestinal infection, the result as emerge precursors Flagellin-specific of TH17 of early To these within of by activated by the proteins, begins macrophages. as intracellular macrophages killing suppress ‘ex-TH17’ to intracellular for SseI and destruction and such new escape downregulates cells, it Salmonella SseJ, expression allow TH1 flagellin simultaneously killing that synthesizing as killing—at cells it from a spreads by and use evade to This safe macrophage allows flagellin-specific both extracellular the least infection detection Salmonella haven T host the systemically. temporarily—as shield to

that those systemic the of shifts response pathogen. phase on antigens of T-cell the the intracellular During lifestyle focused the the become enable to infection, classical these CD8α+ activate and cells, response. to Some a cells antigens sensors to pathogen-specific within type of IL-12 cytosolic expressed newly 1 appear TH1 activate produce which dendritic these activation The directed pathogen be cleared can against newly by now macrophage expressed antigens. TH1-induced of is bacterium extracellular the deprived to a that for sets both for the type from of requires antigens immunity 1 its lifestyles, different and is response and anti-pathogen and niche its the 3 includes cleared Salmonella intracellular survival now host. type Because

critical many types is for of Integration protection antibody-mediated pathogens. of immunity against celland 11-14

protection the T strategy infectious required pathogen. effector antibody lifestyle depends or the of and type host on The cell for of important the Chapter the infection. are cells in of a in in T some learned class they we blood and are lymphocytes in viral present diseases 9, cells, As predominant virus-infected during cytotoxic destroying primary viruses from infection essential. antibodies preventing body and from role be another clearing Nevertheless, establishing of them the in the can fever but patients and again. asymptomatic infected are virus lethal if a hemorrhagic most the one and is who Ebola they do survive viruses causes become protected known, of response In rapid the for infection, initial and antiviral the against essential a survival. recurrent IgG is both strong, virus T the cytotoxic time virus The patient to clears bloodstream cells. and from activate the the response gives antibody to does cells, progresses. of replicate, antibody not and in T disease response activation virus though even occur that fatal; continues there This the infections the is prove

killing cells from the of (the as intracellular Cytotoxic pathogens, avoid causative for can of vesicles activated typhus) with or Rickettsia which are also Listeria, agent bacterial T the to infected required phagocytic some of escape cells such mechanisms destruction macrophages. resist are In which infected macrophage check macrophages activate inside by TH1 which kill bacteria. live contrast, cells, the can mycobacteria, vesicles, mainly to kept killing in phagolysosomal and and can important reinfection. induced to pathogen released organisms phagocytes, killing in these to in are dying Nevertheless, from resistance infections are contribute when antibodies and are

many immunity from of infections cases that an is prevent vaccines mediated antibodies establishing by inducing infection, neutralizing by most work acute primarily the efficient most viral can established pathogens and In childhood protective protective the against antibodies. unless spreading is for example, preexisting and immunity within neutralized from body. rapidly them virus, prevented destroys the motor by because infects virus immediately Effective the requires it against polio antibody antibody, and neurons neutralizes the specific tissues. In enters before mucosal IgA virus it also surfaces on epithelial the polio, the not that primary elimination (IgA involve the effector mechanisms can of do infection. operate case) in Thus, in this protective immunity

Fig. CD4+ subsets. 11.20 Plasticity of T-cell of cells. is hierarchy effector stability regulatory T There CD4 of and a cell resistant effector that ‘ground other relatively TH1 multipotent, and is, phenotypes. at Naive T or be cells appear CD4+ state’; are whereas to stable, are highly TH2 into to they transitioning cells cells prevailing other are cytokines. on and subsets and TH17 cells can into stable, depending less transition iT IL-6 IL-1, acted acted on become iT on can TH1 when When into by cells cells, by TH17 IL-12 transition cells. and can or by IL-12 acted into cells TH17 TH1 cells. on can transition to irreversible. and cells, the TH17 of into TH1 appear or cells cells iT transitions into cells, Notably, TH17 be unidirectional, of the IL-12; to the and Developing TH2 repress iTreg, IL-12. responsive to (right) and subsets expression cells unresponsive inducible TH17, TH1 are of component IL-12 (left) receptor remain (IL-12Rβ)

T-cell in help. Primary 11-15 the of T-cell to responses occur CD4 absence pathogens CD8 can

cells help CD8 deficient are of from T-cell 9-19). Many (see CD4 the responses in Section T absence activity antigen-presenting activate is the to such 9-10). stimulate been cell to able T-cell CD4 of required to circumstances, them as help described has (see In become licensing response, a Section cells complete T-cell CD8 an dendritic for that and naive molecules involves the of cell, (see 4-1BBL deliver T then CD40, such signals Fig. induction can Licensing activate on as that dendritic cells fully CD8 B7, the which co-stimulatory 9.29). the requirement against T by immune provides by a autoimmunity. of and recognition useful dual which an enforces antigen for safeguard both cells, CD4 a Licensing CD8 system between and cells (see Dual generation in also T Chapter cooperation cells the seen recognition 10). antibody is for B help. all require such not However, CD8 responses T-cell

(Fig. pseudomallei, license directly induce Listeria T-cell dendritic such be cells for agents, CD8 to bacterium intracellular as and appear primary Gram-positive Burkholderia Gram-negative monocytogenes Some responses help 11.21). requirement the to bacterium T-cell to able infectious the without CD4 in 11-23). deficient were T that L. class Section responses were CD8 and (see CD4 examined molecules mice II thus to monocytogenes lacked genetically in MHC T-cell Primary cells the tetrameric particular by T of on Appendix using which of antigenic identify receptors. the CD8 cells specific by cells T-cell were can basis CD4 Section expressed or the for measured or A-24), tetramers complexes, numbers antigen of peptide:MHC pathogen (see CD8 specificity their peptide:MHC The I, a T cells T equivalent showed day 7 and infection, mice expansion, wild-type of and mice CD4 On lacking

Fig. 11.21 cells directly through CD8 cells activated can be through action the antigen-presenting by T-cell or T their of cytokines. receptor Naive potent result on the (upper cells pathogens response, surface dendritic naive CD8 complexes into environment to some the eventually proliferate inflammatory panel) high by CD8 peptide:MHC cytotoxic of in (lower left as panel). Left cells left that differentiating cells levels I T co-stimulatory T a are of class encounter produced of molecules activated panels: expressing whose IL-12 panels: combined CD8 T (upper cytokines on effect of dendritic panel). cells activated production induces IFN-γ right cells the and also rapidly IL-18, the Right produce other activates macrophages antiviral the intracellular can panel). promote right in This responses cells destruction and bacteria (lower of for

equivalent pathogen-specific cytotoxic cells. of T capacity, CD8 Mice CD4 effectively by lacking cleared T mice. as cells infection wild-type L. as monocytogenes initial the pathogen-specific CD8 T-cell without T that help. protective responses show can CD4 experiments be clearly by generated These cells will response and diminished later, the see However, as different is we absence the help. of in is CD4 memory CD8 the T-cell of nature

undergo IFN-γ can cells during by also T IL-18 ‘bystander’ Fig. very and IL-12 activation to produce (see Naive CD8 early infection 11.21). with infected Mice

B. response, rapidly strong a monocytogenes which essential or for produce L. their survival. pseudomallei IFN-γ is T within to cells, which be secrete IFN-γ begin to seems CD8 it both few hours of first after the naive and this source infection. cells The NK too cells, believed significant initially of be which to would rare contribute be CD8 pathogen-specific an in any antigen-specific soon expansion is to too manner. for T This time and these cytokines IFN-γ blocked CD8 NK cells production at both IL-12 The responsible. suggesting IL-18, against T experimentally and that early by are be by antibodies this can of T contribute These innate of can naive defense, cells, that requiring kind CD8 experiments infection. CD4 early to one indicate signals in in cells of nonspecifically response T not a

memory infection 11-16 by generation of cells effector of the and most is of the Resolution accompanied the of an cells. death

two is repelled an adaptive system, occur. immune things the by When effectively infection their remove cells antigens them, effector and, of with the stimulated pathogen the actions First, that differentiation. the originally antigen, undergo neglect,’ Second, the cells in of removing ‘death effector apoptosis. by absence themselves by most T and antigenic effector these that be cytokines to contraction’ T to IL-2, appears produced cytokines. of to of loss pro-survival stimulation, as such due receptors of cells by for loss The the of are ‘clonal both expression the resulting component antigen-activated T of antigenic in that signaling receptor declines, then absence IL-2 restimulation. binding, is mediates CD25, the cells, upregulated but high-affinity transiently thus limiting the IL-2 on soon discussed as specific expression receptor lose is the in the 11-21, after IL-7Rα most of IL-7 T (CD127) Also, of activation. Section cells effector component factors which the survival Bcl-2. promotes signaling, expression activates Like of STAT5, IL-7 such as IL-2 anti-apoptotic signaling express leads is lose pathway IL-7 IL-2 of to which Bim, a Bcl-2 responsiveness Effector Sections pro-apoptotic cells apoptosis that assembly of and apoptosome and acts intrinsic, factor that or lose via (see 9-29 the to 9-30). and that the mitochondrial,

die of cells the survival by apoptosis, pathway of of of occur While signals loss T-cell also extrinsic and via the 11.22). activation of apoptosis Fas via activated many can intrinsic members superfamily, Bim-mediated particularly from the TNF the pathway effector (CD95) the T (Fig. signaling death that receptor effector is of complex pathway) the formation of (or receptor the signaling the to extrinsic leads death-inducing (DISC). Activation death pathway of of the of step the The trimeric Fas-mediated in trimerization in first is results FasL, formation the DISC Fas. binding which in bind introduced Fas of domain), This death an causes (Fas-associated the FADD death domain the adaptor of domains Section via death to protein 3-25. to effector death bind contains death a present domain and FADD additional an domain (DED) in other domain to can that proteins. DEDs called a pro-caspases. FADD caspases with FADD When and DED pro-caspase to Fas, via DED initiator the recruits 10 is the of the recruited in 8 a interaction then pro-caspase caspases resulting in the activation. in to association concentration with activated caspases allows local high receptors The cleave their themselves, of these activated, 10 complex Once the caspases downstream 8 from released and and activate can receptor the are

Fig. initiates 11.22 to Fas panel). ligand Fas Binding of the extrinsic also a domain of pathway a apoptosis. contains FADD called domain effector death domain a allows its or that recruit death 10, Fas tail. (not to 8 contains cytoplasmic The (DED) pro-caspase receptor pro-caspase cell-surface it (DD) in so-called domain DED When shown), contains also a (right panel). which Fas panel). trimerizes (FasL) Clustered Fas, binds the receptor ligand (left this a an protein as known death contains caspase to active the shown). release The cytoplasm pro-caspase FADD (not itself (also into MORT-1) adaptor activates also 8 to and domains clustered death effector the caspases can apoptosis. bind domain of Fas induce (center that in (ALPS). cause Loss-of-function disease lymphoproliferative are lymphocytes Fas of mutations increased the of survival the lead and to syndrome autoimmune one in to also 10. due This FasL can disease be in mutations caspase and

deficiencies Bimand with to The mice be apoptotic pathways clearance specific defects Bim in with complementary both. Fas of have as Fas-mediated relative T-cell effector the the than loss of contributions T-cell on they to deficiencies milder agent, mice infectious depend mechanisms, but of appear or different contribute unclear. Thus, is appear infection pathogens the dominance be response over to pathways what one other of aspects to the mechanism nonredundant; in of to the two cleared death whether extrinsic cells dying the Irrespective the on by of their lipid membrane are by T intrinsic pathway, phagocytes phosphatidylserine. rapidly that is induced surface or recognize their membrane, recognized many the only redistributes cells. it surface, specific found by apoptotic be it receptors where can in is inner plasma but on normally outer rapidly the surface lipid to on cells the This of the removed. of the cells Thus, most not end infection, at are only but pathogen effector also pathogen-specific is of removed the in effector next memory be for the the will cells pathogen-specific provide of the B-cell responses, and as discussed section. and T-cell Some basis survive, however,

Summary.

and pathogens. induced by develop subsequently are T immune innate cells that CD4 in sustain, amplify and response to, responses to lymphoid through cells that by antigens and organs. naive local the migrating to lymphoid presented are transported Pathogen cells continuously dendritic are recirculate organs T antigen-specific cells cell-mediated immunity the in activating priming to participate sites in occurs either T T immunity lymphoid effector and or in of by at the tissues humoral of remain here, B effector organ organ infection the antigen-binding cells to lymphoid T-cell differentiation and leave provide the the cells. largely are development their types by different infection to types response is produced response. develop that CD4 sensor activated the ILCs by T the in in influenced of innate by cells Distinct of pathogens, and and cytokines cells early

arm T responses CD4 TFH that cells orchestrated subset the cells T each while antibodies elimination. effector innate and of serve for amplify of innate production to early in Effector by with ILCs, cells heightened pathogen effector develop high-affinity enhance that concert direct cells against promote of pathogens. development intracellular to classical, protect the and responses M1 TH1 macrophages activation of parasites and of development sites as are the eosinophils infections TH2 activation M2 such of alternative, responses directed macrophages promote recruitment helminths, the against by and basophils infection. and to and orchestrating integral tissues bacteria intestines, are of clearance lungs, sustained of extracellular antimicrobial and by skin. the to cells neutrophil the barrier epithelial and TH17 of and peptides production cells fungi, by such recruitment as infections host CD8 special pathogens have host the protective cells viruses that an the against microbial intracellular especially cell’s Listeria have means entering in role T important and and protecting by in other for infection by cytoplasm. immunity, T-cell Primary pathogens require some CD4 such usually in response to T-cell help, can CD8 occur to but responses pathogens without help. from their response alter strategy as and system. plasticity cells response their fixed, of response T pathogens The to adapting pressure not the effector immune anti-pathogenic patterns survival in for are retain long-lived the state of immune same the of agent, Ideally, that host effector populations immunity expanded response clonal the T only infectious a the provide with contract, against adaptive populations retaining cells at reinfection time small the eliminates which memory with of protective cells pathogen.

memory. Immunological

of part eliminated. infection is chapter, we examine immunity is maintained protective how the an In long-lasting successfully will this after from them it encountered and more because immune of Immunological consequence been respond the is disease. perhaps most and rapidly important immune enables the effectively system to that prevents have adaptive causing previously, pathogens memory an to response, secondary number tertiary primary responses, depending so responses, responses. Memory qualitatively antigen, to on, immune differ called on also responses, from the and immune of exposures exhibit primary This responses made affinity subsequent B-cell during particularly compared is response. distinct such antibodies clear responses, to with that as antibodies and for in the higher antigen made secondary characteristics, during be of terms distinguished patterns, location, functions. trafficking naive the also in can and cells, effector effector T of T-cell or qualitatively responses Memory from responses

memory long lived or 11-17 is Immunological vaccination. after infection

to Most children measles and developed potentially virus an virus; this and are dangerous illness. in now were was vaccination developed exposed countries naturally before against acute, most vaccinated widespread, unpleasant, for virus measles, vaccination exposed or people infection, children life. the protection of long-term Whether most acquire their the from whole to lasting through for (see 16): acute Chapter true same diseases protection of of immunological of The a many state memory. is infectious other consequence this is

in smallpox be represent eradicated, responses been vaccinated of absence can were has recall in Because true people to who reinfection. taken the measured for smallpox memory show of followed vaccination, that significant no which peak antibody a smallpox maintenance decay, by long-term with an period early rapid shows is decay. levels After is CD4 in gradually CD8 years. memory the half-life T-cell decays, but 8–15 of with long and lived range a

memory difficult experimentally. basis to of The immunological been has explore by years, was routinely within that the of this exploited the antigen small the more in can memory was vaccination response formed the phenomenon 200 that and the last in only immune it during years that has memory been them. than for phenomenon and originally recorded recognized Although cells reflects programs population adaptive specialized first 30 persist induced are Greeks absence the a of ancient are infectious consistent memory to previously who of exposed a the themselves were immune. only mechanism given agent maintaining is that finding individuals This with depend result of to observations a individuals contact infected infection with on by not The does that exposure people as supported remote living other memory of has repeated immunological populations been idea made islands. on of disappears that for measles many can epidemic, infecting a years. which at such time, people living the as setting, In virus on after an all virus cause that the island population the not affect but does the those island, the the virus since from outside disease born reintroduction epidemic. people On original first in causes

duration used people examining received memory immunological has smallpox The of the vaccinia, virus by been immunize who (Fig. responses to against estimated in 11.23). time memory eradicated from virus. that not to and smallpox time in restimulation is by are smallpox immunological their it to was due presumed represent 1978, the true responses Because as approximate after it the as years half-life was had response responses and estimated CD8 T-cell that found and the these One an memory the CD4 vaccinia-specific and responses years. long of original study memory 75 between of strong from 8 15 immunization, strength its to strength. the original a Half-life required diminish time to represents 50% of response for with decline. By T-cell measurable stable, of memory, titers antibody without antivirus almost remained contrast

virus. not that by memory need These infectious exposure show immunological be to findings maintained repeated that a the by the were encounter induced memory is lymphocytes is sustained it Instead, that long-lived antigen-specific original and that likely second persist by pathogen. with until exposure percentage in at of time. a memory most are Although cells memory one are the a cells state, small of dividing any resting antigen-specific during cytokines, produced is non-cross-reactive maintained by immune IL-7 IL-15, such turnover directed this other, It or constitutively at that as and antigens. appears either responses half-life proliferation death. is memory long regulated, cells persisting balanced relatively a cell cell a of and antigen with The for given highly by number

experimentally various in be Immunological ways. can measured memory Appendix (see the animals Adoptive simple, favored Section immunized from antigens antigen of I, have studies, for such been because transfer assays A-30) with proliferate. lymphocytes nonliving cannot is antigen. to a an of of purely immunization tested a the from these with ‘primed,’ In subsequent terms or specific existence in the by memory immunized, of transfer animal the responsiveness experiments, nonimmunized as measured recipient, cells not antigen or faster received from received do that more cells have did to cells that challenge response and receive than Animals controls donors. nonimmune cells, memory a robust that

a Experiments or when is helper an abruptly and against protein antigen like memory appears that after maximum first that 5 with antigen, shown animal reaches days have immunized a these T-cell so. functional days of phase memory lymphoid a tissues. then proliferation later, in Functional antigen-specific B-cell cell selection some enters appears and level. their memory present month immunization, are By after B 1 maximum cells at of maintained, then for the cells These animal. of are memory levels little the with alteration, lifetime memory elicited as cells It to can due as memory the experiments functional be important the recognize to these themselves. well precursors that in memory of the is cells cells are of progeny differentiate some and whose These precursors T cells. probably cells, B activated later memory will into very even lymphocytes Thus, appear can yet resting have may memory-type immunization, though to memory shortly precursors cells not developed. after

the detail and account occur might mechanisms resting lymphocytes following and changes. lead the memory look the we more to in development lymphocytes, these that in antigen for of In after at changes discuss that sections the priming

rapid responses B B-cell cells. antigen and higher compared have 11-18 with Memory naive are affinity for more of responses

antigen unimmunized specific the or in isolating by antigen helper from cells B in them the Immunological vitro mice of same (Fig. B can restimulating cells be in memory immunized cells for examined and with T presence 11.24). with responses from unimmunized naive both mice. from differ quantitatively immunized cells that mice compared produce and qualitatively B B cells initial the primary increase up their that in cells priming respond response. the in B immune to 100-fold by to antigen frequency after B produced B unprimed for due by than antibodies of have to Further, immunized antigen process in the (described Chapter lymphocytes. by cells produced higher maturation typically 10), mice affinity affinity of antibodies the that immunized to from in memory arise response. primary The mice response cells is B due there. somatic Memory B arise cells can and switching isotype primary undergone a and from mutations reaction center germinal during response, may the have response. from center short-lived can arise B memory independently the cells cells plasma But germinal produced reaction also primary of the in in the nodes. spleen blood residence lymph circulate In and they up case, and through take either the them express cells from cells that cells. plasma some markers distinguish naive B Memory and B cells One B marker simply memory is of

Fig. the 11.24 cells generation of the secondary distinct primary responses memory response. from generation is of antibody antibody B The from of the responses and T them cells unimmunized culture presence mice, These in in immunized effector and and from antigen-specific cells. B can isolating by studied stimulating donor compared be plasma made primary and molecules a of a specific B antibody epitopes cells antigen have that from of consists with affinities receptors diverse the derived of precursor antigen. for different usually response of for quite by population range cells the The overall, relatively few mutations. are The of with antibodies low affinity somatic however, which expansion. more significant secondary of undergone population have, The a high-affinity B clonal response cells, far limited from derives mutation. extensive show receptors are affinity of and high the and somatic antibodies for Their antigen far response. 100-fold there of the priming, response The induce the antibody quality that these increase and usually a the that is although of B altered, overall precursors is intense cells a only in effect frequency after effective in is 10to more radically activatable

0.01 100 10,000 0.1 1 10

Fig. immunization. increase Both the and antibody amount affinity of with repeated the 11.25 concentration the lower a (affinity shows (2°) a by after in the antibody with antibodies immunization; the time followed the (3°), panel The tertiary upper panel primary increase (1°), a secondary the shows maturation). affinity in and increase of antibody and well not largely have switching (as is seen from cells in maturation IgA mature higher-affinity in shown) to as undergone are B Affinity IgG coming IgE, hypermutation that antibodies. yield and somatic isotype which the represents the shading IgM. and on both yellow of own, and The presence IgG, shading blue IgG green the its IgM shading Although responses in some antibody injections. in affinity arises antigen primary to the most repeated maturation later occurs response, overall of a in are would increase concentration level. from logarithmic otherwise scale; its IgG the 1 impossible graphs to that antibody Note around the of on it represent initial be millionfold specific these

B of the IgD. express IgM with naive immunoglobulin a and surface that cells surface expression isotype, switched compared In cells immunoglobulin low altogether. very surface contrast, plasma have naive expressed memory a (see is cells In ligand dendritic TNF-family Section a 9-17). is TNF and receptor which B the cells expressed CD27, family of marker of member that also humans, CD70, by by cells the T is binds

and rapid delayed the a slightly time is IgG initial (Fig. antibody due production by class IgM characterized primary switching for A response of response required to 11.25). production in days relatively secondary larger few of antibody, with and characterized antibody by of IgM is IgE. its small much and IgG response amounts the antibody first IgA The some amounts of response, of are primary the IgA, have the to generated that switched isotype, B IgM memory and their response cells antibodies or surface. already IgE express that on were another At in IgG, secondary and made by the from beginning B7.1 Memory MHC co-stimulatory naive cells than ligand B class express somewhat higher cells. the and do B levels II molecules of CD28, primary in memory receptor compared begins B that present cells to earlier help antigen exposure so with cells helps with TFH after TFH B This more acquire so and in can efficiently through to production the antigen they compared responses. it cells turn cells, B7.1 antibody naive and response, a the (see generation of primary vigorous more immediate cells earlier and plasma than the almost for of accounting Fig. abundant in production The response IgG characterized secondary is by thus 11.25).

secondary immune responses. during

infection, During available complement immune for and immediately response bind secondary to pathogen a phagocytes. from a primary persisting by by exposure or it antibodies degradation to mark are the secondary pathogen, immune antibody If a not completely neutralize the occur. response may the can a cells Otherwise, in secondary lymphoid and peripheral excess response antigens on will the receptors organs. B initiate bind to naive nodes, principally cells, recirculate the follicles cells Peyer’s lymph mucosa. through spleen, the gut of patches the compartments same and as the lymphoid B secondary the of B Memory the with highest antigen cells for activated first. are avidity B Thus for of cells, the to have a secondary up component B previously which response. selected substantial their memory avidity been antigen, make

during described 10-8. B maturation, and and responses reenter memory immune cells through rapidly, responding secondary undergo additional Sections can more somatic 10-6 hypermutation centers affinity in Besides as germinal B-cell zones, in present and responses, interface helper begin that T T-cell primary to II cells. B-cell have memory class B antigen cells the where secondary complexes As acquired can at between the peptide:MHC responses interaction cells. T both proliferation cells This of the and initiates B

the plasma antibody-secreting migrate proliferation into rounds before and of undergoing cells. cells and differentiation follicle germinal cells, memory center B into cells have that additional yet somatic hypermutation not become plasma into undergone B Reactivated differentiating present responses with in Since and during the B antigen-specific cells and receptors tertiary higher-affinity acquire germinal antigen progressively of center, antibodies cells more the produced to affinity secondary TFH the Fig. efficiently will the rises antigen (see 10.14).

increased frequency their relative to as frequency naive

cells. T

than direct function memory analysis T-cell cells. rather relied of assays antigen-specific a recently, of identification of Until memory on relatively T T-cell T-cell of or Some cells days as take to function, macrophages, such several can perform. effector assays to B help providing of memory effector this, frame the the such not cells from optimal cells, preexisting for of distinguishing time can cells during assays since are be reactivated assay. T memory Because program problem target cell minutes. lysis is a but for T CD4 cells, which 5 effector a does as not cells, for effector can for in This T much particularly apply CD8 those contrast, than to the actions cells. preexisting than reactivated be memory effector later of CD8 cells T more will that need T In to much this so cells of cytotoxic, appear become time memory CD8

A-24). Appendix been memory (see the has I, of Section MHC T-cell tetramers made by development easier Examining from effector studied naive responses MHC mice specific Before tetramers, receptor and carrying transgenes. memory cells T-cell were using (TCR) T Such identified could part T-cell to by natural but receptors, TCR-transgenic rearranged of were the cells repertoire. T-cell host’s not T antibodies be uniquely their specificity. MHC different specificity, same frequency the in tetramers the with clones but measure all clones not antigen do T-cell given of vivo distinguish a between of the molecules, of molecules mice T class were now both cells CD4 in allowing MHC first, MHC for also class II humans. some generated normal both for available and and study tetramers but are in CD8 I MHC

formation cells. tetramers direct have analysis of T memory MHC allowed of a the the In in example shown Fig. bacteria to toxin O the with the monocytogenes infection listeriolysin analyzed are T-cell specific MHC (LLO). responses II class tetramers intracellular by 11.26, Listeria to the are T the expansion effector LLO-specific the which cells approximately there repertoire during In T-cell into 100 mouse, 1000-fold CD4 naive cells, of T undergo

Fig. memory of expansion 11.26 cells of 6 after phase T days Generation infection. When eliminated, the infection is infection. after an with an of After strain infection, an case in Listeria this attenuated

104 cells cells the 105 cells. 106 106 103 102 a dramatically falls listeriolysin back sustained LLOp:I-Ab+ low 101 increases of 103 T specific 104 level 102 number T toxin (LLO) give to of then for the and monocytogenes, 105 memory LLO by detected an an MHC responses binding of of tetramer bound consisting I-Ab. peptide T-cell are by contraction CD4 shows and T primary left that the are the shows and panel the The memory panel phase. of response cells right LLO-specific, expand to about cells cells day then the cells contract memory naive in to effector T-cell 25. and about 100,000 7, by day T by 100 Approximately repertoire 7000 decay cells slowly cells by These 500 450. memory day then to Jenkins. Marc Data of courtesy

a in contraction T these cells 100-fold about by slower a are within which follows few weeks. phase reduced naive in of T persists the population present at population days. of frequency this and a of a leaves cells a 10-fold with about This half-life higher than memory about 60 repertoire,

or IL-15. cells to T cells 11-21 that arise from T sensitivity IL-7 maintain Memory effector

differences their distinct can genes. be cells and in by stimuli, various cell-surface proteins, to by by T certain responses of expression expression memory their Naive and of their distinguished many as cells, cells they markers, phagocytic (Pgp1, but stop memory such continue such activated CD69. as expressing glycoprotein-1 CD44), markers to express of other Overall, activation T for Bcl-2, a more their be express cells promotes and survival cell half-life. T Memory responsible protein that long may naive, which effector, several lists Figure cells be molecules can 11.27 and memory distinguished. T by

Fig. alters memory cells cells. many naive proteins become when T T Expression of 11.27 that cells; affect which inflammation; and T effector Proteins are are in effector cells cells, receptors cells; memory govern and endothelial and cells, with that adhesion expressed T of naive such chemokine of as proteins receptors, memory promote tissues survival T interactions that granzyme which and and sites molecules, functions, to cells migration proteins include B. in lymphoid differently antigen-presenting involved the antigen T increase to of cell the changes sensitivity also stimulation. the Some memory to CD69, occur factor cells; cells. cells T the that specific as seen the memory as CD25 of of long-lived are limited cell-surface in the others, are and survival Many memory expression proteins T in such expression some, such to cells, changes T but effector Bcl-2, of effector also are represents CD8 This been cells and have cells humans, both applies of but mice simplicity. CD4 for that details between general a differ some omitted picture sets T to list and in that may these

IL-7R˜, with transfer others of LCMV mice the levels not LCMV cells mice T secondary IL-7R˜hi-CD8 some mouse a effector cells transfer Number expansion robust cells T high antigen-specifc 1470 antigen CD8 after while Only led antigen transfer of Mice generate Days naive infected cells CD8 primary do CD8 of cells of to naive challenge express challenge IL-7R˜hi cells into 0 TCR-transgenic challenge antigen-specifcCD8 IL-7R˜lo after response; transfer

Fig. responses. which of cells 11.28 7Rα) effector T generate robust CD8 Expression memory (IL- receptor can IL-7 the indicates for virus (LCMV) lymphocytic expressing effector day choriomeningitis infected collected a the antigen virus, with on Mice cells were receptor from a (TCR) specific 11. and transgene were T-cell viral into expressing one group and of another T transferred IL-7Rα expressing Effector effector (IL-7Rαhi, low green) IL-7Rα CD8 group. blue) into mice, levels cells were naive CD8 transferred and (IL-7Rαlo, cells were separated T high of by challenge. after of original express (detected of numbers the transferred their and measured bacterium antigen, the expression transfer, challenged responding with were to TCR) the mice weeks transgenic were cells a engineered viral Three T after various the times at generate challenge. of expansion IL-7Rαhi robust Only after could cells CD8 transferred cells a the T secondary effector the

α the the is (IL-7Rαor receptor important Among IL-7 T markers of subunit the CD127). memory cells of and expressed rapidly upon most activation cells. T by IL-7Rα, cells but lost T not is is Naive effector express it experiment the shown example, Fig. For in virus choriomeningitis lymphocytic mice examines with (LCMV). infected 11.28 of small of IL-7Rα. population a CD8 Around of expressed approximately T after 5% 7 infection, levels effector cells day high mice. memory cells, functional T-cell transfer cells, IL-7Rαhi provide Adoptive uninfected these of CD8 not could T but IL-7Rαlo to effector by from suggests that arise T perhaps for they IL-7. IL-7Rα, cells maintain experiment cells survival delivered This signals effector more reexpress compete effectively T the that memory because or

from governing naive memory T those the survival for also The T mechanisms differ cells homeostatic of cells. T cell and the in a and death. T cells expansion is proliferation shift balance their controlled by Memory more cells, naive than frequently divide between Fig. As illustrated in their the require complexes 11.29, Fig. naive peptide:self stimulation periphery with in MHC self (see cytokine to cells contact addition survival in long-term for T 9.4). with signaling naive IL-15. by of and IL-7 for the cells, receptors survival memory requires the As cytokines the cells T IL-7 required T CD4 of CD8 cells. survival and both for is the memory critical conditions. memory the cells T proliferation under survival of IL-15 for CD8 In is normal long-term addition, and It also cells than less appears on with cells memory T MHC T naive that sensitive are peptide:self to dependent self are cytokines. more and contact

peptide:MHC cells pathogen, also T are more require sensitive become to with by but are secondary still antigen reactivated T than restimulation during complexes to encounter with a cells. Memory naive contact and response more several such as cytokines TNF-α, stimulation. to IL-2 produce and quickly Furthermore, vigorously more in such IFN-γ, they for T a vaccine virus. similar progression cells after against yellow immunization occurs A fever in with humans

IL-7 self by cells periodic the with presented self-antigens and survival their in IL-15 molecules. naive and the cytokines stimulation MHC For with periphery, require T naive T antigen, cell differentiates. priming divides specific a and with On its cells. some expression of of that receptor effector cells and T differentiate short-lived but have memory receptor reexpress IL-7 retain lost Most cells relatively effector progeny the long-lived the (yellow), or into become the naive are by cells MHC be cells. peptide:self contact can survival less These and maintained with self compared with complexes T on memory IL-15 and for dependent IL-7 subject may their of T contact self but and this ongoing investigation. necessary in may numbers keep between to vary However, clones the cells the is pool, memory memory different antigens some with be for up

Memory include tissue-resident and memory, and cells heterogeneous central memory, are subsets. T 11-22 effector

(see cells exposure memory CD4 Changes antigen in occur Fig. significant other proteins cell-surface are after on that to T 11.27). is CD4 is cells. T L-selectin receptor cells into the T secondary most by directs lymphoid that tissues, cells effector it (CD62L) and homing lost memory and hyaluronic cells. memory tissues, expressed is it ligands CD44 and other and and for on induced effector T a receptor acid is peripheral in of cells these the tissues, into T into memory change The tissues would rather directly migrate from helps cells. the naive expression T molecules two peripheral than as in migrating lymphoid blood naive in T cell-surface are isoforms from tyrosine effector cells, useful hematopoietic all Different on CD45, cells. a expressed protein phosphatase and memory distinguishing of although CD45RO and and memory of CD45 splicing effector changes in produced impose. the consequences it this alternative functional change The what identifies is isoform the encode may domain extracellular cells, because that exons unclear of is again they of memory CD25, cells, IL-2 Some are T cells α as by the the are cells; cells. antigen surface reactivated receptors, reexpressed when be memory receptor, become expressed but can effector on not activated and subunit such however, effector

and are Memory CD4 three T heterogeneous, and subsets. both T cells are CD8 into major classified cells receptors, and pattern for shows molecules, type different example, a and (Fig. of activation different distinct for chemokines Each adhesion exhibits characteristics 11.30). their T-cell lymphoid that express allows peripheral (TCM) to memory allows receptor which recirculation of cells through zones Central and T similar tissues. to of CCR7, T them traffic to be the chemokine cells the naive other and receptors memory of sensitive subsets early Central T-cell in functions relatively express to restimulation. slower cross-linking cells rapidly to are such ligand of with compared are their memory cytokines CD40 they response; production effector acquire however, very after as a route from system the blood, lymphoid naive into similar Central migrate organs, secondary into to cells the migration the very lymphatic back primarily of memory pattern then and blood, cells. into T the the high and (TEM) β2 lack memory contrast, cells By are the levels and tissues. chemokine inflamed but express T CCR7, so for integrins, effector entering β1 rapidly specialized of receptor and receptors They inflammatory can into T of for IL-5 and effector early IFN-γ, amounts restimulation. large after mature also rapidly chemokines and secrete express cells IL-4, memory the system the nonlymphoid into blood peripheral and primarily into through tissues. lymphoid secondary cells tissues, Effector T lymphatic migrate then finally from There the again. lymphatic can reenter the reach and they blood system substantial in of not up residency contrast cells comprise memory (Fig. T memory effector In cells and 11.31). various T (TRM) cells, but a to central rather tissue-resident long-term take fraction sites that do migrate, memory epithelial Like example, the receptors propria into that chemokine lamina of the TRM cells, CCR7 allow dermis lack migration CXCR3, CCR9) tissues but as express or TEM such cells other intestine. the peripheral (for cells induce TRM sites, these CD69, which In

cells some cells cell antigen cells Some CCR5 cells and T express differentiate, T and CD45RO CCR3 cytokine from FasL CCR7 secrete cells IL-7R˜Effector CD45RO migrate express derive memory sees may to Naive in die a lymphoid cells memory become CD45RACCR7 IL-4 memory CCR7 T effector remain and quiescent after few Central lack cytokines, tissues receptors dendritic Most effector CD45RO effector Memory Effector T cell days perforin cells cells directly tissue IL-2 CCR7

Fig. and the chemokine the T cells receptor central of by expression into distinguished memory effector which 11.30 differentiate subsets, memory are CCR7.

from naive from diagram) can protein cells Quiescent T CD45RO of characteristic cells memory diagram). half the of activated (right effector or cells half arise surface directly activated (left bearing Two cells can T and cells. cells quiescent from response: memory types effector derive the central primary memory memory of T-cell peripheral after lymphoid cells Central CCR7 tissues and restimulation. express memory in remain large and other amounts restimulation, into of memory Memory cells and after IL-5. T IL-4, type—effector secrete rapidly IFN-γ, cells of the effector cells—mature receptors the do not They inflammatory express (CCR3 and CCR5) chemokines. for CCR7, but receptor express

S1PR promoting in reduces expression, tissues. thereby retention CD8 particularly within the epithelium. TRM reside enter cells, cells, TRM and epithelial TGF-βproduction αE:β7, is for express epithelium retention. cells expressed E-cadherin TRM by by integrin induces cells required which binds to TRM the and

TCM, the memory in The in mouse. TEM, TRM been and and between both has populations made humans distinction a itself subset is strictly However, population. each homogeneous not example, CCR7-expressing differing there chemokine with within are other TCM expression the cells, particularly of For markers, cells receptors. help center. is TCM cells A CCR7-positive CXCR5, provide memory cells it the cells can these whether subset yet not although cells, express of germinal B clear in TFH similarly to also the to

antigen, of stimulation rapidly TCM CCR7 On differentiate cells. lose by cells TEM into expression and the TH1 and TH17 receptors cells TEM according and express, classified chemokine in to receptors are cells typical cells cells heterogeneous have also (CCR5), (CCR4). (CCR6), they been TH2 of chemokine particular effector not appear to committed do memory Central cells lineages,

Fig. reinfection surveys that peripheral memory 11.31 immune a are T major pathogens. compartment for by Tissue-resident cells tissues After lymphoid enter as dermis, into chemokines, tissues, for here the activation of and response CXCR3. expression and guided blood in various enter to priming entry cells T activated by CD4 tissues the and in shown CD8 S1PR1 these reexpression promoting surface CD69 dermis. other T decreased of in cells of to by antigen cells caused unknown by expression, the signals leads or The retention by response some T and E-cadherin αE:β7 cells (CD103), binds cells in integrin the In epidermis, expressed induce many which cells reside. epithelial TGF-β, cells, retention of to TRM entry promoting where CD8 through Recent that cells outnumber estimates the migrate cells indicate T the TRM may body. that recirculating

of TH2 eventual cells correlation and is not are effector chemokine TH1, even TH17, receptors or and to some TH1, TH17, or the although there memory expressed. the fully committed cells lineage, output between TH2 their differentiation of lineages. drive to gradually distinct stimulation effector effector T-cell cells the with seems antigen memory the Further into

IL-2 memory T-cell involves CD8 is 11-23 required and help for T-cell CD40 and signaling. CD4

in important cells optimal CD4 role T experimental an memory. is There play CD8 programming that evidence T-cell shown Fig. experiment In in the class responses defect and and a mice the wild-type compared memory MHC therefore were T cells. mice CD4 expression lack T-cell of that in CD8 and 11.32, which primary between II, have In against the carried T-cell a of measured CD8 strain an ovalbumin, Listeria by this response protein, experimental monocytogenes. experiment, was cells. equivalent and infection, mice CD8 of showed of expansion activity days both 7 types After T effector of antigen-specific the by after weaker in far T much cells cells a characterized a generated expanding secondary CD8 CD4 defect fewer secondary mice memory T of challenge. But responses, presence with T either role in initial secondary T CD8 or the during programming CD4 response. the cells a of for memory cells These imply results

this suggest naive programming Further cells. initial is experiments for that help of CD8 the necessary T-cell T CD4 mice. the CD8 CD4 T help Memory transferred in cells into that were of wild-type developed absence After class recipient the proliferate CD8 even reduced mice whereupon were T II. recipient showed though mice challenged again, a cells ability to the transfer, expressed the MHC responses. result during CD4 priming the is the required and of at not indicates help T-cell that This T secondary of time simply cells CD8

Fig. are cells CD8 cells. of T required CD4 development the T functional 11.32 memory for T II not that class develop MHC express molecules fail Mice (MHC II–/–) do CD4 cells. to mice antigen and MHC Wild-type model monocytogenes infected expressing ovalbumin (LM-OVA). the II–/– were Listeria with 7 therefore using can of CD8 number react peptide, days, by and OVA an MHC receptors the cells that T-cell After contain measured that bind OVA-specific specific antigen. T tetramers be this with to OVA-specific same were days of T CD8 to of cells number lacking the found mice have After mice. T cells infection, CD4 wild-type 7 as were during a re-challenged could mice memory to LM-OVA, develop—and cells However, mice 60 to T cells then strong CD4 memory CD8 CD8 the failed cells T allowed expand there in days—a were with wild-type specific for was mice. to recover OVA, which the time when lacking memory response whereas

treatment been antibody in or has help which deficient which with the CD8 demonstrated generation gene. also This were CD4 by for memory depleted were CD4 requirement T CD4 in in mice experiments by in cells

mechanism The completely cells requirement T understood. is not this CD4 underlying for received signals receptor. and may the CD40 through CD8 IL-2 those types those cell— the two through by received received It T of involve generate that cells to CD40 not cells. are unable memory do T T express CD8 to the stimulate it needed express cells CD4 source likely CD40, is signal. ligand the T are many most potentially Although CD40 could cells of this that

genetic the unable IL-2 memory signaling CD8 in a IL-2 of T requirement using subunit. that discovered to cells programming because CD8 The was by were for deficiency IL-2Rα respond in to for of a lymphopro required signaling Because development disorder. the develop IL-2Rα T IL-2Rα mice cells, liferative lacking is both behavior mixed cells. and cells, chimeras study in wild-type be marrow bone IL-2Rα-deficient disorder not are and can mice chimeras these the does to that However, develop IL-2Rα-deficient used of harboring this were chimeric defective to were and these When tested, were lacking with mice their be CD8 T memory infected cells found IL-2Rα. in LCMV responses responses the specifically

shown experiment Fig. The in from also 11.33 distinct programming in indicates their CD8 memory cells that, help provide T CD4 naive the cells. T in maintaining CD8 of effect cells, number T mice transferred been this T into either were in programmed In naive class that MHC normal expressed that had lacked case, mice immunologically or memory CD8 cells II. more of T resulted in memory cells II with CD8 MHC decrease a cells Transfer mice a transfer class memory rapid number lacking CD8 comparison similar the of into in in

Fig. cells. maintenance T CD8 promote memory cells 11.33 of CD4 the normal T their (MHC cells the dependence of CD4 memory that The different into either transfer T of have by CD4 T T or cells shown CD4 is mice cells the host CD8 II–/–). after memory cells cells (wildtype) lifetimes on lack fail of the absence CD4 the cells in T class develop proteins, In to II MHC thymus. with after virus donor hosts, from the in had isolated these cells days 35 cells. LCMV CD8 T T were transferred mice maintained infection that cells memory specific only were CD4 When into memory for mice and implications in CD4 action T such cells for is cells as is of The but not has which clear, yet HIV/AIDS of T the for basis CD4 number diminished. this conditions

mice. into wild-type effector MHC CD8 lacking class cells transferred functions. mice II a of In CD8 had into impairment addition, effector relative response, quantity activation. and II-expressing have cells when on the antigen-presenting cells significant quality These impact a initial CD4 activated experiments T-cell even not imply during the CD8 an for immune T by response are CD8 needed class of MHC that they T-cell the able memory T-cell T be help to efficient promote maintain to program numbers. cells cells to help naive memory generate to T CD8 effector to and help cells, CD4 activity, T

subsequent secondary attributable immune memory In responses lymphocytes. to are mainly 11-24 and individuals,

pathogen immune that the production sufficient course an normal a elicit of then antibodies eliminate the an pathogen response T proliferates and body. stimulates from level to the effector and adaptive In of the a cells infection, to response die, T level levels the and are to longer needed effector that the no because at sustain it. the elicited present of gradually antigens then antibody decline, Most cells the the inhibition as this can of think of feedback response. We a response of a and to same B pathogen. however, maintain T and heightened mount the cells a recurrence with to Memory ability infection remain,

effect remaining the reducing of of on immunized same lymphocytes can cells the a with antigen. memory Antibody encounter B an have individual the subsequent T naive and in activation and passively to a inhibit antibody naive that B-cell to responses be same antigen. recipient fact, can naive In used transferring to which has newborn Rh– A-6). Section to to result practical disease from been (see use can I, This response an to Rh+ the immune fetus, of hemolytic mothers put in making an phenomenon prevent Appendix If she mother inhibited. red to before her blood response to exposed child’s the her given cells, first anti-Rh be antibody is will Rh+ is The cells B cells an mounting likely that fetal mother, the this and destruction naive and entered of of mechanism red response. T thus have preventing cells involve suppression to immune the is antibody-mediated from blood clearance the over only naive to through cells but is so formed in antibody Fc Presumably, antigen, immune not anti-Rh B receptors. are antigen that is complexes eliminated, not stimulate excess are, identified before mothers not occurred. must the risk be primary at B-cell so however, Memory Rh– responses antibody, and a has by treated inhibited response much more are their sensitive of receptor memory be small of and high by passive cannot efficiently Because that affinity the signaling antibody. anti-Rh in cells antigen the amounts to B-cell their B antigen for requirements, cleared alterations secondary responses cells preexisting exposed to even in occur when to memory B are allows antibody, who individuals be to antibody, immune. The antibody also activated of already ability to produce

explain also suppressive sin. mechanisms called a might antigenic phenomenon original These the epitopes that variants to they term influenza tendency which have subsequent people against highly even coined the in are antibodies exposed, This the to first only on with (Fig. infections viral variant expressed epitopes describe of virus immunogenic make additional, to was 11.34). B to new responses for naive specific will the Antibodies original against epitopes. suppress virus tend of cells the using the virus. rapidly host that can those by the effectively and This to might most respond only benefit cells B virus the because if B respond. person able original an to is exposed antibodies and cells epitopes no preexisting all virus, This the to now the influenza bind lacks infection, is are pattern only in seen broken that naive

in˜uenza makes in antibody years 5 B only with epitope with not 10 only Response responses present antigen-specific original variant A E virus Same C variant epitope the G makes Response A B Response virus age 1000 individual at antibody 20 original 10 Same 5 virus of lymphocytic D C similar years on setting epitopes 2 years epitopes at of in˜uenza by choriomeningitis response B virus infected with individual antibody variant 10 F virus 1000 makes in˜uenza 100 E at the years occur naive F C shared the D Individual a response Percentagenormal to suppression 100 with to encountered A all infection the shared response infected memory 1000 T Percentagenormal D with T-cell the at can against infected cells epitopes against epitopes against against Percentagenormal A by a with 100 shared new epitope virus, to

Fig. response with (center 11.34 original virus the with influenza against the to are virus When preferentially and individuals makes to who with been panel). variant of epitopes responds or make antibodies epitopes variant, second a those were third only normal shared smaller that on one have virus, infected epitopes new they influenza infected than virus a years, at age Even the on 20 virus. initial present time for virus epitopes epitopes this (left response to an 2 respond all at with of epitopes, the shared the to retained original A virus, new to commitment response and subnormal years a with child infected panel). is makes first influenza the to age (right same to At different 5 child age a panel). years, exposed the in virus phenomenon virus mouse ‘original dengue or is humans. antigenic (LCMV) sin.’ in This called the expanding a that Mice cells subsequent primed CD8 LCMV with first to strain second to with specific infection were responded a LCMV that antigens T reacted one by for strain. of the of strain examined that using all bacterial was responses antigenic of infections not in type recurrent the caused epitopes by setting suggesting monocytogenes, observed However, when does Listeria not ‘original sin’ occur immune suppression the the effect ovalbumin in were this variable pathogen antigenic of to responses.

Summary.

from results of important consequences most memory Protective populations cells. establishment cells of reinfection of and T long-lived B is against adaptive the immunity, and one memory immunity the of than populations and that antigen-specific that cells dramatically naive lymphocyte higher survive during arise the expand These infection, primary the repertoires. frequencies from of the in lymphocytes memory at recipients to to more capacity and contribute memory B protective restimulation rapidly to their increased same T be immunity, respond can their frequency cells. which to antigen Both transferred by naive and to the IL-7 Memory signals. by as lymphocytes receptors maintained IL-15, and that such provide survival expression their are for of cytokines, changes their antibodies are increasing isotype secondary affinity the be because and immunoglobulin cells of and with B by by characterized distinguished genes hypermutation, for immune and somatic responses can antigen. in Memory switching subsequent for of and receptor-specific expansion tetramers—has effector and reagents—MHC cells. The the of the allowed advent analysis differentiation T of direct memory and memory memory subtypes. T cells is We are quite memory, T-cell now complex, memory, recognize central and that heterogeneous, memory effector having tissue-resident CD4 from of While CD8 CD4 responses becoming primary generate integral help T-cell in cells, the T T that regulating an is have role in absence memory. can it cells cells T effective CD8 clear effective These understanding, issues will how be such in vaccines to design HIV/AIDS. for for diseases example, critical as

Chapter Summary to 11.

microorganisms by infection in pathogenic ways. Vertebrates several resist can not, that defenses induced the the develops. infection, responses in adaptive series they if are repelling by of act contain succeed but infection to followed a as early innate help may and The immunity immediately recognizing immune of using rely innate infection the system. immune by of the receptors These of the two on phases nonclonotypic presence the response first They summarized Fig. are in 11.35 in detail covered in Chapter and 3. toward be nodes act responders bias or response. and innate to cells, immune be viewed can IFN-γ, as of response recruited can lymph between are thus TH1 by sensor NK secrete intermediates effector cytokines immunity, and ILCs, to promote parallel produced which a the innate innate and subsets T cells, cells cells, next and lymphoid cells; of T-cell which and subsets and help specialized the CD4 include adaptive to which can Several rapid adaptive phase third immune the of immune The response Fig. an (see response is their encounter which proliferate, peripheral tissue of because infection specific lymphocytes B effector takes antigen, and is develop, 11.35), site in T serves mounted several and cells. lymphoid and to into the differentiate the that days must particular cannot until dependent chance antigen-specific TFH had cells a differentiate. B-cell responses be to have T-cell proliferate initiated and are infected infection Once via immune is or an and into circulation the has tissues; antibodies controlled response the effector pathogen the occurred, usually the the T is recruited adaptive and eliminated. contained cells and dispersed to early and as the of clear recognition they (see phases changes and more infection infectious mechanisms most an selective only mechanism effector on the the cases is now in immune The Fig. agent, used defense; type final are the in employed depend same those of 11.35).

Fig. immune The microorganisms. classes against of of of 11.35 phases response different components three the the Chapters are in described response of 2 first the thymus-independent covered and B-cell in and Chapter operate phases the The responses are of (T-independent) 3, immunity that 10. immune innate mechanisms two in the the the scene in functional phase cells and to the influence of T of phases late early contribute The character the adaptive antigen-specific initiation antibodies on that the effector appear and immunity, response. they of are similarities in the phase each striking effector the the response; main at of used. in the recognition mechanisms is change structure There

of protective response An adaptive state immune leads a immunity. effective to the of and initial This produced consists state the molecules presence immunological of cells in response, and of effector memory. have pathogens Immunological eliminated. to ability heightened been to as manifested successfully previously a and that is respond encountered memory recipients. Memory to transfer and the property immune naive have B memory of lymphocytes to being able T cells immunological MHC mechanisms certain memory receptors memory as such T-cell self well IL-15, as include maintain The homeostatic as on IL-7 and the complexes. peptide:self cytokines, with that between interactions which is of immunity, induction immunology medicine. of in outstanding the of field artificial The protective by the accomplishment immunological includes memory, vaccination most of success. practical this its accomplished with how is understanding now up is The catching so effective many 13, we prevents the will see we pathogens this induce to against vaccines before these in completely as that learn we do prepare protective can need what immunity will Chapter eliminates pathogens. pathogen, However, not

Questions.

immune or becomes antigen-independent response, focused with False: powerful and The as an a antigen is response which initiates True specificity. process develops dynamic more that 11.1 it adaptive of capable type of a any eliminating the develops, system type of is pathogen. single response Once immune

Choice: Which statement 11.2 incorrect? is Multiple

A. production intracellular secretion dendritic of IFN-γ heightened ILC1 by induces pathogens. IL-12 and to IL-18 killing cells macrophages by induce and

(TSLP), B. IL-17 ILC3s STAT5 by activated lymphopoietin activates and stromal thymic which production. induces are

muscle in which C. IL-25 cells patterns mucus activate production and mucosal smooth activates Molecular helminths production, to by contraction. turn common goblet to and IL-33 ILC2s induce

to peptides promotes induce ILC3-derived IL-22 integrity. an cells barrier antimicrobial and on of enhanced epithelial D. acts production

proteins Match following the Matching: migration. T-cell their on effect 11.3 with

CXCR5 with Pand A. activated endothelial Interacts at i. expressed E-selectin, _______ cells

B. PSGL-1 _______ ii. CXCL13 TFH cells binding attracts B-cell follicle the to

iii. C. _______ FucT-VII extravasation to of with effector cells the VCAM-1 Interacts T initiate

D. VLA-4 iv. _______ compartmentalize distribution. cells for T among helps Pand E-selectin selective Fill-in-the-Blanks: their adhesion production Expression the Necessary of molecules of 11.4 effector cells. the mucosal primed of the to GALT integrin, in example, by expressed For which are binds ___________, the is expression the constitutively gut endothelial which cells T that induce __________ small the intestine lamina also T _________ the epithelium ______, receptor subjacent via attracts cells gradient. propria cells which to a to express chemokine the These T in and other such capacity can the is organs not as to the unique skin. gut This compartmentalization observed be For ______, glycosylated binds endothelium. a cutaneous PSGL-1, vascular ________ example, form expression of on of

Which Multiple incorrectly the of describes following statements Choice: TH1 macrophage 11.5 activation?

A. macrophage to the CD40 sensitizes to ligand IFN-γ respond

macrophage ligand substitute for activation B. LT-α CD40 can in

TNFR-I activation antagonized is TH1 C. cells activated by

by Macrophages promote bacterial repair? M2 sensitized Short small order do tissue are IFN-γ in to stimulate production of D. Answer: 11.6 to How collagen LPS macrophages amounts

Which type Multiple is following of Choice: the concerning true responses? 11.7 3 not

A. which output The are have CXCL2 and neutrophils, primary G-CSF cells to innate effector and recruited due by increased CXCL8 are and an GM-CSF

B. present mucosa cells in the almost At exclusively are TH17 intestinal homeostasis,

produced cytokine the antimicrobial central induce is C. production killer of epithelial D. peptide and IL-22 to proliferation and IL-17 natural is cells cell shedding

able CD4+ to Which T-cell of Multiple the naive induce initiates is pathogens of TH17 a robust independent CD4+ T-cell cells following IL-23 T the 11.8 Choice: CD8+ E. to fate of commitment the help? response

Streptococcus pneumoniae A.

Lymphocytic B. (LCMV) choriomeningitis virus

C. Listeria monocytogenes

D. Staphylococcus aureus

Salmonella E.

to activated component. ________, T response high-affinity immune a receptor express Fill-in-the-Blanks: IL-2 lose 11.9 an of expression component, cells receptor F. IL-7 a an pathogen, ______, During and Toxoplasma all a hematopoietic generate of protein tyrosine isoforms cells _________, activated different by expressed cells. also The phosphatase and distinguished of develop, ________ latter. the these and central and expression Effector in memory by former high can the cells ___________________ in be survival on and _________. additionally of The memory is CD4+ is survival memory on T _________, the of cells cells dependent although dependent T both CD8+ CD8+

references. Section

infection can be distinct phases. divided course 11-1 several into The an of

R. Principles G., and of Infectious Dolin, Practice Diseases, (eds): Mandell, 5th J., Bennett, ed. and Livingstone, Churchill 2000. New York,

H., L., Abel, C., A., Bernuth, V., J.L. Puel, E., Sancho-Shimizu, von Yang, Jouanguy, and Picard, S.Y., Casanova, Zhang, K., in immunity viruses. to protective of Human interferons receptor-dependent Toll-like induction : Immunol. Rev. 2007, 220:225–236.

recruited to The that 11-2 infectious clear an the on mechanisms effector are agent. infection depend

H.: J., and cells. Mjösberg, subsets of Bernink, lymphoid innate Th1and J., Spits, Th2-like Immunol. Rev. 252:133–138. 2013,

Fearon, Locksley, and R.M. D.T., acquired of innate : immunity in response. the instructive immune role The 272:50–53. 1996, Science

G., Rudensky, and A.Y. Gasteiger, innate Interactions lymphocytes. : and between adaptive Nat. Rev. Immunol. 14:631–639. 2014,

from nonself The noninfectious self. system immune infectious C.A., discriminate Jr: Janeway, to evolved Immunol. 13:11–16. 1992, Today

cells immunity. lymphoid H., and Eberl, G.: and Spits, in inflammation Innate A.N.J., McKenzie, Immunity 2014, 41:366–374.

Bucks, M., al. Kane, T.K., Flynn, C., Fallon, R.J., et S.H., Langford, C.M., Bellosi, Pannell, Daly, P.G., Neill, R., A., Wong, D.R., Nuocytes mediates represent innate a : type-2 effector that leukocyte immunity. new 2010, 464:1367–1370. Nature

S.H., Salimi, Scanlon, Englezakis, Hams, C.J., M., Walker, al. J.L., Barlow, et Y.Y., Wong, Oliphant, J.A., A., S.T., J.M., Hwang, Brewer, E., : T cells CD4+ promotes MHCII-mediated innate helminth potentiates group type 2 expulsion. between and cells 2 parasitic immunity dialog lymphoid and Immunity 41:283–295. 2014,

naive a CD27 of False: cells marker is as cells. as 11.10 memory or T well True B

inflammasome to and blunting induce while How responses type 11.11 activation Short type responses? 1 3 help Answer: able 2 type is

Match the the downstream STAT. cytokine 11.12 Matching: to

J.L., Walker, A.N.J. McKenzie, Barlow, and J.A., miss did lymphoid we cells—how Innate them? : Nat. Rev. Immunol. 13:75–87. 2013,

sites adhesion guided specific by cells in changes receptors. and Effector infection tissues T 11-3 expression to of chemokine and molecules of are their

and defense Sokol, receptors: host chemokine and for Griffith, immunity. Chemokines and cells Luster, J.W., A.D.: positioning C.L., Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2014, 32:659–702.

and Wild, Vestweber, A., Frenette, D., P.S. A.J., M.K., Peired, Hidalgo, ligands Complete CD44. of distinct and of functions reveals ESL-1, PSGL-1, neutrophils : E-selectin identification on Immunity 2007, 26:477–489.

and skin antigen challenge. of nodes Dudler, following through Marston, C.R., MacKay, T-cell lymph and Altered L.: migration patterns W., Eur. J. Immunol. 1992, 22:2205–2210.

sequestration: more. A., by decoys M.: and Tuning and inflammation immunity Bonecchi, chemokine Locati, Mantovani, R., and Nat. Rev. Immunol. 6:907–918. 2006,

and W.R.: cell T tissue F.R., Mueller, Memory migration S.N., residence. patterns, Carbone, subsets, T., and Gebhardt, Heath, Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2013, 31:137–161.

T reveals Lipp, upon A., P., Ponath, Hoy, B., recently Kremmer, and chemokine receptor potential cells. Lanzavecchia, Sallusto, Qin, Forster, expression M., for activated E., stimulation in S., homing novel Palermo, F., A.: TCR Switch R., Eur. J. Immunol. 29:2037–2045. 1999,

progresses. sites Pathogen-specific T cells are immunity infection as 11-4 effector of adaptive at enriched

Ingulli, McSorley, Jenkins, Itano, D.L., Pape, and Reinhardt, R.L., Khoruts, Mueller, S.J., A., M.K., A., E., K.A. vivo antigen-specific of : T In cells. activation CD4 Annu. Rev. Immunol. 19:23–45. 2001,

the classical pathogens coordinate through TH1 intracellular macrophages. 11-5 cells activation host and to of response amplify

Freeman, B., synthase-independent Kaplan, inducible P.J., synthase-dependent growth oxide intracellular nitric S., oxide L.G., G.: and both inducible mycobacterial and Murray, controls by TNF-α pathways. nitric Ryffel, Bekker, Immunol. J. 166:6728–6734. 2001,

disintegration on in Lethal J., T and Pfeffer, K.: S., Ehlers, Kutsch, and mice Ehlers, mycobacteria-infected cells S., is granuloma TNFRp55–/– Benini, dependent IL-12. E.M., J. Immunol. 2000, 165:483–492.

Tripp, Wolf, S.F., and C.S., C.S., A., O’Garra, Macatonia, Murphy, Hsieh, S.E., K.M. Development : produced cells by T of through IL-12 CD4+ macrophages. Listeria-induced TH1 260:547–549. Science 1993,

necrosis the cruzi M.A., and mechanism. interferon-γ tumor oxide-dependent Synergism macrophage and for Muñoz-Fernández, on factor-α killing nitric activation intracellular Trypanosoma through between Fernández, of a M.: Fresno, M.A., Eur. J. Immunol. 1992, 22:301–307.

P.J., and Murray, Wynn, T.A. pathogenic functions macrophage and Protective of : subsets. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 11:723–737. 2011,

Stout, CD40 Xu, Flavell, in I.S., and Grewal, J., T R.D., mice. activation ligand-deficient macrophage J., R.A.: Impaired Suttles, cell-mediated J. Immunol. 156:8–11. 1996,

be to Activation TH1 11-6 by must damage. tightly macrophages avoid tissue cells of regulated

J.S. Duffield, a of macrophage: Hyde. inflammatory Jekyll : The and story Clin. Sci. 104:27–38. 2003,

the monocyte-derived neutrophils potential of Meek, inflammation. and of Model and E., the and phases chronic Labow, to systems human during R.S., assess acute destructive Santerre, macrophages J.P.: J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 54:189–197. 2001,

predict D.: regulatory A Mycobacterium cell-mediated during mechanisms J.E., human model with immune tuberculosis. and to infection Kirschner, Wigginton, J. Immunol. 166:1951–1967. 2001,

Chronic TH1 mediates to by activation of be of that cells formation the 11-7 macrophages contain cannot intracellular granulomas cleared. pathogens

D.G. James, clinicopathological classification disorders. : of A granulomatous Postgrad. Med. J. 76:457–465. 2000,

of type 1 reveal in in 11-8 its immunity important pathogens. the elimination Defects intracellular role

Skeiky, protection IL-12 defined Berberich, H.: induced antigens. can Hambrecht, G., an upon dependent Y.A., C., be and molecularly cell Ramirez-Pineda, (DC)-based is and intracellular Dendritic C., pathogen Moll, by DC-derived J.R., Alber, against J. Immunol. 170:3171–3179. 2003,

P., S., I., Launois, Sakrauski, A.K., A.D., O., H., Zimmermann, Egeter, et Himmelrich, al. Seegmuller, Biedermann,T., Voigt, H., Levine, Gumy,A., BALB/c mice. instructs major IL-4 Leishmania and TH1 : resistance in to responses susceptible Nat. Immunol. 2001, 2:1054–1060.

interleukin for memory J.F., and A.: on monocytogenes role T., 18 beyond production. Neighbors, effects Barrat, and extends R., its S.R., to F.J., X., Debets, R.A., gamma primary effector Listeria A critical Churakova, M., Kastelein, J.S., Abrams, interferon in Xu, that Ruuls, responses O’Garra, Bazan, J. Exp. Med. 2001, 194:343–354.

11-9 cells and helminths coordinate 2 responses tissue expel repair to intestinal type injury. TH2

to in effectors The and R.K.: infection. D., sensors Grencis, epithelium: Artis, intestinal nematode Immunol. Mucosal 2008, 1:252–264.

S.J., Jolin, A., N.E., Barlow, D.R., P.G., Hewett, A.N.J. Ballantyne, McIlgorm, and Fallon, McKenzie, A., H.E., Dasvarma, J.L., Mangan, that interleukin onset : and of an provides IL-13 population cell at Identification helminth of IL-5, IL-4, expulsion. the (IL)-25-dependent J. Exp. Med. 2006, 203:1105–1116.

defense of T., regulation against J., Finkelman, F.D., K.B., Goldhill, nematodes. Cytokine Shea-Donohue, Urban, intestinal and J.F., C.A., Gauser, Morris, W.C., parasitic Sullivan, S.C., Madden, host Jr: Annu. Rev. Immunol. 15:505–533. 1997,

Hepworth, Grencis, inducer Liew, adaptive F.Y., immunity and a R.K.: to of intestinal N.E., nematodes. M.R., potent Humphreys, D., IL-33, Xu, J. Immunol. 2008, 180:2443–2449.

Sullivan, Bando, Reinhardt, R.M. I.-C., J.K., Ho, R.L., Liang, and B.M., H.-E., Locksley, expression and functions allergic define IL-13 : of unique Divergent patterns immunity. in IL-4 Nat. Immunol. 13:58–66. 2012,

Yazdanbakhsh, D., E.J., M., T.A. R.M., Wynn, Maizels, Pearce, and Artis, Regulation immunity in pathogenesis helminth infections. and : of Exp. J. Med. 206:2059–2066. 2009,

C., orchestrate C., Voehringer, immunity helminths. R., Schwartz, I., D.: Panzer, protective Ohnmacht, and Naumann, chronic and dermatitis Schiedewitz, M., allergic against Basophils 2010, 33:364–374. Immunity

Innate initiators in Th2 D.: and S.A., cell function responses. Artis, immune cytokine Noti, populations Saenz, as M., effectors and Trends Immunol. 2010, 31:407–413.

Sullivan, B.M., R.M. and Locksley, to contributor Basophils: : host nonredundant a immunity. 2009, Immunity 30:12–20.

and S.J., Dyken, Van R.M. Locksley, in macrophages: roles interleukin-13-mediated disease. : alternatively activated and Interleukin-4and homeostasis Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2013, 31:317–343.

type 11-10 clearance to extracellular cells of the bacteria coordinate and responses fungi. enhance 3 TH17

Edeal, K., F., Mcallister, Reinhart, M., J., Zheng, Askew, D.A., Chan, Fei, Y.R., al. T.A., S.J., Pociask, Aujla, D.J., Gaus, M., et host : bacterial defense against pneumonia. IL-22 Gram-negative mediates mucosal Nat. Med. 2008, 14:275–281.

S., Garrone, Djossou, J.J., et Saeland, E., Pin, O., P., C., Chomarat, al. Maat, Fossiez, P., F., L., Ait-Yahia, Garcia, Flores-Romo, S., proinflammatory interleukin-17 to hematopoietic cytokines. T : stromal cells produce induces cell and Exp. J. Med. 1996, 183:2593–2603.

G.J., K.I., M., Nelson, al. Young, et L.J., Bagby, Schurr, Ramsay, Lockhart, S., Happel, A.J., J.E., E., Quinton, J.R., Shellito, Zheng, E., in IL-17 Cutting 4 receptor to response Toll-like Klebsiella roles pneumoniae : IL-23 and infection. edge: of in expression Immunol. J. 170:4432–4436. 2003,

Schweighoffer, et M.J., E.C., Tsoni, F., Robinson, V., LeibundGut-Landmann, Brown, E., J., S., Tybulewicz, al. S.V., Osorio, Gross, Slack, Ruland, O., G.D., produce T cells Syk-and of interleukin innate : CARD9-dependent immunity that 17. of induction the to coupling helper Nat. Immunol. 8:630–638. 2007,

in cell Ouyang, T 17 W., J.K., and helper Kolls, Y.: The of cytokines biological effector Zheng, functions inflammation. 2008, 28:454–467. Immunity

to Immunity infections. fungal Romani, L.: Nat. Rev. Immunol. 11:275–288. 2011,

gut. in tissue-inducer D.: lymphoid cells CD4+ Sonnenberg, G.F., immunity Artis, Elloso, innate the L.A., and L.A., M.M., Monticelli, promote Fouser, Immunity 34:122–134. 2011,

Zheng, F.J., Ghilardi, A.R., Gong, N., Hu, Y., Modrusan, Sauvage, Y., Q., al. D.M., et De Sa, S.M., Danilenko, P.A., Valdez, Z., Abbas, : attaching defense pathogens. Interleukin-22 and early mediates against host effacing bacterial Nat. Med. 14:282–289. 2008,

cells functions. to their effector T continue out to carry 11-11 effector respond Differentiated as they signals

L., et T., Cua, Chen, Lucian, Murphy, To, W., Joyce, B., B., C.A., D.J., S., Kwan, al. Churakova, J., Y., Sherlock, Seymour, Interleukin-23 inflammation the of cytokine for critical : the is than brain. interleukin-12 rather autoimmune 2003, 421:744–748. Nature

in IL-23deficient Compromised and Chen, Gurney, S., A.L., responses Ghilardi, and mice. Q., humoral Kljavin, F.J.: Lucas, N., delayed-type N., De hypersensitivity Sauvage, Immunol. J. 172:2827–2833. 2004,

Hondowics, A.Y., maintain a is Scott, Th1 required to and B.D., response infection. P.: IL-12 Park, Leishmania major during Immunol. J. 165:896–902. 2000,

pathogen G., and edge: T gondii. Cutting IL-12 maintenance production of Sher, IFN-γ intracellular mediating M., resistance to Toxoplasma A.: Yap, the cells Pesin, in required chronic for is the Immunol. J. 2000, 165:628–631.

cytokines of cells release Effector can independently to T recognition. be 11-12 antigen activated

and L., Junttila, Guo, I.S., Paul, W.E. innate lymphoid Cytokine-induced cytokine and by production conventional : cells. Immunol. Trends 2012, 33:598–606.

K., Usui, M.: costimulatory IFN-gamma-inducing the Suemoto, and Kurimoto, on Okamoto, activation T., IL-12. Kohno, factor (IGIF) exerts Ohtsuki, Ikeda, Kataoka, its not Th1 a cells Th2 of of and factor Y., but I., is independently J., M., M., effect J. Immunol. 1997, 158:1541–1550.

Effector cells adaptation anti-pathogen responses. during 11-13 demonstrate T cooperativity enable that and plasticity

Basu, R., Weaver, C.T. R.D., Hatton, and family: function. flexibility Th17 The : follows Immunol. Rev. 2013, 252:89–103.

Winter, M.K., Bäumler, McLachlan, Lee, J.B., and S.J. Kurtz, Jenkins, Fan, J.R., S.-J., D., McSorley, A.J., S.E., bacterial proteins CD4 host : and of expression Th17 instructs Temporal development. cell expansion T Pathog. PLoS 2012, 8:e1002499.

Weaver, C.O., Lee, C.L., Oliver, Turner, and Maynard, H., Y.K., D., C.T. Elson, J.R., Chen, lineage. : T plasticity helper the Late in 17 developmental 30:92–107. 2009, Immunity

T K.M., of Stockinger, changing B.: Murphy, face the plasticity: circumstances. cell Effector flexibility in and Nat. Immunol. 11:674–680. 2010,

O'Shea, and Paul, J.J., W.E. CD4+ Mechanisms of plasticity cells. and helper T : lineage commitment underlying 2010, 327:1098–1102. Science

pathogens. of antibody-mediated immunity for critical Integration of is protection 11-14 types celland against many

S., M., P., Georges-Courbot, Baize, Debre, Georges, Capron, A.J. J., McCormick, Lansoud-Soukate, M.C., S.P., Fisher-Hoch, E.M., and J.B., Leroy, in responses are with : Ebola outcome Defective associated patients. extensive fatal humoral virus-infected and intravascular apoptosis Nat. Med. 5:423–426. 1999,

CD4 CD8 pathogens the responses T-cell help. 11-15 Primary absence to in occur can T-cell of

G., Hunter, C.A., G.J. Cai, and Bancroft, G., Lertmemongkolchai, the cells of response of production to to : pathogens. bacterial T Bystander CD8 activation contributes rapid in IFN-γ J. Immunol. 166:1097–1105. 2001,

Paige, S.R., Wakeham, Schilham, et C.J., Sambhara, A., Rahemtulla, Arabian, Narendran, M.W., T.M., R.M., al. Fung-Leung, W.P., Zinkernagel, A., A., A., Kundig, markedly and development in decreased CD4. : activity CD8+ lacking function cell cells helper of but Normal mice 1991, 353:180–184. Nature

Melief, and van R., R.E., C.J. Toes, der E.I., Schoenberger, Offringa, S.P., Voort, is for by CD40–CD40L help mediated lymphocytes cytotoxic interactions. T-cell : T 393:480–483. 1998, Nature

M.J.: CD8 cell help. following Defective J.C., T memory Bevan, acute infection T-cell CD4 and Sun, without Science 2003, 300:339–349.

cells. the and Resolution 11-16 of generation the accompanied of is by of infection effector of most memory cells the an death

CD95, and Bouillet, T BIM cell homeostasis. O’Reilly, P., L.A.: and Nat. Rev. Immunol. 9:514-519. 2009,

death. Chowdhury, J.: granzyme cuts: of Death by Lieberman, and D., a programmed pathways cell thousand Annu. Rev. Immunol. 26:389–420. 2008,

Siegel, R.M. immune-cell Caspases life : the death. of crossroads and at Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2006, 6:308–317.

of role A.: proteins the Strasser, immune in BH3-only The system. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 5:189–200. 2005,

long Immunological lived memory 11-17 is vaccination. after or infection

and Rosen, antibodies re-exposure. measles stability Patterns of L.: Black, of absence residents in and the in F.L., Tahiti of their J. Immunol. 1962, 88:725–731.

M., M.W., C.W., Hammarlund Hanifin, M.K. Koudelka, Slifka, Mori, Lewis, J.M., E., and Antiviral following a : case-control infection: study. smallpox virus immunity Virol. J 2010, 84:12754–60.

J.M., J.A., Nelson, Hansen, G.J., Slifka, and L.I., Lewis, E., M.K. Sexton, Hanifin, Strelow, Hammarlund, M.W., S.G., vaccination. antiviral of Duration smallpox after immunity : Nat. Med. 2003, 9:1131–1137.

Taswell, J.C., and Ryser, K.T. MacDonald, H.R., C., M.B., Maryanski, Widmer, Cerottini, J.L., J.E., Brunner, precursors. and and their Quantitation of cytolytic : cloning lymphocytes T Immunol. Rev. 1980, 51:93–123.

Lemonnier, MHC L.L., Ahmed, T in class of F., Lau, cells Altman, I-deficient K., CD8 memory mice. Persistence R.: and J., Murali-Krishna, Sambhara, S., Science 1999, 286:1377–1381.

regulate and Seddon, homeostasis Zamoyska, signals cell CD4 memory receptor B., T cells. R.: P., and of Interleukin Tomlinson, 7 Nat. Immunol. 2003, 4:680–686.

of responses have compared B Memory naive for cells. and antigen 11-18 B-cell affinity are more with rapid higher responses

after effect of single Studies at antigen and Andersson, antibody-forming dose the The time B.: the the of on level of cell: immunization. regulation avidity Exp. J. Med. 132:77–88. 1970,

immune maturation and Mutation the drift C.: the Berek, in response. shift repertoire Milstein, C., and of Immunol. Rev. 1987, 96:23–41.

Thorarinsdottir, Grimsholm, K., P., Gjertsson, Mårtensson, I., W., Bergmann, I.L. O., Jirholt, B., Ren, and in Memory models. mouse : B cells Scand. J. Immunol. 78:149–156. 2013,

J.M., and Paul, W.E. Davie, immunocompetent cells. on Receptors : "maturation" response. the correlates of V. the Cellular of immune J. Exp. Med. 135:660–674. 1972,

H.N., Eisen, Siskind, G.W. and antibodies the : in affinities during response. of Variations immune 3:996–1008. 1964, Biochemistry

K.L., D.M. Good-Jacobson, and Tarlinton, memory. to routes : Multiple B-cell Int. Immunol. 2012, 24:403–408.

cells. blood mutated Rajewsky, genes: somatically somatically Klein, carry peripheral Human general K., antigen a region R.: variable and as B the (memory) expressing B mutated marker Küppers, CD27 (Ig)M+IgD+ for cell U., surface immunoglobulin cells CD27 J. Exp. Med. 188:1679–1689. 1998,

of Rajewsky, germinal Shimoda, M., K.: Takemori, Generation Kaji, T., memory Y., Takahashi, and T., centers. inside outside B cells and Eur. Immunol. J. 44:1258–1264. 2014,

responses. immune

and Bende, F., T.A., Triesscheijn, Noesel, van Guijt, Maldegem, C.J. Wormhoudt, van M., R.J., R., centers nodes B in lymph cells. contain Germinal : reactivated memory human J. Exp. Med. 204:2655–2665. 2007,

centers, is affinity memory and Porto, B and Dal in higher Kelsoe, participate low Haberman, cells competition Very reduced. M.J.: germinal responses secondary Shlomchik, J.M., form immune become G., affinity B when cells, A.M., J. Exp. Med. 195:1215–1221. 2002,

responses. Chappell, R., Shashidharamurthy, Selvaraj, Goins, enhancement of secondary and Jacob, Immune antibody C.L., P., complex-mediated C.P., J.: Immunol. J. 2010, 184:6293–6298.

Y., to Kaji, course adapted cells mutated and secondary Furukawa, K., Okada, M., accumulate A., a response of Takemori, stimulus. in Takahashi, I., new B and antibody Nomura, memory T.: Both the optimally unmutated the Shimoda, repertoire T., develop and secondary M., M., the mutations Ishige, Toyokura, Int. Immunol. 2013, 25:683–695.

tetramers T an persist in frequency cells. T increased at cells identify to that relative frequency memory 11-20 MHC naive their as

M.K. A., Moon, Reilly, Hataye, Jenkins, J., J.J., Khoruts, and C., by survival T : Naive abundance. cell clonal memory and controlled CD4+ 2006, 312:114–116. Science

Jenkins, M.K. Pagán, and Chu, Pepper, H.H., A.J., J.M., M., Green, T motifs. infection clonal during CD4+ cell CD28 and expansion : YMNM PYAP of independently its promotes Immunol. J. 2012, 189:2909–2917.

and Jenkins, M.K. M., Pagán, A.J., Igyártó, Taylor, J.J., B.Z., Pepper, generate Bcl6 effector factor T central transcription Opposing receptor 1 cells. the signals and and helper interleukin-2 memory : from the Immunity 35:583–595. 2011,

IL-7 IL-15. T arise from cells maintain 11-21 or that Memory to cells effector sensitivity T

Akondy, J.D., F., al. J.D., Del H., Quyyumi, N.D., S., Wu, Teuwen, S., Edupuganti, Altman, D., Rio, C., et R.S., Monson, Miller, Garg, yellow broad and The : T memory vaccine CD8+ cell induces virus response. a human polyfunctional fever Immunol. J. 2009, 183:7919–7930.

and S.L. G.G., Atkins, Bradley, L.M., Swain, from CD4+ MEL-14, lack lymph spleen homing T the cells : memory receptor. Long-term the node Immunol. J. 148:324–331. 1992,

E., and S., of Ahmed, profiling differentiation. Molecular S.M., cell CD8 Hemby, memory Kaech, and functional T R.: Kersh, Cell 2002, 111:837–851.

cells. memory despite absence memory and survival S., in of Garcia, Impairment E., T Stockinger, immunological MHC the Kassiotis, Simpson, B.: G., of of Nat. Immunol. 2002, 3:244–250.

Sakamoto, cells C.C., Ku, cytokines. homeostasis P.: of memory A., opposing of CD8+ by Kappler, J., and M., Marrack, Murakami, T Control 2000, Science 288:675–678.

Swain, S.L. Rogers, C., and P.R., Dubey, antigen. memory lower doses Qualitative : cell more effective responses accompany changes of faster, generation: at T Immunol. J. 164:2338–2346. 2000,

and Kaech, V., S.M., D., Masopust, T of Lineage R.: subsets. R., CD8 T.C., Becker, protective von Andrian, Teichgraber, and Antia, Wherry, relationship Ahmed, U.H., E.J., immunity memory cell Nat. Immunol. 4:225–234. 2003,

cells 11-22 memory, central Memory effector tissue-resident and and T are memory, heterogeneous subsets. include

MacDonald, J.C., Cerottini, and H.R. Budd, R.C., Phenotypic a in lymphocytes Lyt-2+ of : of subset cells. identification T memory cytolytic Ann. Acad. N. Y. Sci. 532:68–75. 1988,

Selective Ahmed, CD8 T the Kaech, memory that Wherry, rise effector interleukin of Konieczny, R.: B.T., 7 receptor Surh, S.M., and identifies J.T., expression E.J., cells. long-lived C.D., cells give Tan, to Nat. Immunol. 2003, 4:1191–1198.

and generation T Sallusto, F.: Lanzavecchia, cell subsets. and memory function the Understanding A., of Curr. Opin. Immunol. 2005, 17:326–332.

Carbone, W.R.: Heath, migration Memory cell subsets, and S.N., T Gebhardt, patterns, T., Mueller, F.R., tissue and residence. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 31:137–161. 2012,

Geginat, and cell T generation, function, Central Sallusto, memory A.: maintenance. and Lanzavecchia, and F., subsets: effector memory J., Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2004, 22:745–763.

D., Lenig, Lipp, Sallusto, lymphocytes A.: and T functions. effector potentials and R., memory distinct subsets Two with Lanzavecchia, of homing Forster, M., F., 1999, 401:708–712. Nature

the memory establishment Transcriptional and Skon, S1pr1 C.N., for of Anderson, T D., resident Masopust, Hogquist, S.C.: K.G., Jameson, CD8+ is K.A., required J.Y., of downregulation cells. Lee, Nat. Immunol. 2013, 14:1285–1293.

T-cell required involves and CD4 IL-2 CD8 for T-cell 11-23 memory signaling. is help and CD40

are C.: required CD4 cells Bourgeois, for CD8 memory C., generation. and Tanchot, T cell T Eur. J. Immunol. 2003, 33:3225–3231.

C., C.: A memory. T role CD8 B., of on the generation Rocha, in and T expression cells CD40 Bourgeois, CD8 for Tanchot, cell 297:2060–2063. 2002, Science

Lemmens, U., Wolfe, von E.E., Janssen, M.G., S.P. and Christen, Herrath, T., Schoenberger, E.M., memory lymphocytes. in are secondary T expansion for required cells and CD8 T : CD4 421:852–856. Nature 2003,

Shedlock, cell memory. CD8 CD4 T in and cell generating help Shen, H.: Requirement T functional D.J., for 300:337–339. Science 2003,

maintenance, Sun, not of Williams, acute programming, Bevan, after T CD8 infection. the cells and M.J.: cells M.A., CD4 required for are memory J.C., T Nat. Immunol. 5:927–933. 2004,

and same Rocha, cell memory: same B signals. C., B.: strategy, and Tanchot, CD8 Nat. Immunol. 4:431–432. 2003,

M.A., priming are and Bevan, for Tyznik, memory Interleukin-2 Williams, during expansion M.J.: required cells. CD8 of A.J., signals T secondary 441:890–893. Nature 2006,

to subsequent responses lymphocytes. immune are attributable mainly secondary 11-24 individuals, In memory and

B., R.G. Fazekas St and Webster, Groth, de sin. : original on Disquisitions antigenic I. man. in Evidence Exp. J. Med. 1966, 140:2893–2898.

W.H. Fridman, antigen activation Regulation and presentation receptors. of B cell Fc by : Curr. Opin. Immunol. 1993, 5:355–360.

Zinkernagel, and Klenerman, R.M. P., lymphocyte responses variant bearing T cytotoxic antigenic sin viruses : impairs epitopes. to Original 1998, 394:482–485. Nature

Tangthawornchaikul, T., Mongkolsapaya, Vasanawathana, Rowland-Jones, A., Chairunsri, X.N., W., Dejnirattisai, et al. N., S., Sawasdivorn, S., Dong, S., T., Xu, J., Duangchinda, sin and apoptosis the antigenic : pathogenesis in dengue hemorrhagic of Original fever. Nat. Med. 2003, 9:921–927.

V.J., and Ascari, A.E., Pollack, Gorman, Baker, W.Q., W., J.G., W.J. Allen, Freda, : clinical of Results RhoGAm women. trials in of 1968, 8:151–153. Transfusion

L., Lefrançois, M.J., and M.J.: recall of Bevan, sin cell T antigenic original Zehn, responses. CD8+ Lack Turner, D., in J. Immunol. 2010, 184:6320–6326.

Immune System Mucosal The

in peripheral the Adaptive initiated immune that typically are responses the drain infected lymph nodes tissues. mucosae growth, external are the continuous free While most of microbial that with world tissues contact skin various microbes. have the active encounters lining environmental internal directly will the organs and invade. These most where surfaces are pathogens specialized that mucosal this system the discuss the of these surfaces—the we system. will features chapter, serves In mucosal immune immune

have linked that vertebrate of system, well of the the coevolved to been immune need system vast mucosal that commensal deal the part in with particular, immune to to adaptive may first the vertebrates. the with The the evolve, gut, possibly bacteria of populations antibodies central found in gut the first and cartilaginous Fabricius—derive immunoglobulin lymphoid of bursa avian and are thymus in embryonic the Organized intestine. tissues organs—the the and primitive vertebrates lymphoid important two from of fishes, primitive secretory the of mammals. surface Fish body forerunner be their antibody may also and that IgA form of in protects have a the It immune has the specializations are represents the nodes that original and immune mucosal spleen system, been lymph system therefore and vertebrate that suggested later

mucosal and system. The nature the immune of structure

of invasion surfaces. that of line commensal epithelium against The covers microorganisms potential defense all first these pathogens layer by and is thin the function breached the by defenses can its molecules mucosal cells be supplemented However, needs barrier be by to of the relatively epithelium immune provided system. easily, and so the and mucosal bearing as tissues, 3. The 2 in are innate defenses cells peptides antimicrobial of Chapters invariant and described receptors, such pathogen-recognition and mucosal innate immune we particular highlighting those of discussion. importance on adaptive are that In chapter responses system, only to concentrate the our this as apply chapter underlying reader example, general immunological intestine the all for is tissues; details at immune here constituent to anatomical the and the our use referred we references and of the the other further of system this end of sites. the will to Many the principles its mucosal

surfaces body. system 12-1 the of The the internal immune protects mucosal

internal comprises and tract, gastrointestinal respiratory the tract, lower mucosal The middle immune the the that ear. by lined mucus-secreting a tract, are and urogenital body upper epithelium—the surfaces system the such the the and these as breast of glands the salivary It associated organs, with the eye, glands, the exocrine also conjunctivae lacrymal (Fig. lactating includes and glands 12.1). area to mucosal enormous The represent surfaces an

the The immune of nature mucosal system. and structure

mucosal infection of responses. immune to and mucosal The regulation response

oral gland body human uterus salivary of Fig. stomach the tissues sinus gastrointestinal mammary urogenital bladder respiratory cavity intestine Mucosal conjunctiva tract kidney trachea gland ear tract lungs vagina gland lachrymal tract middle esophagus The mucosal system. immune 12.1 as organs with and the well ear, associated as associated lachrymal The as tissues, system tissues pharynx, of cells mucosal glands urogenital lymphoid these the and and tract, the are cavity, the such glands. intestine, glands and respiratory immune tract, middle oral with salivary the the also lactating of is mucosal system. breast part the The immune

protected. be has m2, 400 skin. almost for that surface which a instance, times the of 200 of area intestine, is small human The

lymphocytes the approximately majority of immune individuals. system in producing the the mucosal immune forms largest body’s of containing of The immunoglobulin tissues, three-quarters part and healthy all other materials from entering antigens exposed continuously the is environment. to and It also lymph will many call the and unique spleen this and in with has unusual system), system When mucosal (Fig. (which immune the features compared nodes immune systemic chapter we 12.2).

Fig. mucosal of the Distinctive system. immune 12.2 features of rest them more mucosal is system. in a antigens, the we the systemic wider system—what immune frequently the immune The encounters encounters chapter much range immune than call and bigger, system of this specialized regulatory and is the that to features, responses antigens. and responses are in mechanisms unwanted antigen, for This designed and reflected distinctive anatomical to immune uptake unusual prevent of food other innocuous effector

and the mucosal nature immune system. structure of The

(103,000*) mucosal infections cough (6000) Acute Roundworm hookworm million) 4 million3 and Diarrheal Whooping million) Tuberculosis B million (2.2 diseases million) deaths Worldwide from respiratory (4 million1 0 million2 HIV/AIDS (2 Hepatitis (400,000) infections million) (1.5 Measles (294,000) annually

and absorption physiological activities mouth, (the (the throat), surfaces to exchange lungs), of gut), food sensory the functions permeable and Because and nose, the are body. mucosal in (eyes, the of (uterus gas thin barriers interior and vagina), reproduction their to of importance essential life means protect defense to these mechanisms them from effective that invasion. tissues The are not create and is agents vulnerability (Fig. significant it infectious invade infection, the and majority is their vast the that permeability of surprising Equally routes these by that to human fragility obvious body 12.3). and major developing throughout the Diarrheal respiratory diseases, countries. worm especially world, in the be in infections, measles, acute whooping tuberculosis, cough, causes of death continue to infants pulmonary infestations often as whose be must added natural syphilis. pathogen such (HIV), of as a transmitted well mucosal infections is as route entry other virus surface overlooked, a To the immunodeficiency via human sexually these

vast a also surfaces mucosal array of are for portals are not of entry antigens that The pathogenic. foreign quantities exposed year kg estimated enormous proteins—an 30–35 gut, is per This per person. best is to of which seen the food in least bacteria large live microorganisms, thousand At commensal species are is at their the colonized by same the microbiota. of symbiosis in intestine that healthy a as or the host known and with time, a in in least These contents, 10. most by factor of making bacteria present of organisms the them are 1012 milliliter numerous colon body the the levels per at cells at populations found intestine. Substantial viruses and healthy are fungi of the also in as no functions, organisms having being and harm, are essential circumstances well beneficial important immune normal to function. metabolic their In these for normal as many hosts, do resident also are (Fig. of surfaces colonized populations substantial The commensal by organisms mucosal other 12.4).

microbiota immune and recognized many antigens, proteins the they being adaptive are of by capable the As contain foreign system. food and against Generating immune these inappropriate responses would, harmless be however, protective agents wasteful. are Indeed, to as this common diseases Chapter protein in (caused response disease Crohn’s of and responses immune some diseases, the to relatively bacteria). a 14) now the celiac disease including bowel kind gluten; by inflammatory of wheat response (a believed such aberrant cause discussed to commensal be antigens see, in the shall intestinal and system As we food means mucosal from normal the has microbiota. immune evolved pathogens of distinguishing harmful faced other such issues and are surfaces, mucosal respiratory the at as female genital tract Similar

Fig. 12.3 health comprise biggest worldwide. infections the problems one Mucosal of surfaces enter those death the through routes. mucosal Most that pathogens are the of cause the world either body these or of throughout respiratory influenzae, infections bacteria (such cause Bordetella numerous pertussis, which as cough) by virus). syncytial caused as and viruses (such whooping influenza Respiratory and pneumonia; the and pneumoniae Haemophilus cause Streptococcus are of and Diarrheal vibrio) Cholera (such as both bacteria diseases caused by cholera the (such rotaviruses). viruses bacterium are and as and the urogenital virus through human enters tract secreted mucosa into passed child to breast is of immunodeficiency the or from milk AIDS in (HIV) way. that this causes The mother respiratory tuberculosis, Mycobacterium bacterium The causes which tuberculosis, tract. enters also the through respiratory systemic enters disease, manifests it oral/ a the Measles via itself route. originally but as virus. also transmitted sexually a B Hepatitis is cause parasitic and chronic death. intestine debilitating premature inhabiting disease worms the Finally, vaccines children occur from of developing old those diseases, diarrheal no of and deaths, world, these the these many effective acute and Most respiratory still years under in especially are 5 there against pathogens. in are shown of Update. 2004 Disease: Burden available figures estimated most the Global recent Numbers (The Organization, Health World 2008). liver from or from not chronic cancer include infection. cirrhosis resulting deaths *Does

PC2 (4.4%)

Fig. Bacteroides healthy humans. microbiota mucosal Escherichia of the surfaces different (Bacteroidetes), commensal at in 12.4Composition (Actinobacteria), fragilis and (Proteobacteria). Panel a: coli species human sizes of typically pie for plotting distinct microbiomes first those component the the second present the of principal components. reflect from tissues, the Panel at b: isolated bacterial charts different the different principal number analysis indicated the and sites of component sites. The primary contains 1000 body colon greatest and microbiome of is as of individual accounts different variation surveys). area due The estimated to species from number (over the for these four taken contain 13% from of key that between phyla indicates samples variation the in the majority identity bacterial color of microbial The the sites. al. a, L., from adapted Dethlefsen, et : Nature species. commensal 449:811‑818. Ubiquitous commensal 2007, include bacteria b, al. C., Huttenhower, from et spp. 2012, and Lactobacillus Clostridium : Nature spp. (Firmicutes), Bifidobacterium 486:207–214.

tract. environmental and, against commensal essential, but these seminal antigens the organisms, entering the are derived pollen, other material, in Here, innocuous fluid. pathogens immunity is lower harmless, tissues also from tract, of protective urogenital many being encountered of to important which mucosal The the be source antigen immune a controlled. foreign must further by normal immune responses system fetus is

in the compartments of mucosal throughout mucosal both tissues. anatomically and system are 12-2 scattered located Cells defined immune

in throughout connective cells other the dendritic of throughout the and surface tissues epithelium intestinal cells and the of and layer tissue scattered organized as lamina the the such mucosa macrophages found tract, are underlying both and in called propria. immune-system Lymphocytes known caudal the organs comprise as lymphoid together and tissues The draining a lymph mesenteric tissues gut-associated secondary in the (GALT), the lymphoid gut group (Fig. organized with nodes of 12.5). sites at lymph which the lymphoid structure are compartmentalized are responses the of anatomically initiated. The immune nodes typical GALT have and mesenteric peripheral and organs, throughout the lamina effector response. immune cells epithelium the the The the local comprise propria scattered and cells of

Peyer’s lamina patch out found carry lymph tissues lymphocyte cells cells) responses organized intraepithelial and the Intestinal mucosa they dome lymphocytes subepithelial lymphoid scattered induced, lymphoid to intestine, propria in lamina (B propria are where T-cell Intestinal area small lumen Scattered immune villus lymphatic functions Organized intestine effector lymphocyte node intestinal throughout the of are follicle lymphoid tissues mesenteric epithelium crypt isolated The where follicle

Fig. tissues and lymphocyte Gut-associated lymphoid populations. 12.5

epithelial up and nutrients. (villi) of absorption responsible food are covered of for fingerlike layer of by a thin made digestion processes is cells of that (red) that derive in new epithelial cells by cells are stem from These replaced cells continually crypts. the yellow is underlying called layer is throughout and this propria, epithelium lamina the pale colored The chapter. tissue the forming intestine, tissues organized isolated follicles are what known as as and the lymphoid (GALT). the Lymphocytes tissues in in the patches such with gut‑associated compartments lymphoid lymphoid Peyer’s found is discrete several by layer of lumen the These the of tissues the the from lie itself, intestinal separated epithelium. wall of single intestine in the contents for to mucosa by the gut nodes, vessels The intestinal nodes body. mesenteric and lymphatic largest which the draining lymph the the are Peyer’s lymph nodes lymph and are in afferent patches the are connected immune responsible antigen and sites are B Together, T tissues these cells for phase responses. are of and the presentation organized the induction to of cells mainly comprise follicles lymph nodes contain (blue) and and the areas isolated while B discrete Peyer’s cells. follicles B‑cell T‑cell patches (yellow), mesenteric these cells scattered effector cells—effector lymphoid (ILCs). as found outside organized are tissues: plasma antibody‑secreting Many are as throughout lymphocytes lymphoid mucosa innate the the and cells, cells well T Effector lymphocytes both the propria. in lamina are epithelium the in found and the lymph from propria also the lamina to nodes. Lymphatics mesenteric drain

throughout comprises intestine; and the follicles the appendix which lymphoid The the adenoids the and present humans); throat. intestine; Peyer’s which the isolated GALT small are patches, found only in in are tonsils (in (ILF), the a of squamous of ring, tonsils aggregates are palatine lingual and layer of airways and around the tissue form (Fig. a ring, the the known lymphoid by large the entrance epithelium as covered The of at and back tonsils, Waldeyer’s gut adenoids, mouth 12.6). enlarged frequently and in in extremely as They were because a infections, the past often recurrent result. childhood become of removed in to and has response who seen removed. IgA tonsils had polio been reduced adenoids A have their oral vaccination individuals

The tonsil ring, and tongue form a airway gut the the of of tissues, ring adenoid tonsil entrance around Waldeyer’s lymphoid adenoids palatine tonsils lingual and

Fig. organs the surrounds tract. the A of ring 12.6 intestine entrance and lymphoid called to Waldeyer’s ring respiratory cavity. the the of the back The either of at palatine while the tonsils nose, lie of lie side either at of the oral adenoids base side lymphoid the tonsils on of discrete the tongue. base are The lingual organs tissue layer squamous organized of of the epithelium a areas shows photo). where covered lymphoid through top by a are inflamed micrograph section The tonsil, human an of (at surface sites easily (crypts) contains crevices but infection. surface of deep become area that increase can The the Hematoxylin and eosin staining. ×100. Magnification

Fig. facilitates antigen antigens M by Transport 12.7 presentation. cells of

patches. first cells the epithelium in of of The Peyer’s panel M the follicle‑associated antigen illustrates through passage convoluted M allowing layer, cells with the membranes that other within form and basal epithelial cells. ‘pockets’ contact have close lymphocytes local cells delivery to cells antigens their that the for by been transport taken This up the dendritic favors intestine have the M presentation. of and from antigen a with dark fluorescently presence T pockets micrograph and epithelial with cells cells shows labeled stained (CD3, inferred (cytokeratin, right green). blue), M‑cell (CD20, B Peyer’s red) of from The antibodies the patch of cells top myeloid expression staining recognition follicle shows cells cells, UEA‑1 and epithelium interacting dendritic include with for peptidoglycan (cyan). lectin identified by (green), of the protein‑S At apical cells CX3CR1expressing (red) patch right, some bottom which M Peyer’s processes cells Some extend cells M into CX3CR1‑expressing the (arrows). Top Espen, et S., al. micrograph right, from Immunol. : Today 20:141–151. 1999, Wang right, micrograph Bottom from et al. Immunol. : J. 187:5277–5285. 2011,

lymphoid of follicles located patches the isolated of The lymphoid the small the the the Peyer’s wall. within are and appendix, tissue intestinal intestine, the Peyer’s the in gut. are for sites initiation patches responses immune of important Visible appearance, lymphoid project to into eye, a the naked aggregates forming lumen of they intestinal have distinctive the cells dome-like Fig. (see that 1.24). patches are in human Peyer’s small the 100–200 intestine. There Peyer’s a consisting and germinal small than B each the lymphoid richer are organs, They between number Fig. large the follicles patch of centers, of follicles with immediately systemic areas T-cell much B-cell cells below peripheral with (see in 12.5). immediately subepithelial T lies epithelium area in cells. dendritic the cells, dome cells, B rich and and The is beneath lymphoid the is epithelium. lumen gut Separating a the layer follicle-associated of from tissues specialized Fig. as called and as number cells cells shown (M smaller of microfold This epithelial epithelial cells), a known conventional intestinal in cells contains enterocytes 1.24. is 7-23). a like necrosis of M-cell ligand is Section by (TNF) and B CD40L superfamily factor tumor which development RANK the (see local (RANKL), cells member controlled digestive enterocytes surface of instead cells that and the epithelial lack up Fig. make thick found of do the not or intestinal Unlike so secrete have surface the and of covering (see cells mucus most conventional luminal a glycocalyx) enzymes mucins, layer M microvilli epithelium, folded (the 1.24). the exposed within from Peyer’s microbes to patch which gut lumen and lumen the preferred the as directly by (Fig. antigens particles the therefore route are are and such microorganisms enter They 12.7). epithelium contains cells. and The follicle-associated also lymphocytes dendritic

can large with be more of intestine, large thousand but the identified local lymphoid correlating microorganisms. throughout load isolated Several are microscopically the frequent small and in follicles the they intestines, Like lies cells patches, the Peyer’s containing have follicles an that these over organized tissue. lymphoid M epithelium develop to birth gut antigen due microorganisms. cells they in by colonization only and after commensal of However, response contain the mainly to B stimulation contrast, fetal birth. is in development completed patches, already until although full Peyer’s the after their gut, are in not present gut, called In cells dendritic aggregates (LTi) cells the intestinal and the from which to follicles contain (see lymphoid wall inducer 9-2). Section small isolated tissue cryptopatches, lymphoid seem mouse in arise not Cryptopatches have gut. human yet identified the in been Peyer’s draining connected are nodes. to the and lymphatics follicles lymph by patches isolated lymphoid

in tissue intestine located the that the to which the intestine the connective abdomen. drain nodes, of The mesenteric rear tethers tissues the are lymph to of the small wall crucial nodes and to and the a largest intestinal the role play body initiating in shaping responses antigens. lymph These are immune in of large aorta. mesenteric to lymph to of and the caudal separate close as and of to lymph drain lymphoid surface node mucosal the found intestine a the known part node node, the The bifurcation aggregates the

(see and family development, Section systemic of factor their tumor during the distinct immune lymph and necrosis receptors the mesenteric system of differentiate development involves (TNF) 9-2). nodes independently fetal patches and chemokines Peyer’s The The lymphoid imprinted systemic are and the GALT in between life. differences organs thus the early

the of tract are isolated in wall respiratory tract; species respiratory the found upper lymphoid nasal-associated lining those in bronchus-associated lymphoid the nose called those such in as and the tissues upper known lymphoid (BALT). the as are nose, while mice, are some follicles the tissues also In (NALT), of in tissues tissues to term nose lymphoid all respiratory organized unless (MALT) the tract such or not mucosa-associated are collectively organs, present. although defined The sometimes to in lymphoid found is mucosal used is in humans in tissues infection refer adult found

routes The mechanisms distinctive uptake. and intestine antigen 12-3 of has

at the mucosal stimulate mucosal surfaces system. immune Antigens they epithelial transported must be across present barrier can before an adapted lumen. the the of for highly antigen patches from intestinal isolated lymphoid and Peyer’s follicles are uptake the particles lumen follicle-associated (see up or continually cells taking molecules and in gut M epithelium endocytosis from by are Fig. the phagocytosis The 12.7). this recognition may cell. pili on type involve 1 (GP2) several M found a the specific glycoprotein For by bacteria in of the protein FimH bacterial transported the the through into cell the in interior released of extracellular material where membrane, as vesicles the transcytosis. membrane-bound known cell This basal process is to space—a it is immune enterocytes, and target access find of to adaptive they a the cells are then M intestinal space, so of lack much number the gain glycocalyx pathogens cells more a even M Because to though system. accessible heart themselves subepithelial in than the fever; which Salmonella the causative enterica are major and that of agent species These enterica which pestis, serotype Salmonella poisoning; serotypes, other typhoid include bacterial dysentery; Yersinia Shigella causes of cause Typhi, plague. causes food route. follow Poliovirus, the some and as same causal of HIV, entry reoviruses, retroviruses the such prions as agent such scrapie transcytosis. encourages bacteria that M-cell that M cell, entry into in produce reorganize the their proteins cytoskeleton After the a manner

myeloid which cells, extensively makes encloses close membrane The dendritic cell and that basal a an M of is contacts local cell pocket (see lymphocytes with including Fig. folded, cells forming 12.7). M presentation take it T cells to the cells released lymphocytes. Macrophages dendritic process from and transported the for up material and in epithelium released recruited to the follicle-associated cells. they favorable are in by a that even acquire are chemokines epithelial are the or toward, constitutively position Local into, dendritic and antigens, response cells to gut of CCR6 and bind the (MIP-1γ), receptors receptors). CCL9 include dendritic Appendix to (see CCR1, The on their which cells IV and for a (MIP-3α) CCL20 chemokines respectively, listing chemokines and region the antigen-loaded The they areas the T patch, naive, where of dendritic T-cell then cells. dome antigen-specific the Peyer’s to cells from migrate meet initiate T B dendritic activate cells and IgA. switching and Together, then cells primed class cells the to the chemokines, pattern areas—are cells their into uptake and to subsequent receptors on cells, increased and cells recognition by processes— dendritic antigen into of epithelial immune production of M and markedly due Section the the of the the layer, organisms these cells of in cells pathogenic of migration 3-5). T-cell migration the (see presence the All of epithelial products dendritic ligation immune lymphoid MALT also of underlie processes the follicles of isolated of Similar the gut the and mucosal responses surfaces. induction other in in

of in disease. mucosal immune contains large The of even system the effector absence numbers 12-4 lymphocytes

contain the gut tissue. leukocytes organized numbers the lung to throughout mucosal other lymphoid as In the scattered such of and addition lymphocytes enormous surfaces and organs, of the comprise by Most activated cells effector and that they immune T of the been cells mucosal system. scattered lymphocytes have the plasma have and the of antigen, appearance cells lamina the propria in and Fig. the two are main intestine, epithelium (see the compartments: found In effector cells 12.5).

of a being layer quite are tissues despite thin separated membrane. by only These distinct immunological in basement terms, of The small epithelium component CD8 which in lymphoid the are T virtually consists mainly cells. the intestine of lymphocytes, all lamina of dendritic plasma cells, cells, CD4 effector innate macrophages, CD8 cells, types lymphoid phenotypes, The many with propria cells. and including IgA-producing and contains T cells, memory immune conventional cells and mast and the the propria α4:β7 express T chemokine integrin the the cells CCR9 of (Fig. lamina in intestine receptor small bloodstream. tissue into attracts the from the them which 12.8), express and cells either mostly T (IELs) lymphocytes are CD8 conventional the Intraepithelial

Fig. the of cells and naive effector system. Priming immune cells T redistribution the of 12.8 intestinal in T endothelial high carry entry direct their cells and which venules receptor (HEVs). chemokine the patches via Naive CCR7 into Peyer’s T L‑selectin, by T‑cell and presented has cells. they dendritic cells is been tissue encounter transported by area lymphoid antigen that the In into M the local the the lose gut‑derived CCR9 and activation, integrin L‑selectin and under and the α4:β7. During chemokine T cells, dendritic acquire cells the selective control receptor of patch differentiation, the lymphatics, passing draining the node thoracic through via lymph Peyer’s but the enter to from the exit primed mesenteric T full activation, duct. before cells the After the intestine. thoracic of bloodstream, to the cells wall back activated The small the into the duct T empties delivering bloodstream cells attracted lamina the specifically leave T α4:β7 to are and Here the bearing and of the enter CCR9 villus. propria

chemokines epithelial bloodvessellaminapropriaCCR10CCR9MAdCAM-1˜4:°7Gut-homing endothelium gut-homing effector on cells express specifc bind for largeintestinesmallintestineendotheliumepitheliumCCL25E-cadherin˜E:°7CCL28Gut MAdCAM-1 cells T cells T

Fig. 12.9 Molecular homing intestine-specific of of lymphocytes. control

dampen which or the T-cell form to act CD8 of may homodimer, α:β activation. CD8α:α (CD103), to epithelial (Fig. integrin E-cadherin αE:β7 on the These CCR9 and express IELs cells which binds 12.9). T that By predominate. propria contrast, in CD4 is it lamina cells the

presence therefore mucosa in effector characteristics the many a numerous tissues. leukocytes other The the displays lymphocytes healthy response—namely, intestinal of chronic and of inflammatory of signify effector nonlymphoid a of the presence healthy for cells The infection. such numbers tissue, but would not be unusual large necessarily in does gut response local is at the surfaces, maintaining between for microbiota. essential to and it the innocuous host the present Rather, myriad symbiosis is normally beneficial and mucosal antigens to a cells, of pathogens. when effector be generation immune produce balanced and response It regulatory required, T can full invading adaptive but, refocused to involves a

and circulation controlled adhesion chemokine tissue-specific receptors. immune the of The within lymphocytes mucosal 12-5 system by molecules is

from their characteristics changes results entry lymphocytes they effector become as homing into the activated. mucosa in The of and which and to predetermined compartment through high the in, immune as Peyer’s up they system bloodstream they in (HEVs) cells are of Fig. circulating lymph patches mesenteric (see B endothelial 9.4). the end will enter nodes T cells not venules and Naive lymphoid in lymphocytes. bind tissues the the are the CCL21 naive system, and systemic chemokines CCR7 is the and CCL19, this immune which process released from controlled on As by largely receptor this to patches, MAdCAM-1 cells. binding T by L-selectin the is expressed HEVs In the naive mucosal addressin Peyer’s of vascular the on assisted on Peyer’s in follicles naive the cells of also CXCL13 produced patches for CXCR5 lymphoid to is to isolated of and B-cell B follicles intestine. important responding recruitment their antigen, secondary the do to see other lymphoid and lymphocytes not exit As lymphatics bloodstream. naive the the if in return tissues, via they lymphocytes antigen If lose the GALT, the encounter and activated expression in become CCR7 of they L-selectin. and Section they HEVs via to they lymphoid that means the to have their (see organs, This ability cannot home enter 9-5). because lost them secondary

Peyer’s or wall (see effector and lymphocytes by mesenteric in lymph bloodstream lymphocytes Left the in T the B intestinal supplying as patches the nodes arrive antigen panel: primed Fig. 12.8). binds specifically integrin blood mucosal which endothelium α4:β7, expressed MAdCAM‑1 tissues. in vessels lymphocytes selectively on the express to The of the into adhesion cells signal This of propria. needed the emigration lamina provides the the for CCR9, primed the cells circles) the intestine, small also effector epithelial this the if which receptor chemokine in intestine; the small lymphocytes them (yellow selective produced panel: allows CCL25 Right respond express to recruitment. to of enhances by been have do the large Effector instead not CCR10. express lymphocytes in primed CCR9 express that but intestine function. CCL28 produced colon CCR10 to by respond (blue to similar cells a epithelial circles) fulfill may epithelial the Lymphocytes enter the layer integrin express the destined expressing and integrin. α4:β7 to αE:β7 instead stop receptor is cells. The this E‑cadherin the on for epithelial have help it. interactions once These they in entered keep may epithelium lymphocytes the

accumulate activated lymphoid effector where then travel they to organs in have been mucosa, as the the that Lymphocytes cells. mucosal lymphocytes activated and mesenteric parts lamina B up eventually the adjacent via lymphatics, end migrate T propria, Although and may pass Peyer’s duct. some thoracic patches most through initially into leave the of in in lymph directly nodes, the circulate in (see bloodstream the they there From Fig. and 12.8) lamina blood via propria selectively small the vessels. intestinal reenter have patches production naive the of propria. only but to differentiate switching there, cells plasma the they Peyer’s to IgA they B cells once fully isotype lamina returned in undergo follicular IgM areas IgAproducing from into Antigen-specific is in Peyer’s found T mucosa. patches, differentiate arrival of cells, after are the cells plasma in fully effector true only a this which and also As rarely result, also

by of part determined integrin adhesion by is T molecule cells and α4:β7 the in homing antigen-stimulated the the lymphocytes. expression Gut-specific on large B the mucosal endothelial This to (see on MAdCAM-1, that the vascular found addressin within blood the vessels wall gut binds the Fig. line cells 12.9). expression of as the primed Lymphocytes epithelium. back also gut are tissue-specific by a lured originally of in the gut result chemokines receptor B the is on case of ligand produced cells small In by intestine, expressed the the CCR9 (TECK) a gut-homing for cells cells. epithelial and T CCL25 constitutively as outside required colon. not CCR9 for to is CCL25 migration of to be the lymphocytes of small expression, not there Within chemokine is intestine the specialization seems the regional intestine expressed and gut-primed lymphoblasts for and salivary and is lactating tissues. B glands epithelial However, (MEC, to IgA-producing express lymphocytes a mucosal attracts gland, colon, the the CCR10 ligand on which these CCL28 receptor mammary chemokine), in surfaces lymphocytes other activated unknown. migration of and involved chemokine receptors addressins mucosal are to The

integrins. only that first circumstances, homing a Under express most in gut-specific and organ induced lymphocytes encounter receptors lymphoid normal antigen to are gut-associated secondary sections, see shall antigen the cells molecules next ‘imprinted’ T presentation. lymphocytes during are we these or intestinal on dendritic induced in As by binds chemokine and from integrin dendritic molecules to receptor In lymphoid and 11-3). as to VCAM-1; example, antigen them direct receptors—for contrast, skin lymphocyte (see α4:β1 adhesion chemokine the such lymphocytes the cells express Section (VLA-4), nonmucosal cutaneous other CCR4—which binds which E-selectin; which induce tissues (CLA), tissues dendritic or consequences cells in do The correct immunization properties. infections with such not why routes, intestinal tissue-specific because priming effective imprinting a as route, involve against requires mucosal subcutaneous immunization, other explain vaccination of lymphocyte the by intramuscular GALT the

at of may induce mucosal lymphocytes Priming in surfaces. 12-6 immunity other mucosal one protective tissue

system. exploit localized recirculation parts the within the tissue-specific mucosal of of compartmentalization same immune Not allowing all the lymphocyte chemokines, system Thus, nodes to patches) respiratory similarly, intestine the to most to mucosa. respiratory efficiently primed lymphoid in primed small those in effector and small likely draining intestine; cells lymph most B back (mesenteric Peyer’s the are tract migrate T the and organs return the in or responses This in organ proteins cells which antigen-specific foreign is homing an mucosal to be will useful returning and effective in infection obviously controlling in most fighting commensals. immune against effector the they been lymphocytes tract, GALT, tract, can that to other respiratory the some in and breast. recirculate lactating also primed tissues cells for mucosal example, as such urogenital have effector the Nevertheless, as mucosal idea the other parts common to from gave This the recirculation mucosal immune immune a is distinct between rise system, system. of overlap routes which of against be implications now does one to mucosal oversimplification, because may for at route to mucosal have Although understood infection development, it immunization by vaccine surface. this used enable be an it another important to protect is the intestine. or of infection of important by vaccination IgA breast this production lactating the such of the natural mucosal is in induction as antibody surfaces example An passive transmitted to MAdCAM-1 the a means of phenomenon generating and by the expresses transfer breast lactating because is of crucial This be vasculature protective of infants the is that can milk. the antibodies in immunity ability urogenital nasal been shown a special which immunization further has A against immune the in has in in to example prime responses animals, experimental tract HIV. unknown. this are The mechanisms behind

Distinct of cells populations mucosal responses. immune 12-7 dendritic control

are As in are both throughout responses cells the shaping lymphoid and in important tissues, scattered and mucosal surfaces. for and mucosal secondary mucosal organs elsewhere, dendritic initiating located immune in Within are two areas. found Peyer’s dendritic main patches, cells subepithelial cells acquire dome the In antigen cells (Fig. from region, can dendritic M 12.10). dendritic major present cells of the 9-1). in subtypes (see Sections Both 6-5 of intestine and the are and, activated, expresses the of to patch In tends the IL-23. in abundant (αM cells dendritic produce most when Peyer’s CD11b subset mice, integrin) promotes ILC3 IL-17 This 3-23 stimulates and both of which Sections of (see cells, and and IL-22 cells TH17 11-2). development produce dendritic CCL20 epithelial CCR6, for cells. the cells These produced follicle-associated express by receptor to they In IL-10 in beneath the uptake, maintaining reside produce response and epithelium environment. antigen resting conditions, a noninflammatory increased cells rapidly that during by the dendritic bacteria. into layer in is Salmonella, the CCL20 to in in the by of such the a However, epithelial presence recruited released are infection response quantities the pathogen cells epithelial patch of as Peyer’s cells activate molecules, into them differentiate pathogen-specific to cells. to effector co-stimulatory Bacterial naive express also to cells dendritic products induce allowing the T factor the T-cell requires less dendritic subset in CD11b-negative 9-9). cytokine area IL-12 produce and Also Peyer’s BATF3 of the whose cells, patches Sections development are which of abundant 6-5 the and (see the in infections. dendritic intestinal CD11b-expressing cells are protective many

lamina small of the the the in intestine also Peyer’s wall are patches, cells Dendritic mainly outside propria. in abundant lymph antigen spend relatively migrating naive These from cells. and short the antigens T tissue, intestine to in lymph a afferent where to they they the in and present node, before time surrounding the lumen sample draining mesenteric dendritic cells Fig. elsewhere, migration chemokine of (see receptor As CCR7 depends the on 9.17). cell of the antigens intestinal the dendritic every T It cells. in to estimated the surface is lymph constant delivery resting mesenteric from allowing intestine, day that emigrates to nodes the 5–10% of population mucosal and In of in results T generation and the cells CCR9 absence encounter integrin inflammation, infection antigen-specific migrating (see naive in nodes described cells T of the molecules gut-homing regulatory FoxP3+ express above cells the mesenteric dendritic α4:β7 Section the 12-4). that or lymph between and in node, to Treg the wall harmless return production lymph the responses leave These to the of suppress cells intestine, inflammatory then ‘primed’ food. of the small antigens

Fig. the antigens lumen propria. by 12.10 intestinal cells lamina the from of Capture mononuclear in patches. first or enterocytes, Top row, in as food M panel: can Peyer’s be between epithelium by up across proteins surface directly such antigens outside taken or transported soluble cells the the receptor transport by capture surface of neonatal internalize and Fc Second (FcRn) enterocytes across their the means and antigen:antibody on by them epithelium complexes transcytosis. panel: can Fc dendritic internalize and and Lamina receptors complexes. cells other propria FcRn capture and express the a pathogen panel: undergoes an is intracellular by infected apoptosis with cell. Third dendritic phagocytosed an enterocyte and can integrity. Lower left extend the rows, between of its cells the epithelium processes panels: cells disturbing mononuclear cellular without to cells. T to cells, cells internalize now presentation neighboring These to dendritic macrophages, be for antigen thought it and may pass micrograph small mononuclear the stained mouse of The (green) shows villus of lamina intestine. in for a propria cells CD11c is its white surface the (outer) line. The shown black appears epithelium luminal but by cell cells between its the intestine. into and two the epithelial A of extends lumen process tip stretches ×200. Magnification dendritic Center can to propria lamina goblet antigens soluble panels: cells. cells mucus‑secreting transport soluble in green). dextran across stained the cells the epithelium the (white underlying blue) goblet shows (purple) transported micrograph marker cells in panel) right CD11c The dendritic in bottom to (nuclei being (stained for μm. Scale bar 10 the Right cells panels: capture dendritic may propria. returning layer the enter lamina bacteria to and (purple) before epithelial green. blue or lamina the propria stained in and macrophages are remaining cells Dendritic μm. bar 10 Scale Niess, J.H., micrograph al. from left, et Bottom 2005, : Science 307:254–258. from J.R., McDole, micrograph al. center, Bottom et Nature 483:345–349. 2012, : al. Bottom micrograph right, Farache from et : 2013, 38:581–595. Immunity

vitamin A that which require retinoic dehydrogenases. the gut-homing produce and the of the the retinal of molecules is dendritic Both derived action expression generation dietary cells Treg metabolism their of acid, through from of cells enhancing of lymph further also is stromal the cells effects node, by the the mesenteric dendritic migratory produced Retinoic cells. acid in migrate the patch Peyer’s also the also mesenteric either in Retinoic Peyer’s regulatory for node. generating after be found cells T patches, or may in lymph they acid-producing to cells itself, and important dendritic are intestinal is which regulatory transforming of is assisted cells. cells dendritic by induction The (TGF-β), tissues growth factor-β produced in by T transport antigens to them found draining dendritic in that take local in lung. continuously intestine cells the the the populations mucosal of other are and large also up surfaces nodes and such lymph tissue Migratory the as are commensal Although produce as also to differentiation not do influence such bacteria, harmless how believed and it cells dendritic tissues it not from T-cell clear they acid, they is in tolerance involved is maintaining retinoic homing. materials these and

subsets lamina propria The intestinal described also in above. two the dendritic the cells major include dendritic that foods in Collectively, commensal a of reactions prevents to microorganisms. environment cells unnecessary tolerogenic intestinal damaging the result and and dominantly properties is factors that produced constitutively by The cells behavior anti-inflammatory mucosal promoted dendritic healthy mucosal are the gut environment. the in in of thymic T cells. CD4 cells, stromal produced produced PGE2 and by (TSLP), produced dendritic and epithelial cells, TGF-β prostaglandin by intestinal by include These stromal IL-10 macrophages lymphopoietin and for for into retinoic bile in liver intestine. delivered the in the local stored provides intestine conditioning the an cells Retinol of the dendritic of generation acid the the additional source via small small wall and

and 12-8 different in mucosal responses. roles dendritic Macrophages have cells immune

healthy body. intestine of lamina propria the the The largest macrophages in of population the contains Fig. express but site, this in CD11c II dendritic cells, (CD64; expression, lack MHC, they express Like and class cells dendritic they FcγR1 CD103 see but unlike the for CX3CL1 CX3CR1, 10.38) (fractalkine). receptor and intestine present draining to unable and from cells. lymph also cannot to antigen are T nodes migrate the Macrophages naive to the Section develop such the macrophages, require liver, blood 3-1), as in embryonic intestine which other in tissue-resident constant brain precursors (see many the those from replenishment those by Unlike or monocytes.

are intestine. a Macrophages healthy maintaining important for and epithelial under immediately the epithelium suited ideally ingest thus to microbes highly the They are and degrade are that phagocytic, across barrier. penetrate any positioned and rapidly which numbers found clear such cells, away intestine, can of an dying large They in in also a consequence epithelial inevitable are the dividing tissue. nitrogen However, or body, macrophages in as reactive oxygen parts not stimuli to or produce macrophages ligands. cytokines exposure unlike other TLR species intestinal bacteria quantities do response phagocytosis such significant to or or inflammatory of in the of to acting inflammation they is constitutively, This as them while IL-10 produce large amounts limit scavengers. of powerful because allowing to sustain node. needed the dendritic Treg survival also maintaining antigen-specific intestine the tolerance secondary cells IL-10 in contributes lymph is primed migrated expansion Macrophage-derived mucosa, the of FoxP3+ to tolerogenic cells as back it in and have after the by being to that conditions Indeed, these local have to they the of their functions populations, environment. are specifically their of both and features adapted intestine. Thus steady-state roles in and complementary dendritic macrophages the but cells distinct play cells already and shaping of and mucosa organs, tune initial scavenge of macrophages sessile primed responses in microbes and the the the in and debris T out dendritic lymphoid T-cell carry secondary Migratory itself. activity may cellular priming cells

acquire cells the in a of intestinal mucosa routes. Antigen-presenting by antigen variety 12-9

Peyer’s the to an in itself limited, the epithelium intact by provided surface immune the is propria antigen area total is patches by lamina of The and M intestinal covered cells epithelium. system for Fig. crosses access gain antigen macrophages the to and (see explain additional proposed to epithelium Various cells dendritic to mechanisms have how been 12.10). transported cells formed dying as proteins across food cells epithelial are antigens gaps be such Soluble being shed. between might epithelium the where or in outside the epithelium reside may mucosa surface in of M the patches. cells Alternatively, Peyer’s invading cells, the of coli, have enterohemolytic to allowing E. to directly. of bacteria, strains attaching and specialized enteropathogenic Some and epithelial underlying them lamina such as intestinal propria enter means receptor expressing to the (FcRn). cells by cells dendritic lumen antibody-coated of by neonatal propria the uptake from Fc be epithelial antigens delivered lamina Antigen can be may cause their to (see responses 6-5) enterocytes immune (see derived ability for by enteric specialized rotaviruses, induction disease apoptotic cross-presenting Antigen processed diarrheal cells such because Fig. against as which cells of viruses, epithelial of infect dendritic Section from 12.10).

Fig. cells transepithelial local lamina lumen sending Macrophages also sample may bacteria participate reach (see the extend that uptake dendrites epithelial and to antigen by in in between the propria 12.10). lumen, subsequent up cells it to dendritic reported Lamina from on soluble T to passing been have antigen cells. the macrophages for presentation also to propria take macrophages such might to their with bacteria, also to make suggest lumen acquire the the returning before as that experiments dendritic way antigens lamina or cells them into Some propria.

the associated with system. class is IgA of mucosal 12-10 immune Secretory the antibody

antibody is dominant produced mucosal cells by IgA, wall. which The class in immune system of locally mucosal plasma is in the the and blood the secretions. IgA in two main between The of which is differs mucosal nature it found—the compartments of derived plasma the IgA monomer by produced form blood B is activated bone nodes. marrow from the lymph the cells in in is (mIgA) that a in mainly cells in as the by which produced almost 5-16). Section (see J dimer, usually are linked immunoglobulin polymer, chain two a is a a tissues, exclusively in monomers IgA In as mucosal

the B-cell of Peyer’s are The plasma and nodes. precursors cells mucosal activated naive patches IgA-secreting mesenteric lymph in by of controlled B TGF-β. IgA the Class is switching cells cytokine to activated follicular T the B gut, as 10. instruct class cells same organized Chapter switching dependent mechanisms occurs (TFH) in where entirely the human tissues, helper only In is cells in by T-cell and described lymphoid this IgA-switched IL-21. IL-10, cells B IL-5, The expansion differentiation subsequent are and IL-6, of driven by and g class of is normal immunoglobulin by major is in the and are 75,000 of IgA-producing 3–4 there. secreted IgA and Upward plasma tissues human day, the mucosal produced the intestine, cells each present production occurs This IgA quantities in continuous driven large invasion of of recognition entirely pathogenic microbiota. the by the commensal almost absence of is of and

as In isotypes, and IgA1 are dimeric IgA2. IgA found both and monomeric humans, two small varies of and and IgA1 being tissue, the about depending about the IgA2 10:1 colon. on intestine, the ratio respiratory 3:2 to blood tract, in upper The in markedly 2:3 the in whereas influenzae) common produce as enzymes (such resistant mucosa cleavage. Some is of and Neisseria to respiratory (such proteolytic IgA1, the the genital mucosa cleave as that gonorrhoeae) pathogens IgA2 can Haemophilus proportion density switching. IgA2 the result at site drives higher because cytokines of the the class this selective of intestine cause of large high production might commensal that cells in plasma microorganisms secreting The found, similar closely and most it in humans. IgA2 is is In to isotype only IgA mice, one

CCR9 IgA-expressing tissues as lymphoblasts homing above. to as α4:β7, express resulting the integrin mucosal After activation mechanisms the differentiation, the localize B receptors chemokine and discussed mucosal well the CCR10, and by and subepithelial the final undergo space the plasma Once (Fig. into them propria, and synthesize secrete the dimers which differentiation cells cells, lamina into B in IgA 12.11). extracellular we as Section located dimeric to and luminal basolateral portion of cells expressed of of on pentameric be where by of to gut epithelial cleavage which IgA the across the intestinal 10-16. base transcytosis the epithelium the immunoglobulin binds by the reach To antibody transported pIgR of Fc to covalently introduced the released the constitutively its receptor. crypts IgA target in the it at epithelium, domain and is it the surface and immature in surfaces lumen, immunoglobulins the the of the the such receptor is J-chain-linked proteolytic antigen (pIgR), transports IgM, polymeric by has the polymeric (frequently Part associated to as component pIgR secretory cleaved the IgA of the remains abbreviated is SC). with known and is resulting protected proteolytic and secretory as referred antibody to (SIgA). cleavage from The is IgA

there a route. is some of secretion intestine— animals the In the hepatobiliary into IgA route second blood into the to liver vein. that IgA in the drain portal up is venules has which via the propria, intestinal lamina bound not taken Dimeric pIgR antibodies have these lined surface. underlying hepatocytes, to In (sinusoids) which their an are endothelium veins allows liver access pIgR that on the the small by taken bile hepatocytes up IgA an is and by the adjacent duct. transported transcytosis into into directly small IgA In common bile upper the delivered way, the this can into via be secretory duct. intestine that eliminate bound there to have antigens IgA This hepatobiliary dimeric lamina and invaded by route have propria allows the IgA. been Although efficient hepatocytes not other primates, in not route to in of other does this and seem in rats and express highly significance humans do whom great rodents, pIgR. be

lumen via IgA the carbohydrate the binds secreted surface into mucus in coating gut the determinants secretory to of layer epithelial component. role the by preventing pathogenic homeostatic is and, maintaining balance also has involved it as just invasion in There in important, organisms a it crucial

Fig. (pIgR), Transcytosis mediated epithelia specialized across a protein. antibody receptor the by IgA transport 12.11 of is polymeric Ig gland. salivary epithelia, just the gut, epithelial membranes tear and cells Most basement the is in antibody respiratory the mammary of IgA synthesized lactating and glands, plasma the lying beneath basement by by on dimer and diffuses is the IgA the a pIgR membrane the across the epithelial chain cell. bound surface basolateral The of J linked apical the in vesicle to surface. by a across transported transcytosis, The is it undergoes which the complex cell bound the leaving component pIgR component. the IgA the secretory molecule the IgA‑binding There to so‑called as bound cleaved, extracellular is at mucus binds the surface. holds carbohydrate epithelial the in the to not on and shown, secretory mucins Although IgA component The of and the is nonfunctional residual degraded. is pIgR piece transported across this way of that external environment. organs into are in IgA several with contact in the epithelia the is lumina

Fig. surfaces. several IgA in functions has epithelial Mucosal 12.12 to functions. toxins, and their inhibiting IgA covering on it their panel: First layer the of the neutralize tissues can preventing pathogens their adsorbs where and epithelium, mucus access cell and meet epithelial by by antigen can the Second IgA internalized neutralized endosomes. in be panel: are or propria pathogen‑specific the secreted. the reached panel: pathogens Third epithelial the is and that the resulting into across as encounter IgA reexported there, lamina dimeric cell IgA lumen complexes have the toxins via be on Peyer’s IgA in the panel: transported IgA patches the to in residues cells. and Fc dendritic Dectin‑1 bound Fourth antigen to cells M underlying of carbohydrate can to lumen secretory bind portion on anti‑inflammatory dendritic Binding to the the them cells on to of IL‑10. DC‑SIGN induces IgA‑containing complex produce

microbiota. between host the and the commensal It a number of ways (Fig. 12.12). in this does IgA IgA1 allowing to being efficient flexible inhibits unusually Fab molecule, wide to the assisted the angle it to as its antigens the adherence 5-12), by the such and particularly bivalent bacteria ability very microbial between epithelium, the First, Section pieces isotype (see binding large bacteria. bind of neutralize microbial IgA or toxins enzymes. Secretory also can

viruses within and cells, penetrated there. in to the after encounters it endosomes and lumen, epithelial as the IgA viruses its lamina neutralize propria inside bacterial epithelial bacteria activities in the addition well lipopolysaccharide as across have can In barrier excreted from (see The into complexes the they Fig. gut lumen, the then reexported IgA:antigen are resulting are from body where 12.12). can be above. route IgA the propria lamina containing dimeric hepatobiliary also described via Complexes formed in excreted the complexes local antigens, and elimination on can carbohydrate lectin In M uptake the of of residues of dendritic cells of via IgA:antigen such cells, IgA enabling binding to enhance antigen luminal addition and as receptors the the DC-SIGN. formation by Dectin-1 to manner. a can the nonspecific as IgA well of restrict bacteria in As effects, secretory entry antigen-specific these the chain the to bind act use This carbohydrate that it as epithelial a bacteria for of part because on is content Fc the surface. heavy allows to IgA carbohydrates of the receptors decoy high capacity little IgA not as activate to an does of act to complement the classical or so opsonin, has pathway Secretory induce and inflammation. complexes to induces by dendritic IL-10. these cells produce cells IgA:antigen Uptake of also anti-inflammatory harmful to that something the properties potentially tissues, in mucosa of the limit damage would can that penetration these microbes mean be intestine. Together without IgA these the into inflammatory fragile risking and the commensal is secretory (see between gut same IgA For crucial bacteria symbiosis Section individual the an to beneficial reasons, 12-20).

some processes production species. to can IgA T-independent 12-11 in contribute

IgA proportion a activation switching. B-cell is intestinal class humans, In derived from and T-cell-independent unlike mice, significant of of commensal activation follicular cells in of depends the dendritic result conventional system may interaction on dendritic solitary immune and of with the from B products direct and the follicles. cells lymphoid innate by This microbes cells to (see precursor intestinal the involve subset such arise in microbial as B-1 from to lymphocytes the cells which to wall constituents of seems peritoneal in B antibody and lipopolysaccharide. This production the Section response 8-9), migrate cavity (see Fig. BAFF APRIL mucosa, switching and the the occurs and TGF-β-dependent Once in to acid, factors, IL-6, of IgA influence local class retinoic including under bind B cells by otherwise helper 10.6), for to on cells 10-1). CD4 signals substituting TACI T (see supplied Section which TGF-β. APRIL, eosinophils producing and BAFF may APRIL, and can epithelial Intestinal cells while IL-6, local by contribute produce assist oxide (NO) myeloid may Other and in of and activation TNF-α, nitric of the TGF-β. processing produce both which cells

are somatic in low affinity, of little these antibodies and diversity with T-cell-independent of limited hypermutation. generally responses of The evidence produced IgA of at ‘natural’ directed an important antibodies source bacteria. They commensal are nevertheless be little to secretory somatic of dependent. in yet, for evidence in hypermutation is there seem humans, whom this IgA IgA T-cell all and source As responses involve switching cannot switching class Chapter required human The activation-induced is propria, there. (AID), enzyme is 5), occur unlikely be to class deaminase lamina which intestinal that (see for indicating detected cytidine in is cells it in AIDS. as in evolutionary a its B in responses when of in compromised antibody Nevertheless, pathways propria IgA in lamina humans, specific activated history be the may production T-cell-dependent mucosa, glimpse could into offer that the indicate occurrence might and mice is mediators myeloid and production differentiation common that propria full in occurs and reactivation of epithelial by cells, of cells in lamina other is BAFF, of likely secondary humans for it likely involves Nonetheless, lymphoblasts APRIL, compensated 12-12 IgA-committed but deficiency IgM. plasma relatively the for be B by may secretory which is IgA

500 to IgA Caucasian ethnic populations is in deficiency of humans, in is of individuals origin, production immune occurring in the 700 in groups. rarer commonest somewhat primary other about although 1 Selective it deficiency in genetic for this condition in frequent The the receptor mutation that in identified most TACI is been has BAFF. A deficiency. harmless with reported infections, (a disease of for tendency older has people respiratory IgA higher in slightly incidence antigens), environmental reactions autoimmune been to allergic and atopy not overly to also IgG2 there susceptible in deficiency IgA are is unless deficiency a most individuals infections production. with However, probably indeed of increased mucosa of the the in to and ability reflects plasma people. IgA-deficient IgA cells of as predominant are The IgM in secretions, antibody dispensability numbers IgM-producing replace of the IgA intestinal found lumen transported is cells mucosa the a secretory the is bound efficiently into gut pIgR gut by IgM and is produced in IgM polymer, epithelial J-chain-linked as the Because IgM. across mechanism shown of been backup The importance has this in knockout mice. to Animals a alone have pIgR IgA infections. phenotype, the lacking but those susceptible lacking normal are mucosal to bacteria a commensal consequent and into immune systemic They tissues of bacteria. show response penetration also increased these in lethal. a of the is such never that has suggesting humans, pIgR reported defect been absence Genetic

innate antigen-experienced The cells. and cells contains of unusual 12-13 T populations intestinal lymphoid lamina propria

by well and cells, such memory effector in in the such been as and α4:β7 of CCR9 cells express dendritic markers T as chemokines (RANTES). of lamina propria cells gut-homing express as such activated humans, integrin, T and healthy as CD45RO pro-inflammatory receptors or markers as Most CCL5 for the have in The or ratio has population propria of T-cell systemic lymphoid cells CD8 lamina tissues. more, to that CD4 of of the T to similar a 3:1

and overt of IL-17, as (IFN)-γ, absence secrete even inflammation. amounts propria of Lamina CD4 cells T large the in cytokines IL-22, such interferon recognition and environmental likely their constant CD4 takes of infection frequent is antigens immune place by that in (see and of the in Section intestine, HIV opportunistic other cells, such This underlined with infections reflects T microbiota state the importance the of occur lacking that intestine individuals the the 13-24). as those and mucosa, are products their local immune components TH17 the of Effector important intestinal in are cells defense. prominent IL-17 to stimulates the lumen, receptor needed IgA is maintain the epithelial in integrity. peptides that of antimicrobial IL-22 into secretion poly-immunoglobulin expression full help epithelial while produce for intestinal involved cells of barrier required. to is capable a production pathogen the lamina immune a and are when propria and CD8 are both normal of cells cytotoxic T Effector present protective response activity cytokine in also

the suggest situation, any T the large differentiated of lead pathogen presence and a would to likely such inflammation. In cells numbers would other of effector of presence regulatory in cells. is cytotoxic IL-10-producing not TH1, T lamina TH17, it of and generation presence T numbers is substantial the propria because that the does of The the healthy cells by balanced of fact mostly these the are the T FoxP3positive whereas colon, dominate. FoxP3-negative, in intestine, In cells small of inducible from T antigens the derived within microbiota. organisms recognize Many cells the

lamina 9-20). innate and Sections also many (ILCs) contains healthy lymphoid cells 1-19 (see propria The and mucosa. both in ILC3 The human prominent is intestinal mouse subset IL-22, and and produce and the IL-17 some ILC3s NK-cell Mature NKp46. express NKp44 receptors hydrocarbon the by receptor transcription (see Their RORγT factor is and the Section aryl development controlled 9-21). in intestine are their secondary in ILC3s lymphoid for important organs and the lymphoid development there. present tissue are that IL-23 defense dendritic antimicrobial In by promote intestine. secreted to response ILC3s the cells, bacterial produce to stimulates peptides against and fungal IL-22, local generate in local which pathogens epithelium the significant acquire this of response to endows ILC3s their IL-12, During properties. to with course produce of inflammatory diseases, IL-17, combined them IFN-γ and with in can the ability production the pathological by reactions produced respiratory form IL-5 equivalent layer in T-cell-independent in IL-13 of tract. intestine, to an and in ILC2s an parasites involved the helminth the important allergic is population responses and

for intestine. propria cells CD1-restricted iNKT cells and the 2–3% lamina small account mucosal of in Section 6-19) Section (MAIT) (see are invariant T T in and lamina cells (see present human 6-18) also propria, cells metabolites from vitamin MAIT an with limited of in TCRβ a pathway range TCRα metabolism recognize invariant chain B and chain the riboflavin presented by mainly paired express microbes MR1. of derived

unique is system. the 12-14 The intestinal compartment immune epithelium a of

introduced the intestine. lymphocytes already present We in are there fact (IELs) that have abundant intraepithelial one 10–15 there lymphocytes cells, for the lymphocytes small (Fig. the making epithelial single body populations largest healthy of IELs are the 100 In every of the intestine, in 12.13). carry CD8, the and propria. IELs intestine 80% the of in of than complete these lamina the are lymphocytes in cells, T in the around small 90% to More contrast of are IELs intestine, present the small epithelial fewer of are CD4 large is proportion and the to in in also number than there cells them although the of relative intestine. greater the T cells

the contain T in intracellular and activated even lymphocytes like an propria, they granzymes, perforin the most of the and by in absence containing have cytotoxic those in a pathogen, Like appearance granules cells. lamina CD8 effector IELs infection conventional of restricted receptors the evidence an V(D)J use oligoclonality, most gene number of locally expand show they that of IELs with indication a in relatively small segments, of response may T-cell CD8 to antigens. However, the assists small and E-cadherin and their The of (see which epithelium on integrin the receptor in CCR9, cells IELs chemokine epithelial Fig.12.9). expressed the the αE:β7 with retention (CD103), intestine interacts express

lymphocytes. Fig.12.13 Intraepithelial cells. are of T epithelium The the CD8 ×400. Magnification the (EC) large on known as small of shows The contains the intestine right IELs on intraepithelial cells panel). lie lymphocytes lymphocytes epithelial the micrograph electron between population left (IELs; that a of the from separating propria micrograph center membrane (LP) in human which small basement the section epithelium. The a (BM) in lamina the intestine through is antibody. can a with of basement leaving been cytoplasm into One a having in monoclonal crossed epithelium, membrane T trail have be cells IEL stained the its seen CD8 brown the peroxidase‑labeled of the Most lymphocytes wake. in the epithelium ×8000. Magnification

which and of are subsets of on type intraepithelial expressed. based CD8 a (‘inducible’) form is CD8 main (‘natural’)—identified cells—type T There two b of the the with bacteria The vary strain proportions intestine. relative and in of age, number mice), (in subsets IELs α:β heterodimer. CD8α:β the and a T-cell express Type (inducible) receptors T MHC-restricted class naive CD8 the antigen derived cytotoxic virus-infected in they example activated T as patches mesenteric cells, from for (Fig. conventional by or cells, nodes, I that and cells were lymph function killing are Peyer’s They 12.14, top panels). secrete such effector also cytokines They IFN-γ. as

infected T cytotoxic panels) classical (top cells other I epithelial from Type conventional derived intracellular class pathogens or that IELs recognize are molecules on to CD8 MHC viruses cells. peptides a bound CD8α:β the IELs receptor Type T‑cell an heterodimer express α:β and a co‑receptor. the NKG2D (bottom using activated and MIC‑B carrying MIC‑A IL‑15. CD8α:α b IELs Type the receptor recognize are homodimer by and panels) expression upregulate of epithelial MIC‑A growth I the nonclassical have that gluten) component peptide and MIC‑B α‑gliadin toxic molecules or a by infection been by Human stressed and cell the protein altered produce MHC of class (a from or cells IL‑15. of of granzyme. and release the can kill Both perforin types by IELs Apoptosis induced on ligand cell. epithelial binding cell cells Fas T the Fas be can also of by to of the the epithelial on

IELs CD8 (natural) α:β either b Type express can of T-cell expression are homodimer. or an by CD8α:α a distinguished receptor, γ:δ but the their particular those genes are are tissues for enriched found other (see from T Vγ the cells and The in and Fig. in Vδ intestine γ:δ distinct 8.23). presented 6-17). of by IELs molecules Section (see expressed the Some MHC class nonconventional α:β Ib by those including bind receptors ligands, also MHC-like cells, natural typical two molecules the MIC-B. and killer MIC-A molecules b the to binds such lectin express which activating as NKG2D, IELs C-type of Type of Section TLRs response to are in epithelial These intestinal cellular on or induced cells (see 6-16). injury, ligation stress, IL-15 and can that cells The cells. the then injured killed of by damaged a process epithelial production by by the recognized the IELs, enhanced be is inflammation, cytotoxic IELs b Like cells, constitutively such and as immune pro-inflammatory chemokines. NO, production of of type genes express cytokines the innate associated with high molecules, levels and phenotype role the elimination a or of the and gut (see abnormal that infection cells an recognition rapid express Fig. in stress of epithelial as result Their may be 12.14, panels). bottom promotes inflammatory epithelial helping as well mucosa release peptides, and which stimulate reactions. barrier the tissue they the they inflammation; repair also source as of factor, to thought aiding the function, remove IELs such growth after the b thus of TGF-β, cytokines assists local inflammatory the repair, damage: Type which in inhibiting important are to keratinocyte as of and release antimicrobial be

kept TGF-β by inhibitors, their immunomodulatory IELs those of Type signaling found on NK cells. including the in and b cytokine co-expression inhibitory are check like receptors importance disease. activation IELs rise the of type shown The excess control of by is inappropriate fact may to or that give b processes these caused IELs receptor found of example, For gluten which numbers Section is celiac the expressing protein γ:δ an immune increased to in T-cell (see wheat response abnormal disease, 14-17). are a by and production contributes of intraepithelial expression of increase components stimulate cytotoxic of in condition, of can MIC-A. by as epithelial cells to the this the certain IL-15 damage T MIC-Adependent gluten cells intestinal activity killing activated to of cells described the as epithelial IELs, These processes lead by Fig. above (see bottom panels). 12.14,

b unexplored is development has in controversial humans. type IELs been The origin and and of positive expressing T-cell type an express α:β undergone (see to T-cell selection a receptors. Unlike not have IELs, negative apparently 8), type IELs and receptor and seem b conventional Chapter autoreactive many CD8β chain complexes, the than conventional more classical the chain that binds have The molecules. means strongly CD8α MHC of for to however, absence peptide:MHC CD8α:βheterodimer, these the because affinity low cells T act IELs cannot effector self-reactive α:β therefore as receptor-expressing T-cell b Type cells. MHC thymus. that probably selection molecules self also cells the these is affinity negative in for escape This reason the low of via a unknown positively selected immediately which selection, are thymus double-positive cells late T they in released in ligands develop are by double-negative/early so-called process appear Rather, intestine. agonist the and to the to Here TGF-β the influence CD8α:α and induced by cells. epithelial express they the under to are of produced homodimer mature these MHC maturation of the b important molecules the IELs. on are epithelium expressed Nonclassical for also type intestinal molecule leukemia (TL), selection Fig. of is another class this (see kind nonclassical I MHC example of molecule the antigen thymus One in mouse present found peptides. strains not certain 6.26) which does binds high directly CD8α:α affinity. TL with is by epithelial intestinal and cells expressed

also develop agonist γ:δ the IELs of selection expressing Type via in the T-cell (see b as thymus, of programmed part γ:δ development a wave receptor T-cell

Fig. 8.23). and endows migrate ligand. ability programmed the the is in expression same by by ligands The where be the intestinal of with cells they to further these receptor epithelium, this to may the driven agonist thymus specific specific

cytokine the with cells. ‘trans-presented’ presence a to which on development microbiota the differentiation of complex require b receptor the to epithelial in IELs produced and response is IELs type of involved in events the present local IL-15, the in The IL-15 other factor vegetables. development dependent environmental by that brassica on derived IEL and hydrocarbon is transcription various (AhR), Type activated a aryl are the ligands b receptor dietary from these epithelial IELs materials that have barrier intestine. type the lymphocytes b view lack important that response unusual AhR numbers ILC3 to the show immune the in local innate abnormalities Mice and reinforcing in in roles play repair, and of reduced the

Summary.

amounts such organisms. exposed of such the as tract enormous different or of antigens, tissues pathogenic body which mucosal to commensal as and can harmless intestine invaders be respiratory are continuously the materials foods and The either antigen the largest distinct system, this system, to body. immune is which are in immune the a Potential by mucosal the of immune the compartment load responses controlled unique routes cells and antigens, and dendritic M for imprint distinctive and the cells presentation of activate T uptake to features acid-producing cells patches, the include of of B antigens that processes with epithelium across transport exploitation Peyer’s Its properties. the retinoic gut-homing and they generation normal of in FoxP3-positive the Dendritic the Treg gut. favor cells also cells contribute by without these processes their causing Tissue-resident IL-10. due macrophages phagocytosing production to to inflammation, of regulatory intestinal antigens specific acquire preferentially to primed mucosa-associated lymphoid redistribute mucosal effector as receptors, surfaces them allowing in Lymphocytes the homing cells. to tissues back immune is memory/effector the presence in response tissues populations T of IgA, lamina cells in adaptive mucosal propria. characterized epithelium distinct of production the the by dimeric secretory and of by and The pro-inflammatory CD4 IL-17 of the lamina infection, of absence overt even presence cytokines IFN-γ and this is the but normally as propria balanced cells by in produce T such cells. Treg the IL-10-producing in functions IELs epithelial activity innate that cytolytic and other a help exhibit maintain healthy barrier.

of and regulation responses. mucosal infection response mucosal to immune The

microorganisms include role forms response The of all from defense the agents, of which parasites. against viruses mucosal is to infectious immune major multicellular means spectrum of means immune of challenge response. tailored pathogens; be generate the microbes adapting the a to evolved unsurprisingly, and responses to host individual to subverting wide many meet able host must This that have of the antigen, to to response to an to it the harmless and recognize mucosal or pathogens, a as the it foreign respond system able to any To must a not same be to response (from adequate produce ensure would food immune effector but pathogen. antigen commensals) needs of these A it competing the focus how balance this chapter. part mucosal of will major is the be demands, immune and of role does the system this to

response local immunity. Enteric development and cause 12-15 protective a of inflammatory the pathogens

a wide gut, the in of from Despite organisms. indigenous array stiff microbiota, infection is and variety site by competition the gut the mechanisms the frequent innate immune of of a pathogenic and such Salmonella, pinworms. Entamoeba helminth Vibrio, species; bacteria such Shigella tapeworms and many enteric include as histolytica; parasites These as such as protozoans viruses; multicellular and These the innate the the ways, generating system. activation as the body, disease pathogens many protective elsewhere cause of in of to aspects immune and is key appropriate immunity in

immune spread effector intestinal themselves of The rapidly can and innate the system infections without intestine. significant of the beyond eliminate most mechanisms infection the intestine. these responses surfaces are and we unique of discussed in or that The features to unusual the aspects essential 2-2 epithelial Section highlight only here in are involve (Fig. important cells the epithelial themselves the these, Of most 12.15). tight The junctions between

and cell and NF˜B, activate NOD2 in˜ammatory to inducing cytokines, NOD1, chemokines, express the other mediators. epithelial NF˜BTLRNODsCCL2CCL1IL-6CXCL1CXCL8IL-1IL-1IL-18I˜BTLR-5CCL20defensinstightjunctionslysosomephagosomephagophorecaspaseNOD-2TLRs, destroyed entering or are by are bacteria products are with fusion recruit integrity cytoplasm infection directly dendritic NOD1 after cell and activate cells IL-18 from escaping barrier Destruction recognized Bacteria macrophages, which autophagosome activate or in of in their Bacteria in˜ammasome increase or in˜ammasome in NOD2 of vesicles of lysosome forming IL-1, neutrophils, surface and taken and intracellular myeloid formation on into recognized triggers and production TLRs Intracellular These the Activation by autophagosome cells and phagosome of cytosol Bacteria induces

Fig. cells in Epithelial against a have pathogens. defense 12.15 crucial innate role epithelial basolateral they where apical are on bacteria. components invading of TLRs vesicles of or the present intracellular or recognize different surfaces in cells, bacteria. Cytoplasmic peptides detect cell‑wall from NOD1 NOD2 and NODs and activate NFκB (see Fig. TLRs CXCL8, produce and and neutrophils CXCL1 which 3.15), (GROα), cells macrophages, CCL20, IL‑1 dendritic inducing and attract macrophages. to which activate and attracts that cells, CCL2, epithelial IL‑6 CCL1, types IL‑1 and 3‑9) activate damage cell and of Section that produces 1 (see inflammasome pro‑caspase IL‑18. activates Many can cytosol Bacteria epithelial‑cell that from invade autophagy. into the phagosomes induce cytoplasm or escape the can autophagosome. the of The recruitment phagophore, the proteins become ubiquitinated, organisms adaptor forming leading an to that attract Fusion the to within lysosomes then with autophagosome. leads destruction the of cargo also NOD2 autophagosome the directly molecule ATGL16L1. to disease‑associated proteins, binding trigger including Crohn’s formation by adaptor can

to kills it Typhimurium (top which M then left). adheres and enters causing apoptosis by cells, infect and gut cells. It can then epithelial macrophages membrane flagellin, NFκB basal epithelial bind expressed TLR‑5 the activating by the can pathway. salmonella caspase the uptake by invasive activation, IL‑1 macrophages 1 propria, induces Salmonella of lamina in and IL‑8. After promoting production panel). CXCL8 these macrophages, activate together infected produced neutrophils by (lower mediators left also and and the is recruit (top middle of epithelial invade called also the threadlike by gut cells on panel). directly protrusions surface Salmonellae fimbriae epithelial luminal adherence fine can and lumen processes thus the the cell epithelial by The infected salmonellae in right by may epithelial panel). (top be effectively phagocytes breach between extended cells mononuclear layer them prime may lamina from mesenteric lymph node carry to infected become draining cells the to in (lower the propria Dendritic macrophages and response panel). adaptive right infected immune its bloodstream and lymphoid intestine containment infection. processes fail, the Salmonella tissues beyond and can If to the invade lymph in the cause enter systemic node

Fig. food epithelial layer of cause and Typhimurium serovar important Salmonella the in ways. three enterica 12.16 is poisoning an penetrates Salmonella

cells that normally and cells salmonellae travel macrophages epithelial phagocytic and lymph from cause systemic activate bacterial out cell lymphatics or cells and cytokines gut by CXCL8 luminal infection immune then infect neutrophils cells cells, and acquired is a epithelial and to and to enter neutrophil M response a Salmonellae M luminal vessels the and barrier macrophages lumen provoke loaded antigens enter form impermeable Salmonellae invaders. mesenteric adaptive the produced can caspase directly these of fail, activation cells them invade macrophages Salmonellae recruit blood the the IL-18 contents sampling IL-1˜Chemokines macromolecules are kill via node of with an surface Dendritic enter 1 gut If and TLR-5 that bloodstream defenses afferent loss of from rapidly barrier or production repaired epithelial damage to also mechanical new cells the of after allows crypts be the in constant cells stem The cells. Fig. used through these gain acquired mechanisms pathogens shown are entry mechanisms entry salmonella Nonetheless, have to barriers; in some by Fig. 12.16, in and those shigella by used 12.17.

both TLRs basal in surfaces, lumen bear can gut across that on and have those and Epithelial epithelium. the penetrated cells also from their which the apical they bacteria sense vacuoles In addition, that epithelial that pathogens detect and TLRs endocytosis. products pathogens extracellular or internalized intracellular by have carry can in their been cells intracellular also react sensors, in and their the products Epithelial Chapter when can microorganisms intracellular have enter 3, or cytoplasm. described cells Section nucleotide-binding These oligomerization domain and NOD1 the NOD2 3-8 Fig. include proteins (see sensors and (NOD) 3.17). in NOD1 Gram-negative of the is found acid-containing only bacteria. peptide recognizes a that walls diaminopimelic cell most cells in dipeptide recognizes by the a to in bacteria, defective epithelial NOD2 NOD2 intracellular found less peptidoglycans of and muramyl infection resistant are bacteria. patches. across also Peyer’s and bacteria translocation of NOD2 Mice of lacking epithelium the out increased show in nonfunctional. 25% patients that as to up Crohn’s a of in important also seems A renders by to recognition microbiota disease, the carry NOD2 be NOD2 the mutation defect in commensal gene protein the NOD2 of

NOD1, peptides I˜K cell-wall I˜B NF˜B oligomerize Shigella NOD1 and NF˜B RIPK2 bind pathway activating the

proteins of and of IL-1 cytokines, cells of stimulates the TLRs the IL-6, such chemokines. NOD as Ligation production production epithelial or in and CXCL8, which The and of and the is T chemoattractant, neutrophil eosinophils, CCL2, a attract chemokines CCL5, CCL3, out potent which monocytes, blood. include CCL4, cells and also 12-7). the and epithelial (see Sections immature toward CCL20, dendritic their which of surface cells the cells attracts production epithelial 12-4 Stimulated chemokine increase

intracellular form also members can family, that (NLR) gNLRP3, inflammasomes NOD-like including and of Epithelial receptor Fig. express (see NLRC4, cells the NLRP6, 12.15). formation in of to Fig. activation the (see As 3-9, active inflammasome and cytokines an to which pro-IL-18 1, produce described pro-IL-1 Section caspase cleaves of leads 3.19). by integrity, defense against but to cause Both present invasion contribute tissue can promoting if for bacterial these long barrier epithelial cytokines periods. damage

autophagy, important its as Section relationship which recently antigen processing. for for we mechanism epithelial recognized One is defense infection 6-6 in to against discussed phagophore, various double-membrane fuses the contents to to process, the the cytoplasmic a In (see cytoplasm, vesicle, called in complete form membrane, engulfs the Fig. which isolation autophagosome, this or fragment contents a lysosomes crescent-shaped with degrade 12.15). autophagy and become cannot bacteria be contained cells disrupted, epithelial effectively, When stressed. is into This bacteria the NFκB-mediated penetration body can inflammation. and to increased of lead to and Autophagy is NOD2 the NOD1 bacterial sensors. promoted intracellular by in IRGM1 associated to NOD2, humans. genes ATG16L1 disease in and are with mutations with the susceptibility As autophagy-related Crohn’s

roles particularly immune intestine. populations Certain innate defense of of specialized in cells important epithelial have the TH17 peptides in exposed or such released CD4 IL-22 cells and small Paneth when the cells ILC3s. to antimicrobial defensins intestine, only where as RegIIIγ they produce are by found and NODs they They autophagic. directly to can and respond are microbes, as also they highly TLRs express in bowel bacterial reduced defense function important cell humans. Defects are to and disease in Paneth lead susceptibility believed to inflammatory be to in and mucus ILC2s. TH2 are produce of further cytokines from cell CD4 in a kind specialized epithelial derived or response cells Goblet cells to complex surfaces. in of immune of component forms highly and defense (mucins) essential mixture consists all an of charged Mucus a mucosal glycoproteins stickiness charge, Its and density,

Fig. 12.17 dysentery. cells intestinal infects cause flexneri to Shigella epithelial bacterial M is translocated epithelium Shigella and panel). flexneri cells binds to (first beneath the gut are cells panel). The infect bacteria (second their cytoplasm basal released into from and surface epithelial intestinal the tripeptides and protein of walls cell the shigellae oligomerize Muramyl diaminopimelic bind the to the acid in NOD1. containing the and serine/threonine NOD1 NFκB activates binds RIPK2 pathway the Fig. kinase (see Oligomerized 3.17), panel). cytokines for chemokines (third to the leading and genes transcription of cells panel). epithelial which as release neutrophil the chemokine chemoattractant a (fourth acts Activated CXCL8, of inhibitor kinase. IκB IκK, NFκB; IκB,

that trapping microbes presents other it by barrier invasion, a and formidable particles. mean to peptides and across same epithelium. been the time, At have antimicrobial lumen antibodies into IgA that acts retain scaffolding the to it the a secreted as is movements. also by expelled that slippery peristaltic easily then can meaning nature, normal Mucus trapped in materials be there of found and intestine. loose outer in two intestine, the In mostly inner large layer, are denser the an layers layer a mucus, much defects of structure epithelial the normally layer, away they can defense. by layer mucus, Although and from the dense penetrate loose bacteria kept are compromise the surface cells antimicrobial inner the of in this

also have is rich of to discussed, system immune mucosa that we intestinal in rapidly innate the respond As can the cells infection. γ:δ cells. include cells, and T MAIT These mast macrophages, cells, ILCs, cells, eosinophils, NKT

immune defenses have responses when induce innate breached. been 12-16 adaptive Pathogens

cells they and subepithelial tissue. space, pathogenic interact viruses with inflammatory underlying in access may the on TLRs gain the bacteria If to inflammatory with mediators this behavior as cells, of alters cells. of the and local antigen-presenting mucosa dramatically the of epithelial changes the dendritic cascade the by released cells such environment Together express effector activated and cells. co-stimulatory in cytokines of described of and development will T and as IL-12, dendritic IL-23, such high cells IL-1, molecules Section promote As levels IL-6, 9-8, patch, in T-cell-dependent patches to the the dendritic migrate encounter areas lymph in cells CCR7. that the under Dendritic migrate the Peyer’s propria node of activated to lamina mesenteric cells of control whereas antigen ways CCR9 acquire to gut-homing T acid, such ensuring retinoic activated these to to organisms. α4:β7 gut return molecules the and that as of invading wall the in the cells they The due presence encounter effector generating accumulate lamina lymphocytes that lymph nodes, Peyer’s patches Similarly, cells the generated and in IgA-producing are B propria. in plasma mesenteric TLR by enhanced cytokines. the response lumen pIgR in to infection enhanced expression IgA because pro-inflammatory secretion ligands into is and is systemic and infections, but antibodies IgG from secretions, derived now found intestinal are tissues. some these organisms reach serum invading be in In require to immune can

their found functions T sustaining The mucosa. cells myeloid the effector the arrival in activated cells after mucosa inflamed the of and in also contribute to B of produced function cells. for the maintaining arrived monocytes are and IL-6 survival recently IL-1 TH17 local important by and help oxide produce myeloid cells nitric Pro-inflammatory that mucosal as TNF-α, cells. such also drive mediators B secondary IL-6, of switching and IgA expansion and

intestine function Effector epithelium. in protect the of the T-cell 12-17 the responses

effector cytokines producing body, that the counterparts elsewhere cytolytic appropriate activated, T Once the like and the their intestine as in much cells the activity generating to accumulate in behave pathogen. is barrier. to aim protective different the epithelial intestine of the is integrity in the preserving What is function immune and of that tailored the response the nature This pathogen. ways, number is depending in on a the of of achieved the their cells stem triggering crypts. cells cells intraepithelial rapidly in uninfected by cells infected infections, dividing epithelial cytotoxic kill In T virus Fig 12.14), the lymphocytes the replacement CD8 (see derived among from cytokines effector during from cells of forms A directly immune T CD4 can similar process epithelial with protective other division. cell occur stimulating responses, attach forces of replacement and epithelium. for surface to the organisms are the a infected that generates of to the moving target cells This attempting a is (and IL-13, cytokine parasitic TH2 cells during of of kind this infections. ILC2s) An by example produced by against by its epithelial cells extracellular bacteria that cells defense TH17 antimicrobial In enhancing keep stimulate tight cells, contributes by barrier to ability the between Paneth junctions intact. to IL-22 produced production and addition peptide the fungi to is cells CD4 protecting cells. and as enhanced cytokines goblet such barrier, other by Mucus epithelial by well recruited production and of and IL-22, its crucially by important innate T products mast cells effector as is T-cell-derived in as the by IL-13 cells lumen within enhance others fluid, of mediators and washing intestine. the the peristaltic its out of action intestine the these pathogens outward secretion can and of Finally, the and epithelial the these hostile environment its processes for damage Together reducing the barrier. to to invade a unstable and ability pathogen, generate aim

The antigens. foreign maintain to 12-18 immune mucosal tolerance harmless must system

food the of lack do to central response, bacteria tolerance Antigens and inflammatory an immune induce normally not (Fig. within commensal despite them 12.18). a overcome which local is The tolerogenic, of system’s nonliving immune mechanisms. regulatory to mucosal to vaccines, development this and need environment barrier inherently is the the digested the relevant amounts in immunologically Food completely absorbed significant proteins are in into are not an intestine; form. body oral phenomenon the tolerance. of known as administration oral of The response antigen default a protein development a to is to mucosal systems that antigen. a same tolerance systemic the of is form the unresponsive This and relatively renders peripheral immune a (Fig. in such ovalbumin experimentally It them by feeding mice as be foreign protein demonstrated can 12.19). as a the into injection the by such challenged animals response would immune one is skin, When expect the nonmucosal antigen with the then are blunted. route, is of other responses antigen lasting specific: responses suppression are to This is immune and long antigens systemic not affected. the of of mucosal as suppression mucosal a is proteins after the to the via immune response to similar giving respiratory usual delivered administration surface. tolerance, is tract, into concept antigens responses subsequent rise the A such of observed Systemic antigens inhibited that also can by T-cell encountered protein previously. not humans they have responses feeding be

responses including peripheral of tolerance IgE production. response, can all and immune the impact T-cell-dependent Oral effector aspects humans, oral food the to found although healthy inflammation. also proteins levels Effector responses lead antibodies T-cell in not directed of in mucosa downregulated at can be in are do secretory IgA but tolerance, low

Treg the via for gut-homing, likely migratory the cells, antigen-specific and to antigen-specific mesenteric to tolerance acid cells generation including Section oral induced anergy, T cells of regulatory and account cells of mechanisms T are to TGF-β 12-7). antigens, by the dendritic protein Various production become deletion lymph retinoic of FoxP3-positive in node (see also that the of known suppression this the mechanisms essential for mucosal link systemic yet it are responses, immune the responsible not events these are all is understood. and system immune peripheral Although for between occur At Sections times, is 14-17) in peanut can believed oral and tolerance (discussed detail more fail, in celiac (discussed in allergies 14-10 or 14-12). in disease Section to as

against infections immune by are during The system presented immunity intestinal antigens protective organisms. generates pathogenic that T and appropriate the and IgA activated made, serum in IgG the are locally, cells IgA elsewhere. are antibodies and are intestine effector produced antigen rapid the is effective encountered memory, again, ensuring is protection. When there little antibody or food systemically, from proteins no IgA and production. tolerance with Antigens induce locally activated, cells challenge T not suppressed. are subsequent are responses and to not antibody are there but and case commensal systemic In primary production, the cells no of bacteria, be activated. some IgA effector local responses, T may

response an control ovalbumin are adjuvant day stimulate 7, the are mixture or effective mice Mice injected On immune a either to ovalbumin fed with plus

Fig. administration. oral experimentally to antigens generated by be Tolerance can 12.19 2 a mg are ovalbumin, as with protein fed second 25 control. for the either or a experimental weeks protein, of Mice and after are 2 and days immunized serum the subcutaneously the later, measured. adjuvant, are T‑cell an mice ovalbumin weeks, function plus antibodies Seven with Mice control lower ovalbumin‑specific those ovalbumin response systemic a protein. fed have than fed immune the were that

of by been 1 we greater inflammatory arthritis, and Chapter in that animal antibodies, disease superseded detail therapies, in diabetes humans in 16. in monoclonal as Although less have clinical trials will be used avoid successful, other models have encephalomyelitis, mellitus, mucosal experimental to and discuss can such been tolerance type

12-19 The bacteria required of for large that normal intestine quantities are health. contains

numbers as archaea, colonized body mostly but surfaces microbiota, fungi, protozoa healthy the of also by collectively bacteria, The microbiome, viruses, and of referred large composed . to microorganisms, or the are of organisms, tissues intestine these largest all of their other The source mucosal own, populations harbor the of microbes. distinct although the is in We species ileum. commensal and bacteria and the are intestine, lower harbor numbers present of in than in they more our each greatest 1000 colon be only their cannot now established being of numbers many by in techniques. and As the high-throughput identities culture, are species exact grown sequencing several Firmicutes, of Proteobacteria, descending Actinobacteria, order, phyla bacteria, there In archaea—in major and are plus humans, Bacteroidetes, Archaea. the weigh microorganisms kg. There these 1 collectively are least that about of at 1014 history. been has The mutualism known or exists and over a as many coevolved that millennia microbiota beneficial, with their mutually relationship normally in has throughout humans in vertebrates symbiotic, intestinal established these to individual animals result, host groups are As distinctive species. a adapted the of are in highly and different found their microbes populations of

maintaining health. The role in has an essential microbiota Its cellulose, metabolism K1. members the as dietary such produce assist as such vitamin as constituents toxins degrade essential as cofactors in of and well their essential acid (TCA) butyrate, metabolism source (SCFAs), of especially carbohydrates tricarboxylic enterocytes bacteria anaerobic the acids such energy cycle. through acetate, as entry as colonic produced and propionate, of fatty commensal Short-chain substrates are an for by into by dietary as a undergo necrosis. flow remove starved colitis, Surgical SCFAs colon called enterocytes the can which syndrome fecal in and of normal diversion ileostomy, to procedures, the that cause inflammation such segment SCFAs this the Providing to affected colon can condition. reverse they commensal competing that property interfere colonize to with pathogenic the of is invade Another and the and by nutrients. important partly organisms bacteria of for ability gut, space inhibit that also for directly that cells stimulate epithelial pathways pro-inflammatory in invasion. They signaling needed and pathogens the can are of Sections Perturbations balance the bacteria the in (see found 12-22). been between and in susceptibility to to increase species the of present various variety have 12-21 diseases (dysbiosis) microbiota a

of broad-spectrum protective adverse of The commensal role the effects by microbiota antibiotics. is the dramatically illustrated to an able antibiotics not niche kill numbers ecological compete bacteria successfully. be can commensal would that thereby otherwise bacteria, These of for large creating gut grows infection a a gut of severe the and (Fig. bacterium can is antibiotic-treated difficile that Clostridium One example cause in 12.20). prevalent, produces broad-spectrum and problem it antibiotic injury. mucosal toxins use is in is countries an This organism that severe diarrhea cause increasing as where infection. healthy from transplant feces Restoring a be by normal the microbiota to of can individuals C. difficile used treat

of importance experiments that defense the health lack the of by is factors bacteria The for shown in commensal local one mechanisms more against or involved. animals mucosa lymphoid and antibodies the penetrated disseminated numbers beyond instance, tissues. intestinal of have have For without bacteria its secretory increased commensal have draining mice that these altered, The microbiota mice diversity. in increased species decreased bacteria, of composition the of but also numbers is with T mice cells described in or FoxP3+ regulatory dysbiosis been lacking has eosinophils. Similar

inflammation to compromising preventing while to react ability invaders. the without

epithelium is bacteria is intestinal when beneficial their integrity damaged. a Despite are the the of potential as threat, commensal effects, shown systemic invade gut normally these nonpathogenic can circumstances, E. and fatal innocuous infection. cause as In mucosa, such coli, cross bloodstream, the bacteria, the in commensal some has control response intestine immune microbes the to mount of the system (Fig. to Therefore, form 12.21). damage the Since and system inappropriate of to immune to reactions the must the cost damaging to intestine, may and chronic tissues with from commensal inflammation inflammation. lead bacteria the balance recognition response responses microbiota and are and the maintain that Commensal balance the local itself. elicit bacteria largely antigen-specific confined intestine host between to unresponsiveness, state soluble these of they systemic commensal when organisms systemic response. enter immune Unlike antigens, can primary and do a bacteria induce a immune not the bloodstream, food stimulate normal

Fig. of local organisms further the dependent system the cells dendritic Recognition immune in uptake adaptive of transport Peyer’s (see the patches by on the node and migrate intracellular by or is microbiota lymph than no that mesenteric remain wider the acts which of microbiota. to dissemination prevent 12.21), IgA Because not commensal comprising induce that a intestinal balanced antibodies are are at microbes and cells bacteria. are response, secretory noninvasive, commensal fully enter activated dendritic directed finely secretions and appear the be Fig. commensal lumen of in to living (see IgA 75% organisms to by Up coated and epithelium. 12.21), limiting to adherence the of penetration their alter of their the expression. In microbiota coating can gene addition, SIgA with large TH1 differentiated the fully of and Many of numbers

Fig. Infection difficile. Clostridium by 12.20 colonize colon. with Treatment normally antibiotics the causes death the massive bacteria commensal that of is occupy normally bacteria. commensal pathogenic allows and niche by that bacteria harmless This proliferate occupied to ecological an to pathogen antibiotics. diarrhea severe toxins Clostridium can an producing difficile example a that of with cause treated in patients bloody is

Fig. local homeostasis 12.21 ensure processes and host microbiota. peaceful Several between M cells. immune system in bacteria the access the lumen via gain to Commensal follicles (left up taken by dendritic patches are and noninflammatory cells conditions Peyer’s Antigens panel). isolated in under localize Presentation cells plasma IgA‑producing panel). the generates of B propria that these (right antigens in cells lamina IgA‑switched as their the then their bacteria, to the expression, binding commensal and epithelium, IgA altering blocking binds access gene limiting their surface. to by of assisted Interference mucus, the presence layers thick mucin glycoproteins that which have is with of contain also the epithelium penetration properties. of antibacterial induces CD4 of peptides such and as also T from on TH17 IL‑22 addition, pattern Section of by the cells production stimulated cells RegIIIγ stimulation derived are ILC3s. In recognition 2‑4), and which (see antimicrobial defensins receptors Paneth tightens also epithelial barrier. the IL‑22 bacteria the found Phagocytic kill immediately and penetrate under can that macrophages the epithelium surface. ingest

at TH17 directed healthy intestine the microbiota. in are cells also found While the clearance produce mediators collateral and of bacterial by producing can risk damage. cells, that assist cells epithelial these come inflammation they and with macrophages of present by cells in T IL-10 T regulatory because mucosa. occur, not This the cells produced does and FoxP3+ regulatory and in in TH17 switching. and cells the centers selective acquire leading to helper intestine can T of germinal IgA enter the FoxP3+ Peyer’s T cells, follicular functions patches

leading present unusually seems by weaker such neutralization enzymes phosphatase, bacteria alkaline commensal also as sensitive activation. on endotoxin gut immune to The to resist by small their in the rapidly and commensal are factors of cannot numbers, they bacteria means phagocytic do killing cross If destroyed. virulence they epithelium lack and uptake cells, lead happens inflammation. In in other to of does the not tissues, ingestion bacteria to commensal contrast what in intestine respond macrophages intestinal If develops cannot inhibitory spontaneously. IL-10, of inflammation the effects to when in assist switching Eosinophils to producing exposed 12-11). intestine IL-6, commensal and Section (see IgA microbes TGF-β the APRIL, antigen-specific healthy by mucosal the inflammation. or with organisms invading commensal surface Thus, without provoking associate many the cells associated create in as sometimes to symbiosis state immune referred This involves physiological usually innate are that but inflammation a intestine chronic effector inflammation. adaptive with and

12-21 in intestinal The function. major systemic a intestinal role and shaping microbiota immune plays

normal an role play in immune essential and their of Commensal bacteria products the system. development of by mice, illustrated in colonization in is microorganisms. This germ-free, gut effect or which no gnotobiotic, the there is responses, serum markedly size low especially cells, levels, reductions reduced in immune and TH1 the T all mature of have marked organs, responses. TH17 lymphoid animals fewer These immunoglobulin and are prone TH2-type as more Such responses such susceptible antibodies to IgE are and mice make

the 12.22 immune Fig systemic function. and Effects disease on of microbiota

and the presence the system consequences microbes to immune the composition have which reflect others downstream may in the the function microbiota intestinal of be products of for of of The some ability may secondary the mucosa, circulation. to body other and while the enter events of many tissues, wide on and many known range diseases humans The a microbiota animals. in is of to susceptibility effects also have to experimental

1 type immunological such diseases diabetes. certain to as and normally intestine, lymphoid develop isolated do follicles are absent. Peyer’s the not In patches immunity, peptides, Germ-free retinoic of and IL-7, IgA-secreting lamina and reduced such T and reduced propria local as in numbers of acid, IL-25, nearly plasma severely also and mediators antimicrobial epithelium, cells, ILCs absent IL-22, IL-33, TSLP. lymphocytes have mice the the germ-free in intestine, the germ-free bias contrast, perhaps contributing In in cells NKT seen abundant more animals. invariant TH2 (iNKTs) are to

beyond The the 12.22). intestinal of the microbiota extend intestine effects (Fig. far autoimmune in more For are example, several animals. germ-free diseases frequent The a model genetic state type of diabetes. germ-free increases in 1 the severity greatly symptoms of diseases, influences even to the many of cardiovascular different cancer, and disorders. obesity, The composition disease, disorders such metabolic psychiatric microbiota immunological as susceptibility in commensal for been is have individual and few identified The these basis species susceptibility. disease associations unclear species affected normally form have that individuals we as in the unusual compositions bacterial the make up However, microbiota, dysbiosis, of saw some a 12-19. major of Section conferred bacteria secondary be preexisting and affected disease rather a In unaffected by animals, change in experimental idea susceptibility intestinal being between supporting microbiota is disease. transferring than models, causal that factor, can to the the mixtures observation probiotics, which beneficial. of This bacteria are yeast live of are and considered particular that underlies use the prevent benefits. and use understood microbiota promote much disease intestinal health, be Their remains their although may manipulate to the to about potential

probably microbiota are effects different the the of in Many mechanisms (Fig. involved 12.23). on is local effects NLRs cells and and epithelial of the myeloid TLRs for undoubtedly many important of cells. Ligation TLR-5 Flagellin intestinal stimulate TH17 IL-23 mucosal and the bacterial and on IL-6 present can responses. and dendritic of favoring species many cells, inducing CD11b-expressing IgA on production function. examples bacterial also have specific There immune effects on are species individual that of cells of IELs, segmented (SFB) (see and bacteria TH17 filamentous accumulation Colonization the enhances IgA intestinal Fig. mice with effector of number T of production, 12.23). (see ILC3. dietary enhance by Section IL-22 production by lactobacilli the of activate and 12-14) kynurenine into can metabolites AhR Conversion tryptophan Bacteroides the (PSA) A differentiation manner. Treg Polysaccharide a in of from drives fragilis cells TLR-2-dependent preferential of the a species the several T perhaps FoxP3+ TGF-β-rich in Clostridium regulatory promoting environment stimulate generation by SCFAs. by Also, cells and producing colon, unclear. mechanism currently SCFAs which alter by function The is immune cell directly effects be yet, E prevalent Escherichia As disease, of identified called certain coli, been collectively enteroadherent human the with dysbiosis organisms on disease. found Crohn’s to species, been explain in specific have to coli have patients although few in are similar much done with these associations more to of shown but in number studies rheumatoid Prevotella diseases. if to a confirm of Recent other find be copri patients also work needs arthritis, increased effects abundance there have and newly to diagnosed

immune and 12.23 Fig tune responses. local systemic microbiota The been effects few and have only distant immune identified. mechanisms local The individual and although organisms has on microbiota a function, cells, (SAA) (SFB) may epithelial serum induce dendritic on protein amyloid inducing to potently filamentous that produce by perhaps cells. bacteria SFB‑specific A cells Segmented act TH17 on Bacterial TLR‑5 and mucosal flagellin IgA TH17 CD11b‑expressing responses favors stimulating cells. by dendritic for isolated NKT lymphoid inhibits ILCs, especially ILC3 cells, but is (iNKTs). invariant presence needed of the follicles cells of accumulation and microbiota the also The enterocytes, colonic other Tregs, to is generation although and energy also the the may drive mechanism of Besides providing butyrate to FoxP3+ unclear. molecular SCFAs still act of Clostridia cells. by induce production also epithelial TGF‑β The polysaccharide TLR‑2 cells, regulatory cells. Bacteroides preferential generation CD4+ T stimulates the by on T antigen to of from binding possibly (PSA) fragilis the IL‑25, of members Unidentified of maintain to RA. the and needed production IL‑33, TSLP, are microbiota

immune responses commensal intestinal Full bacteria disease. to provoke 12-22

can normal accepted cells are T commensal in bacteria potentially the idea 1990s kept present led aggressive 12.24). but the animals (Fig. to in Elegant to that are generally by active in usually check experiments regulation that respond now inflammatory such Crohn’s bacteria commensal these disease. responses fail, regulatory to immune to can as bowel mechanisms diseases lead unrestricted If encode with in innate associated susceptibility genes humans that that regulate are Many disease Crohn’s proteins immunity. to fail, such commensal against immune bacterial, are these When antigens systemic flagellin. from responses as regulatory generated processes in responses mucosa, the leading generated damage. to also are T-cell severe intestinal IL-23 of TH17 effector promoting this in is process, important differentiation cells. with CD4 responses both the in cells induce these in effector inflammatory under IFN-γ IL-23 to and circumstances. IL-17 TH1 concert T IL-12 also can and produce found some intestine, are linkage Crohn’s evidence in for disease the a humans. with IL-23 These in results consistent clinical receptor and polymorphisms experimental between all In depends with by animals. germ-free damage be experimental bacteria, models, does occur in presence antibiotics, the and of intestinal can on commensal treatment not prevented the

and unusual populations Patients related exhibit microbiota. intestinal ulcerative of disorder disease colitis Crohn’s harbor and dysbiosis with the of causing the have be been commensal with yet responsible damage. for bacteria proven to exception coli mentioned of species no Escherichia individual enteroadherent above, the However, also There to trigger viruses parasites responses activation is pathogenic or certain T cells effector gondii such as Toxoplasma persistent produce may evidence bystander to local specific commensal that experimental inflammation. of organisms and

Summary.

strong mucosa antigens, the but foods to and to generating to distinguish and commensals. responses pathogens effector potential immune The between unresponsive pathogens system in harmless has remaining form induce and/or the by T tolerance producing Food tolerance of in mediated an be systemic mucosal immunological active systems; proteins regulatory IL-10 cells may this TGF-β. and immune tissues from migrate draining the system, by but intestinal mucosa to to wall semi-mature cells immune nodes. that are its T limited Commensal dendritic commensal are because presented antigens also lymphoid this is and draining by recognized the mesenteric bacteria lymph to the cells antigens microorganisms, the the local of This by results but IgA by tolerance of production in these mucosal and system. antibodies colonization that the immune systemic active restrict ‘ignorance’ the important for with the these bacteria commensal host, allowing beneficial the system. Because have processes effects are immune immunoregulatory coexist to in many bacteria mesenteric induce cells differentiation break dendritic effector the into naive fully T When local T down, cells the regulatory and node. normal become of processes in cells lymph activated immunity inflammatory or occurs against can diseases disease. under for important the lead it but pathogens, protective such to This when disease as celiac wrong is circumstances, it Crohn’s which appearance a these As normal helps the of of normally consequence immune needs but the gut physiological has immune the system. of of competing, inflammation, response, and maintain function intestine the interacting, cells, regulatory driven IgA, control of completely need it process effector damaging microbiota activation by the results the responses. intestinal in or and and causing This production the to mostly several innate immune coordinated and eliminating of inflammation, is without T the microbiota, and development in in intestine. the can of changes alter the the Abnormalities the response outside composition of the behavior host also can while influence many microbiota diseases outcome and

Chapter to Summary 12.

complex is apparatus a system by but prevent not disease. the helping mucosal health, vital in of entire protecting large crucial by just immune and and the The regulate also organs immune role physiologically to system a has that tone be peripheral recent The most immunologists focused an specialization tissues. mucosal lymphoid organs evolved on a that original in by of template may vulnerable mucosal to of highly infection body the The are surfaces

Fig. produce regulatory T present cells. controlled cells in T the 12.24 response inflammation with normal bacteria are to are to potential by but animals, in commensal an Transfer lead of CD4+ T‑cell the reconstitution such rag the –/–), mouse, as unseparated T of a mouse (rag gene one into normal compartment. will cells immunodeficient lacking to CD4+ from However the inflammation CD4+ if and transferred, T colon. purified develop host are cells severe (CD4+CD45RBhi) mice the ‘naive’ of removed CD4+CD25+ that co‑transferring cells by naive FoxP3+ population. T‑cell be This the the T CD4+ the during of prevented purification were can regulatory also vivo of by IL‑10. are in TGF‑β effects cells neutralizing these dependent on The are T and blocked intestinal cells in by caused prevented or T as The mice, by naive of CD4+ it antibiotics. requires with microbiota, presence inflammation is the the germ‑free treatment in that normal normally check are CD4+ animals cells. capable that regulatory against some these microbiota, demonstrate by in T responses These but T held inflammatory intestinal of provoking cells are the experiments Powrie, Micrographs F., from al. et Med. : Exp J. 1996, 183:2669–2674.

immunity. and of array complex possess mechanisms a adaptive of innate and rest of as the as predominance distinctive infection; antigens of lymphoid predominant immune responses that of tissue; of secretory lymphocytes lymphoid specialized system lymphoid antigen absence from more activated/memory macrophages; the dendritic distinctive respects: uptake production immediate the cells tissue as the to microorganisms. mucosal peripheral organs; and the juxtaposition adaptive mechanisms diffuse The lymphoid lymphoid well IgA and antigens and several immune (ILCs) and epithelium of commensal such and of organized as tissues downregulation innocuous antibody; food innate lymphoid in the the and the of system cells differs even dimeric mucosa-associated in the of No detected these systemic response be immune normally to antigens. can pathogenic responses. microorganisms protective In induce contrast, strong mucosal is in tolerance responses which between T powerful in immune the context in immune system. lymphocytes key the factor adaptive The the of to antigen and presented development is decision the T When antigen inflammation, of there induces of no dendritic the cells differentiation T by cells regulatory cells. to is presentation their tissues, contrast, maturation mucosa molecules, cells pathogenic an of response. crossing co-stimulatory T-cell in inflammatory expression the protective By and thus microorganisms a the of antigen-presenting the which induce stimulates favoring response process dendritic their to to which to migrating react antigen This T environment cells. present controlled by mostly decision-making specialized cells the is way in before naive maintaining host response the formed and plays in in disease. the role development The a local of mutualistic loop and between immune central health microbiota the

Questions.

incorrect is Choice: an following of Multiple 12.1 Which statement? the

microbes luminal have entry and to surface patches. folded of of a Microfold thick allows the Peyer’s possess cells a A. layer that mucus

the and transcytosis. space extracellular release process called material the GP2 bacterial cells B. by by to recognize proteins several a Microfold

and CCL9. dendritic CCL20 tissues trough such C. Gut‑associated as cells attract lymphoid chemokines

D. space. microfold access such to subepithelial target as to pestis gain Pathogens Yersinia Shigella cells the and

T Intraepithelial to mostly False: in lamina CD8 are 12.2 cells, lymphocytes contrast or CD4 predominate. True where propria, cells T the

receptor homing or Matching: chemokine Match tissue each to function. its 12.3 chemokine

i. A. CXCL13 correct Multiple lactating and salivary following glands Which is gland, a to 12.4 of the statement? lymphocytes mammary of the Choice: colon, Recruitment

for patches. A. IL‑12 stimulate and main the are cells Peyer’s ILC3s dendritic source CD11b+ in

their CD11b– B. cells require development. BATF3 for dendritic

by dendritic required production naive C. for Treg is generation of cells. acid Retinoic cells cells for the T

into layer patches. dendritic cells epithelial entrance of D. of the CCL20 Peyer’s prevents

from complexes pathogen Answer: reexported Short in enhance 12.5 IgA:antigen excretion be the order to can gut lumen to organism. the enhance of In the of antigen. luminal contrast, can IgA:antigen uptake the formation also complexes to of organism? the How antigen beneficial can uptake be

12.6 plasma means prevent most and secreted the into infections. intestinal by yet the Large as produced with microbiota cells in Answer: and of lumen IgA overly deficiency and susceptible a cells to not to pathogens, individuals B from keep are are invasion Short IgA amounts check Explain this why is the case.

following Choice: describes intraepithelial Multiple of the Which 12.7 best lymphocytes (IELs)?

A. and CCR9 Express α4β7 B. integrin integrin (CD103) Express αEβ7 and CCR9

CD4 cell Have C. CD8 a T 3:1 to of ratio

that D. produce IL‑17, cells T IFN‑γ, Contain and IL‑22 CD4+

heterodimer express 90% α:β Consist α:α CD8 or which T as of E. homodimer of 80% an cells, an

A and C F.

E G. and B

expression on D for aryl and cell Which receptor A, following development? Multiple Choice: hydrocarbon the C, depend 12.8 types H. proper of

A. Type (EIL) b ILC1 intraepithelial B. lymphocyte

cell C. B

E. ILC2 D. Macrophage

F. Neutrophil Match disease the human the with 12.9 Matching:

treatment that iii. C. Antibiotic eliminates to bowel particular (Crohn’s of the mucosal diarrhea and and and to flora allowing species disease disease lead ulcerative Inflammatory injury toxins a produce colitis) bulk overgrow severe that commensal

D. responses immune iv. to Hyperactive such as or to pathogens commensal cytokines in IL‑17, genes secrete propria IFN‑γ, Diversion large IL‑22 colitis due and of to only insults. T bacteria response cells in inflammatory defects innate True CD4+ and amounts Lamina immunity 12.10 False:

Tregs Most small in False: or intestine the 12.11 express do FoxP3. not True

references. General

Littman, and L.V., D.R., Macpherson, A.J. Hooper, the microbiota immune Interactions the between : system. and 2012, Science 336:1268–1273.

homeostasis I., Regulation and of T.T., in intestine. and Fantini, Monteleone, G.: the M.C., inflammation Monteleone, MacDonald, 1768–1775. 2011, Gastroenterology 140:

tolerance Anatomical intestinal immunity to A.M.: Mowat, of basis and antigens. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2003, 3:331–341.

Mucosal Principles of for ed. Immunology, Society 1st Mucosal Immunology: 2013. Garland New York, Science,

references. Section

12-1 immune system of mucosal body. the the The protects surfaces internal

Brandtzaeg, tissue of Function mucosa-associated antibody P.: in lymphoid formation. Immunol. Invest. 39:303–355. 2010,

interface. and responses K., at Cerutti, A., mucosal Chorny, Chen, the A.: Immunoglobulin Annu. Rev. Immunol. 29:273–293. 2011,

of B.: Role infection maintenance and homeostasis. Corthesy, secretory IgA of in Autoimmun. Rev. 12:661–665. 2013,

and T Kanagawa, gut: T and the cell-dependent cell-independent Suzuki, S., O., K.: S., IgA Adaptive immune in synthesis. Kawamoto, regulation Fagarasan, Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2010, 28:243–273.

evolutionarily GALT the of A.: Matsunaga, thymus: be T., search of origin and related. the and thymus the Rahman, may In Scand. Immunol. J. 53:1–6. 2001,

distinct for Naz, tract R.K.: development. immunological vaccine immunity: genital challenges Female J .Reprod. Immunol. 2012, 93:1–8.

T.D. Randall, tissue and structure : lymphoid function. Bronchus-associated (BALT) Adv. Immunol. 107:187–241. 2010,

Sato, of system and mucosal respiratory Kiyono, immune The S., tract. H. the Curr. Opin. Virol. 2012, 2:225–232.

located of the system Cells immune defined and both 12-2 are scattered mucosal compartments anatomically mucosal in tissues. throughout

Lugering, Olivier, M., Baptista, B.J., M., et A.P., al. K., H., R.G., Domingues, Kusser, Luster, Veiga-Fernandes, Knippenberg, A.D., G., A., Greuter, Goverse, differentially SILT regulated events. Colonic : patch and colonic independent are development and Mucosal 2013, Immunol 6:511–521.

Kiyono, Russell, P., M.W. H., Pabst, R., and Brandtzaeg, mucosa-associated Terminology: of : tissue. lymphoid nomenclature Immunol. Mucosal 1:31–37. 2008,

crypt: hypotheses current Eberl, of on facts S.: function and Sawa, Opening and cryptopatches. the G., the Immunol. Trends 31:50–55. 2010,

J.S., ILC22 tissues cells Garlanda, R.D., pathways R., lymphoid via Kopan, Mantovani, Kennedy, McDonald, dependent M., of drives Cella, M., A., Lee, C.A., C., K.G., and Nukaya, and gut development on Newberry, independent Bradfield, G.D., Notch. al: the of AHR postnatal et Nat. Immunol. 2012, 13:144–151.

F.E., McCoy, K.D., The and Johansen, P.: function. induction geography of Brandtzaeg, IgA and immune A.J., Macpherson, Mucosal. Immunol. 2008, 1:11–22.

Friedrichsen, Pabst, S., T., dispensable the Korner, tissues Cryptopatches generation R.: dynamic G., for isolated of Hoffmann, Bernhardt, R., Herbrand, M., and H., M.W., lymphoid lymphoid follicles: Pabst, H., Yan, Forster, Worbs, lymphocytes. and O., intraepithelial Eur. J. Immunol. 2005, 35:98–107.

Randall, T.D. structure tissue (BALT) : Bronchus-associated and lymphoid function. Adv. Immunol. 107:187–241. 2010,

Mebius, R.E. Randall, and T.D., lymphoid micro-organisms. with of tissues: mucosal a function balancing act and The development : Immunol. Mucosal 7: 2014, 455–466.

IgA Suzuki, and S.: leading Maruya, to GALT: and organization S., synthesis. Kawamoto, K., M., Fagarasan, dynamics Adv. Immunol. 107:153–185. 2010,

of routes and 12-3 mechanisms intestine antigen The distinctive uptake. has

N.G., Neutra, Shreedhar, Chabot, J.A., V., Dickinson, M.R. S., Anosova, B.L., and Borawski, toxin, E. follicle-associated migration the Peyer’s dendritic patches. derivatives Cholera into of cell epithelium induce heat-labile coli : non-toxic and toxin, Mucosal Immunol. 1:59–67. 2008,

et K., Pontes, Fujimura, al. Kawano, Hase, S., Fukuda, Kadokura, Kawano, T., Tobe, G.S., Nochi, K., Y., S., M., T., Ebisawa, K., glycoprotein through immune mucosal FimH+ cells of by bacteria : response. Uptake initiates 2 M 462:226–230. 2009, Nature

Iwatani, Yokota, al. et Kweon, K., Y., Jang, M.N., Terahara, M.H., Yamamoto, K., P.D., T., T., C., Nochi, M., Suzuki, Sasakawa, Rennert, entry mucosal the : villous in cells: site epithelium. Intestinal an M antigen Proc. Acad. Natl Sci. USA 2004, 101:6110–6115.

de patch antigens Bovis, by J.P.: Lelouard, Peyer's sample H., dendrites S., dendritic Fallet, and B., through M cell-specific cells Meresse, transcellular Gorvel, pores. extending M., 2012, 142:592–601. Gastroenterology

Mabbott, immunosurveillance N.A., epithelium. important D.S., posts Mahajan, Microfold the (M) Williams, in Ohno, intestinal A. I.R., Donaldson, H., and cells: Immunol. Mucosal 2013, 6:666–677.

Kunisawa, Kaneto, Transcription and Y., Peyer’s Takahashi, H., Spi-B-dependent Okura, cells. M factor Sato, development S., S., J., N., Shibata, Kiyono, Yuki, -independent for H.: the and pathways Y., patch of Mucosal Immunol. 2013, 6:838–846.

Stoklasek, Salazar-Gonzalez, T., X., R., Ravindran, et Zammit, I.R., Yadav, R.M., Gu, J.R., Srinivasan, J.H., Maxwell, R., D.J., Williams, al. Niess, A., pathogen-specific cell CCR6-mediated dendritic cells Peyer’s of activation T patches. : in 2006, Immunity 24:623–632.

Williams, Cruz, M., et C.S., A.K., Farber, Marquez, X., J.M., A., G., A., I., Linehan, Kucharzik, Sato, Zhao, T., Dela al. Luegering, Shirakawa, dome the and cells. CD11b+ region recruits secreted by dendritic epithelium : Peyer’s CCL9 is patch follicle-associated J. Immunol. 2003, 171:2797–2803.

mucosal numbers of even in The 12-4 system the immune disease. absence lymphocytes contains effector large of

T.W. Hand, Bouladoux, N., Belkaid, and Y., and Effector cell to : responses T memory commensal bacteria. Trends Immunol. 2013, 34:299–306.

dissemination, P.: immunity: Mucosal induction, functions. and Brandtzaeg, effector Scand. J. Immunol. 2009, 70:505–515.

homeostasis. Elson S., intestinal polymeric to C.O., intestinal and IgA Yao and Gong Th17 cells and receptor A.T., Cao B., upregulate Cong contribute Y.: Ig Immunol. J. 2012, 189:4666–4673.

Doubting H., TCR Cheroutre, function coreceptor Lambolez, the F.: and of CD8αα. 28:149–159. 2008, Immunity

T L.S., tissue-resident mucosa cells. the memory by Guarding Lefrancois, Cauley, perimeter: of L.: and the protection Mucosal. Immunol. 2013, 6:14–23.

and Weaver, C.T. Maynard, C.L., effector and in health Intestinal cells disease. T : 2009, 31:389–400. Immunity

Thome, Kubota, J.J., D., Goldstein, T memory M., Sykes, P., H., N., K.L., tissue-resident and Distribution circulating subsets. T., cell compartmentalization et Turner, human Bickham, of Camp, and al: Yudanin, Lerner, M., Sathaliyawala, Immunity 38:187–197. 2013,

12-5 receptors. The mucosal within circulation lymphocytes immune the of system

mucosa. Generation the and to localization gut-homing their W.: cells small of T Agace, intestinal Immunol. Lett. 128:21–23. 2010,

memory Xiong, and M., K., Li, in responses of chemokine Yang, Critical in CCR10 IgA roles Hu, regulating J., intestines. S., receptor N.: Yang, Proc. Acad. Natl Sci. E1035–1044. 108: 2011, USA

Xu, Y., and Xiang, Rifkin, D.B., Lin, U., X.W., C., Littman, M., Sarpel, W.V., Ota, Yang, Kim, S.V., D.R. R., Kwak, mucosa. intestine homeostasis : large GPR15-mediated in homing the immune controls Science 2013, 340:1456–1459.

Slack, E., McCoy, A.J., M.B., Geuking, Hapfelmeier, and Macpherson, S., K.D. habitat, IgA. life, forgetfulness double citizenship, of : The and Immunol. Rev. 2012, 245:132–146.

through dendritic lung the promote and homing Luster, cell Mikhak, immunity chemokine CCR4. and A.D.: cells Z., receptor T imprint lung J.P., Strassner, Lung Exp. J. Med. 2013, 210:1855–1869.

and J.R., von Mora, U.H. Andrian, : and cells. Differentiation homing IgA-secreting of Mucosal Immunol. 1:96–109. 2008,

road migration tolerance--generation the G.: Bernhardt, of On O., regulatory T and Pabst, cells. to gut and Eur. Immunol. J. 43:1422–1425. 2013,

12-6 in induce mucosal surfaces. at tissue Priming lymphocytes protective one mucosal immunity may other of

homing D., N.P., C., Denimal, and Lu, Pothier, immunization Gerard, cell antibody-secreting A., Intrarectal the small IgA B., D., Agnello, Gerard, Lavaux, intestine. to L., Blondeau-Germe, P.: and J. Immunol. 190:4836–4847. 2013,

secretory memory surfaces. and of at mucosal Induction immunity Brandtzaeg, P.: 2007, Vaccine 25:5467–5484.

and for Holmgren, J.: immunity routes targeting the optimal Czerkinsky, immunization: tissues. to C., delivery Mucosal right Curr. Top. Microbiol. Immunol. 2012, 354:1–18.

Poles, J.H., N., B.S., H., Ruane, Cheong, Velinzon, C., Choi, Studt, J., Brane, et K., Y., al. Zhu, L., Reis, D., Do, : cells dendritic T induce to tract. protective Lung migration gastrointestinal the of cells Exp. J. Med. 210:1871–1888. 2013,

12-7 immune mucosal dendritic Distinct cells populations of control responses.

Cerovic,V.,Bain,C.C.,Mowat,A.M.,and Milling,S.W.F. Intestinal macrophages : the what’s difference? and cells: dendritic Trends Immunol. 2014, 35:270–277.

Nakato, Y., C., Diez, and Ignatowicz, Panea, M.G., C., G., A., Ivanov, Cebula, L., Goto, I.I. T.M., Laufer, Lee, by antigens intestinal differentiation. presented Th17 cell Segmented : dendritic filamentous drive bacteria mucosal cells Immunity 2014, 40:594-607.

Lambrecht, M., H.: macrophages the labor pulmonary in and dendritic cells Division and lung infections. of Guilliams, defense between against B.N., Hammad, Mucosal Immunol. 6:464–473. 2013,

to Kotarsky, Jaensson-Gyllenback, Agace, E., generate ability Blomhoff, F., cells. E.K., Bile cells K., Zapata, T.E., CD103+ W.W.: T the Gundersen, and dendritic retinoids intestinal with imprint Persson, gut-tropic R., Immunol. Mucosal 4:438–447. 2011,

cells induction. Matteoli, cell influences tolerance effector dendritic balance 2,3-dioxygenase CD103+ and regulatory/T which oral T indoleamine G.: express Gut Gut 2010, 59:595–604.

Low, A., A.W., Ho, P., et N., Shin, Zelante, K., P., T., A., al. Wasan, P.S., D., Atarashi, Schlitzer, Teo, McGovern, See, responses. dendritic and mucosal : cytokine cells control IL-17 IRF4 human transcription factor-dependent mouse CD11b+ in 38:970–983. Immunity 2013,

Wright, Guilliams, E.K., al. Agace, C.C., Lambrecht, W.W., Bain, P.B., B.N., Kotarsky, K., Luda, M., Scott, C.L., D., et Schien, Persson, K., induce T precursors develop production dendritic cells CCR2+CD103-intestinal : interleukin-17 by DC-committed and from cells. Mucosal Immunol. 8:327–239. 2015,

X., Y., A.C., E., X., M.A., Masteller, et Tang, Wang, B., Huang, al. J.M., Bernstein, Travis, Proctor, L.F., Reichardt, Q., Reizis, Melton, and causes in mice. on of αVβ8 integrin Loss autoimmunity colitis : dendritic cells 2007, Nature 449:361–365.

Vicente-Suarez, et M., R., S., Reardon, A., Park, C., Y., I., Obata, Y., Larange, Feau, Y., G., al. Gold, Wang-Zhu, Chodaczek, Matho, : propria dendritic lamina of Unique phenotype the imprint stromal functional cells. cells mucosal Mucosal Immunol. 2015, 8:141–151.

Comparative humans Ansel, Zeng, Dent, in B., and K.M., and Watchmaker, Lee, of R., functional intestinal et al: conserved Morton, profiling Kim, A., mice. D., defines Lahl, K., differentiation Diamond, M., transcriptional DC P.B., programs S.J., Baumjohann, J., Nat. Immunol. 2014, 15:98–108.

12-8 immune roles have in dendritic Macrophages responses. mucosal cells different and

Bravo-Blas, Henri, Malissen, the circulating B., Scott, S., C.C., intestine. Geissmann, Osborne, replenishment D., Constant F., macrophage adult and Mowat, A., Bain, A.M.: L.C., Artis, C.L., monocytes maintains in from pool Nat. Immunol. 15:929–937. 2014,

against H.: B.N., the Lambrecht, Hammad, labor and in M., Guilliams, defense infections. Division of and macrophages between lung dendritic pulmonary cells 6:464–473. Immunol Mucosal 2013,

U., requires propria. cells lamina in Hadis, Hardtke-Wolenski, Forster, M., Sparwasser, O., Muller, gut expansion Wahl, homing B., N., R., T., Intestinal and Wagner, tolerance FoxP3+ W., Schulz, and the Pabst, A., Schippers, O.: T regulatory of 2011, 34:237–246. Immunity

Merad, promotes Microbiota-dependent macrophages homeostasis. crosstalk M.: D., Y., and Belkaid, S.P., intestinal ILC3 Spencer, M., between Chudnovskiy,A., and Hashimoto, Mortha,A., Bogunovic, 2014, 343:1249288. Science

by antigen Antigen-presenting mucosa variety cells a routes. the of intestinal acquire 12-9 in

E., and immune macrophages to homeostasis defense. cells Zigmond, dendritic Contributions Jung, intestinal G., of and Shakhar, and S.: J., Farache, Immunol. Cell Biol. 2013, 91:232–239.

al. Sasakawa, Yamamoto, Rennert, P.D., Yokota, Nochi, K., C., Y., Iwatani, Jang, K., Kweon, Suzuki, T., M., et T., Terahara, M.N., M.H., mucosal Intestinal site in the cells: an antigen villous : entry M epithelium. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 2004, 101:6110–6115. USA

CD103+ of CX3CR1+ be macrophages G., M.: antigens tolerance and Rescigno, via from established L., to junction Oral gap E., can dendritic cells. transfer Mazzini, Penna, fed Massimiliano, 2014, Immunity 40:248–261.

luminal McDonald, M.J.: Wheeler, dendritic small deliver the to intestine. L.W., V., Wang, K.G., Newberry, Knoop, CD103+ McDole, B., Goblet in cells K.A., Konjufca, antigen cells and Miller, J.R., R.D., Nature 2012, 483:345–349.

small O.: sampling Antigen in O., the and Schulz, Pabst, intestine. Trends Immunol. 2013, 34:155–161.

Roopenian, E., Mizoguchi, J.S., Claypool, A., Mizoguchi, D.C., M., Lencer, W.I., S.M., Yoshida, and Wagner, Blumberg, R.S. of Fc receptor antigens into mucosal IgG cells. of transport delivery Human : for secretions neonatal luminal mediates to dendritic 2004, Immunity 20:769–783.

class IgA 12-10 system. the the mucosal associated with is of immune Secretory antibody

Larijani, Gosselin, M., McCarthy, Rojas, N., S.J., S., Rubino, J.H., II, O.L., D.D., Hapfelmeier, Ivanov, Fritz, Robertson, J., al. S., Simard, et of the a Acquisition multi-functional phenotype : in gut. plasma cell IgA+ 2012, Nature 481:199–203.

Tsutsui, Suda, of T., Doi, Y., selection bacterial immune Foxp3 A Honda, Kawamoto, regulate Maruya, K., Y., T W., Okada, H., homeostasis. and L.M., responsible et facilitate immunoglobulin diversification S., cells Atarashi, al: Kato, K., for M., Qin, species Immunity 2014, 41:152–165.

and M., Brandtzaeg, immune switch and Lin, recombination mucosal compartments. Pan-Hammarstrom, human systemic IgA Du, Q.: in subclass L., P., Immunol. Mucosal 2014, 7:511–520.

J.M., M.W. Russell, Woof, and and IgA. function : Structure in relationships Immunol. Mucosal 2011, 4:590–597.

IgA some to processes species in contribute T-independent can production 12-11

plasma are cells in induced engagement P., J.D., Edgeworth, Boursier, et originate S., L., that Vossenkamper, germinal Barone, W., humans. D.K., IgA-producing Wijetilleka, John, A., from Su, B-cell by A., S., al: centers Watson, Fields, F., receptor Dunn-Walters, 2011, 140:947–956. Gastroenterology

Kawamoto, synthesis. in Adaptive Suzuki, the T S., and immune cell-dependent O., cell-independent K.: regulation Fagarasan, and gut: Kanagawa, S., T IgA Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2010, 28:243–273.

subclass recombination M., Lin, in switch mucosal L., and compartments. immune Pan-Hammarstrom, human P., Du, IgA Q.: Brandtzaeg, and systemic Immunol. Mucosal 7:511–520. 2014,

and Tezuka, Liu, Iwata, J., J., M., Sato,T., H.,Abe,Y.,Asano, Ohteki,T. in dendritic for induction. Prominent : cell-independent T cells IgA plasmacytoid mucosal role 2011, 34:247–257. Immunity

may be by compensated but common IgA secretory 12-12 in humans is for relatively deficiency IgM.

H., oral tolerance Kahu, A., and the secretory M.R., a immune F.E., Brandtzaeg, system. Hypersensitivity absence P.: in and Macpherson, Karlsson, Johansen, of 65:561–570. 2010, Allergy

IgA deficiency. L.: Selective Yel, Clin. J. Immunol. 30:10–16. 2010,

and innate intestinal contains populations cells. lamina 12-13 cells The of T antigen-experienced lymphoid propria unusual

and cells pathology. Maloy, Ivanov, Uhlig, D.R., Ahern, K.J., intestinal lymphoid Littman, Buonocore, interleukin-23-dependent I.I., H.H., Powrie, innate drive Innate S., F.: P.P., 2010, Nature 464:1371–1375.

al. D., X., Briseño, S.R., M., Kc, A.T., Turkoz, Satpathy, J.S., Manieri, N.A., Wu, et Thomas, W.L., Lee, Ng, C.G., W., Lee, Notch2-dependent attaching-and-effacing dendritic intestinal orchestrate pathogens. cells classical to bacterial immunity : Nat. Immunol. 2013, 14:937–948.

T., Goppert, of Klose, the CCR6–RORγt+ lymphoid C.S., T-bet innate Y., controls Schwierzeck, V., E.A., N., and fate Y., et Croxford, A.L., al: d'Hargues, Hoyler, Kiss, cells. Ebert, Tanriver, A., A function gradient Waisman, K., 494:261–265. Nature 2013,

G.M., Prepens, Eberl, in produced intestinal al: lymphoid G., A.V., by Nonredundant Kuprash, S., Tumanov, D.R., Littman, homeostasis. C., D.V., Winsauer, Seleznik, soluble M., innate A.A., LTα3 et Kruglov, Heikenwalder, of function Grivennikov, S.I., cells 342:1243–1246. 2013, Science

Bourhis, epithelial and MAIT L., detect Premel, Dusseaux, Martin, cells V., Core, A., Bessoles, efficiently N.E., E., and S., M., Treiner, cells. lyse E.: Serriari, bacterially-infected Le M., Bohineust, Sleurs, D., PLoS Pathog. 9:e1003681. 2013,

emerging Spits, in T.: lymphoid development, lineage insights cells: H., Innate and relationships, function. and Cupedo, Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2012, 30:647–675.

unique The immune intestinal the is a epithelium of 12-14 compartment system.

Roberts, C., Greineder, Ebert, A.I., C.M. Agace, E.C., and Parker, Wu, W.W., L., express inflammation. receptors intraepithelial induced lamina lymphocytes chemokines specific propria by for Human intestinal : and Eur. J. Immunol. 30:819–826. 2000,

and Mucida, intestinal lymphocytes. Cheroutre, dark F., sides and D.: The intraepithelial H., Lambolez, light of Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2011, 11:445–456.

on function the cryptopatches. Sawa, facts S.: current of Opening and crypt: the and Eberl, G., hypotheses Immunol. Trends 31:50–55. 2010,

Shires, Hayday,A.,Theodoridis, Ramsburg, and J.: Intraepithelial the in lymphocytes: Third immunology. Way exploring E., E., Nat. Immunol. 2001, 2:997–1003.

Tardivel, Z., intraepithelial is Han, essential intestinal Tian, Wang, W., J., Tschopp, NOD2 Wei, H., of al: the Jiang, MacDonald, H.R., lymphocytes. gut microbiota X., B., Liu, et of Recognition L., homeostasis J., Zeng, by A., for J. Exp. Med. 2013, 210:2465–2476.

activation. A.R., E.F., intraepithelial lymphocytes Li, D.R., Veldhoen, C., Withers, hydrocarbon S., maintain M.: Grigorieva, Gallagher, Roberts, and Y., Innocentin, aryl stimuli Wilhelm, receptor N.A., via Exogenous 147:629–640. Cell 2011,

and deletion A.: Angelov, negative L.A., selection. J.H., and F., of Park, autoreactive Singer, Laethem, Jeurling, L., Feigenbaum, Tai, X., survive Van thymocytes the that Pobezinsky, Clonal S., G.S., fate Nat. Immunol. 13:569–578. 2012,

and response development cause of the inflammatory local 12-15 a immunity. pathogens Enteric protective

Bevins, C.L. Clevers, H.C., and : crypts. of cells: the small Paneth intestinal maestros Annu. Rev. Physio. 2013, 75:289–311.

K.K., M., et Zhang, K.L., A.B., P., Jijon, Aldrich, L.N., al. H.B., Kuballa, Song, O.H., E.J., Yilmaz, Conway, Villablanca, Patel, Castoreno, J.H., : autophagy of protection and Atg16l1 for infection. in cells epithelial from intestinal required is Salmonella mice 145:1347–1357. Gastroenterology 2013,

intestinal K., Cho, to an helper J.H., C., Philpott, Kim, J.G., innate bacterial Bourhis, Rubino, S.J., Geddes, of 17 Magalhaes, response pathogens. D.J., R., Identification T al: L., C.J., Kaul, type Robertson, Le et S.J., Streutker, Nat. Med. 2011, 17:837–844.

Heath, Patel, Villablanca, J.M., T.C., al. E.J., et K.G., P., Liu, Becker, Lassen, R.J., Peloquin, C.E., Conway, J.M., Kuballa, Norman, K.K., K.L., cytokine resulting in autophagy selective decreased altered defense. variant decreases : T300A signaling and antibacterial Atg16L1 Proc. Acad. Natl Sci. 111:7741–7746. 2014, USA

D., Prescott, Philpott, J., D.J. and Lee, : microbiota. An sense to armamentarium epithelial the Semin. Immunol. 2013, 25:323–333.

G., N., and D., Maloy, Baban, Frankel, G.X., K.J. Srinivasan, J., Pott, Song-Zhao, : the Nlrp3 epithelium against in intestinal a protects mucosal pathogen. activation Immunol. Mucosal 7:763–774. 2014,

adaptive breached. have immune been responses induce 12-16 Pathogens innate when defenses

Mowat, and and in A.M.: Macrophages Bain, intestinal inflammation. C.C., homeostasis Immunol. Rev. 2014: 260:102–117.

intestinal presentation. Zigmond, to Kim, E., recruit dendritic K.W., Farache, I., Luminal Koren, epithelium G.C., S.A., I., into sample the CD103+ cells and J., Furtado, Lira, Milo, Shakhar, bacteria Gurevich, for I., bacterial antigens G.: Immunity 38:581–595. 2013,

intestinal Agace, and and cell the Scott, Mowat, W.W.: Dendritic Ontogeny propria: A.M., Persson, subsets in C.L., function. E.K., lamina Eu. J. Immunol. 2013, 43:3098–3107.

Niess, Ravindran, R.M., I.R., al. J.R., Williams, X., et Zammit, Srinivasan, Stoklasek, Maxwell, Salazar-Gonzalez, Yadav, T., D.J., A., R., J.H., R., Gu, Peyer’s in dendritic cells activation CCR6-mediated : pathogen-specific of T cell patches. 2006, Immunity 24:623–632.

H., H., M.H., Y., Z., N., H., N., Kato, Sougawa, Kuwata, S., Guo, et Matsui, Kumagai, Jang, Uematsu, Yamamoto, Chevrier, M., al. of CD11c+ cells. pathogenic Toll-like receptor by lamina propria Detection 5 bacteria on intestinal : intestinal Nat. Immunol. 2006, 7:868–874.

the T-cell Effector protect function epithelium. the in responses 12-17 intestine of the

new Grencis, Cliffe, expulsion. Lane, C., intestinal Humphreys, epithelial cell Potten, R.K.: a C.S., N.E., parasite T.E., L.J., of Accelerated mechanism turnover: Booth, and 2005, 308:1463–1465. Science

Flavell, and Littman, D.R., Buffie, C.G., T.M., M.A., R.A., Kinnebrew, Zenewicz, L.A., Pamer, Diehl, I., G.E., E.G. Hohl, Leiner, 23 dendritic to defense. Interleukin bacterial : intestinal CD103+CD11b+ flagellin mucosal by cells enhances immune production response in innate Immunity 36:276–287. 2012,

in M., epithelial et Sokol, E.J., Li, intestinal H., infection B., C., cell C., Z., Zhang, responses, S.H., bacterial M., al: Villablanca, Morin, Conway, Card9 Cao, control of and T-helper Choi, mice. Wijmenga, K.L., restitution, Yun, 17 mediates Gastroenterology 145:591–601. 2013,

regulating IL-22IL-22R and Fouser, the D.: at in and Functional inflammation surfaces. Sonnenberg, Artis, G.F., L.A., barrier of biology immunity pathway Adv. Immunol. 2010, 107:1-29.

cell Helmby, helminth goblet B., infection. Stockinger, H.: mediates expulsion J.E., and and worm Turner, hyperplasia in IL-22 intestinal Patho. PLoS 9:e1003698. 2013,

tolerance mucosal antigens. foreign The must system immune harmless to maintain 12-18

Love, H.L., W.S., T., Blaner, Mora, S.B., immune for CCR9 of and integrin α4β7 oral Gut-tropic B., Cassani, J.R.: induction Villablanca, A., Quintana, in are Sparwasser, F.J., cells that and Snapper, tolerance E.J., T Weiner, express required P.E., mice. Lacy-Hulbert, 2011, Gastroenterology 141:2109–2118.

mechanism. Powrie, Foxp3+ induces mucosal population and Sun, C.V., via Belkaid, C.M., Hall, J., of DCs functionally and Y., Arancibia-Carcamo, CD103+ J.L., Siddiqui, TGF-β cells specialized F.: T a acid-dependent retinoic K.R., A Coombes, regulatory J. Exp. Med. 204:1757–1764. 2007,

Du H.T., Santos, P.H., Basting, Radulovic, Toit, S., A.F., Feeney, D., Bahnson, Sayre, Phippard, Roberts, et al. Brough, G., G., M., H.A., M., Randomized allergy. in infants trial risk : for of consumption peanut at peanut N. Engl. J. Med. 372:803–813. 2015,

and Wang, Control CD103+ G., Chi, in cells. T immune cell Huang, mucosal and H.: signaling of Y., p38α dendritic by tolerance fates Immunol. J. 191:650–659. 2013,

Immunological S., and Drummond, Strobel, H.E., antigens Mowat, A.M., responses A.: in Ferguson, fed to protein mice. I. Reversal tolerance cyclophosphamide. to oral of ovalbumin by 45:105–113. 1982, Immunology

that intestine The are bacteria normal of large 12-19 contains quantities health. for required

ability preventing react to without compromising inflammation the to invaders.

N., Pfeffer, Arpaia, S., H., P., deRoos, Cross, J., Liu, van et Dikiy, al. K., J.R., Coffer, C., Fan, Campbell, Veeken, P.J., X., der regulatory promote T-cell peripheral : bacteria produced Metabolites generation. by commensal 504:451–455. Nature 2013,

Nagano, S., Hase, Nishikawa, Suda, H., S., Narushima, al. Atarashi, K., K., Tanoue, Oshima, Fukuda, Y., T., W., K., et Saito, T., microbiota. human a : Treg rationally of by from mixture strains induction Clostridia selected the 500:232–236. Nature 2013,

Y., Belkaid, T.W. Hand, and Role immunity of inflammation. : in the and microbiota 157:121–141. Cell 2014,

Soergel, and Wood, C.M. J.M., Harig, R.A., K.H., Komorowski, short-chain-fatty irrigation. with of Treatment diversion : colitis acid N. Engl. Med. J. 1989, 320:23–28.

of Duarte, B.: K., Plasticity J.H., is IgA responsible patches in O.M., for Stockinger, responses. J., the M., Steinmetz, J.E., Hirota, Th17 Villa, induction cell-dependent of cells Demengeot, and T Turner, Peyer's Nat. Immunol. 2013, 14:372–379.

and adaptive Maruya, the regulation L.M., microbiota. system of of gut M., Fagarasan, S.: role immune in Kato, The S., Kawamoto, Immunol. Rev. 260:67–75. 2014,

Marino, Macia, A.N., Vieira, Binge, K.M., J., L., A.T., Thorburn, E., Rogers, K.E., Mackay, L.C., C.R. Maslowski, Kranich, and influences epithelial inflammatory basis function as Microbial diseases. integrity and on a immune : for Immunol. Rev. 2012, 245:164–176.

Maynard, Elson, Weaver, and C.L., R.D., Hatton, C.T. C.O., : of Reciprocal system. interactions and the intestinal immune microbiota 2012, Nature 489:231–241.

N.P., Guruge, and McNulty, D.A., Gordon, J.I. J.L., Peterson, a gut homeostasis. IgA : as of to response symbiotic mediator bacteria Microbe Host Cell 2007, 2:328–339.

Mazmanian, and Round, S.K. J.L., by intestinal Inducible commensal regulatory : T-cell development a of Foxp3+ microbiota. the bacterium Proc. Acad. Natl Sci. 107:12204–12209. 2010, USA

Segata, V., A., Bielski, Abramson, C., et J.U., Longman, C., N., Pamer, Sczesnak, R.S., al. Ubeda, Scher, T., Rostron, S.B., Cerundolo, E.G., Expansion of correlates enhanced : with copri susceptibility arthritis. to intestinal Prevotella eLife 2013, 2:e01202.

et Brenner, O., severe K.W., Kim, Müller, G., B., receptor E., S., not Friedlander, IL-10 W., C.R., but deficiency, Zigmond, R., al: Krauthgamer, Macrophage-restricted Yona, colitis. Walker, Varol, causes spontaneous deficiency, interleukin-10 Bernshtein, C., Immunity 40:720–733. 2014,

immune a and function. major plays intestinal role The in 12-21 intestinal shaping microbiota systemic

provoke disease. 12-22 commensal to responses & Full immune bacteria intestinal

E., Martinez-Naves, et T.E., M., M.F., Tomczak, Tschurtschenthaler, Hosomi, Adolph, Niederreiter, Ko, Glickman, S., H.J., J., J.N., J., al. Bock, L., Hartwig, site intestinal cells as a inflammation. for Paneth : origin of 503:272–276. 2013, Nature

Elson, S.R., Targan, K.L., Alexander, C.O. and innate regulation of activation : immunity. Microbiota adaptive and and Immunol. Rev. 260:206–220. 2014,

A.G.: Y., and Escherichia Arenas-Hernández, enteroadherent implications Clinical M.M., coli. Martínez-Laguna, Torres, of Curr. Gastroenterol. Rep. 2012, 14:386–394.

Hill, E.J., Villablanca, E.B., S.M., N.C., Mora, J.R., Surana, Reading, al. Wang, Edelman, et H., J.A., Pamp, N.K., S., S.J., Troy, Chung, microbiota. maturation immune depends Gut a host-specific colonization with on : Cell 2012, 149:1578–1593.

M.J., C., Maloy, O.J., Schiering, Coccia, K.J. M., B., Harrison, and Asquith, F., Powrie, Becher, CD4+ secreting and of lymphoid intestinal by mediates accumulation innate IL-17A the chronic Th17 IL-1β cells. inflammation promoting cells J. Exp. Med. 209:1595–1609. 2012,

bowel Knights, linking inflammatory Xavier, R.J.: the K.G., disease Lassen, host pathogenesis: genetics D., microbiome. and Advances and in 62:1505–1510. Gut 2013,

Jankovic, et A.W., C.G., F., McKenzie, Hue, Kullberg, D.J., K.J., Cheever, Powrie, al. S., B.S., Feng, M.C., P.L., D., Gorelick, Cua, Maloy, and barrier function : epithelial of Intestinal regulators cells: immune homeostasis. Exp. J. Med. 2006, 203:2485–2494.

regulators epithelial Peterson, of L.W., Intestinal immune homeostasis. D.: barrier Artis, and cells: function and Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2014, 14:141–153.

intestinal in and CD4+ Schiering, F.: subsets inflammation. T-cell Shale, M., Powrie, C., Immunol. Rev. 252:164–182. 2013,

Zelante, A., C., Fallarino, R.G., De C., Iannitti, R., al. Cunha, T., Luca, G., D'Angelo, Zecchi, Massi-Benedetti, et C., G., Giovannini, Pieraccini, F., receptor : via reactivity engage hydrocarbon and mucosal Tryptophan balance catabolites interleukin-22. from aryl microbiota Immunity 2013, 39:372–385.

Mechanisms Host Defense Failures of

first an course triggers innate immune the In infection, of normal an the agent response. infectious The then induce ultimately establishes protective the response foreign by an enhanced immune of from of a the state adaptive infectious infection clears immunity. that immune agent, innate cells, and antigens signals happen, does always however. not This an defects we chapter occurs to there in pathogens. or In in agents, immune by examine due this whether in in immunodeficiency, are host, the abnormal or circumstances host as to hosts which subversion infectious of of immune defenses failures defense against normal evasion of infection, the host (AIDS) which consider as immune by the in Finally, a will immune deficiency defenses acquired are to agent case leads virus generalized special the susceptibility (HIV). to immunodeficiency caused that we normal more one by impaired occurs in syndrome infectious human

function results an or due elimination immune in to with that gene impaired components In the or to of or which more heightened to pathogens. inherited primary, diseases, we first the host leading system, the chapter, the fails infection of classes examine defect defense of susceptibility inherited, part a particular immunodeficiency of in in one diseases function, caused Blymphocyte phagocyte or and by been complement development, in all discovered. T components have Immunodeficiency defects which elimination, by second In to chapter, the evade consider mechanisms components of we immune the evasion. pathogens response subvert part immune briefly of the avoid or specific socalled leads how persistent chapter, example In or secondary, the of an consider HIV infection the part last to of AIDS, we by acquired, immunodeficiency. to infectious circumstances including the preventing which mechanisms host and help immune defense fail contributed system greatly by or and, controlling longer already can methods new The has our to the study diseases, understanding term, provide might in of of AIDS. mechanisms of

diseases. immunodeficiency

subversion defenses. evasion and immune of

syndrome. deficiency acquired immune

diseases. Immunodeficiency

of or the are system classified (inherited, occur more or as Immunodeficiencies immune (acquired). are defective; immunodeficiencies or one primary congenital) secondary when components that are in responses. inherited large or any immunodeficiencies in mutations number a Primary control caused involved genes immune of are of by Well 150 primary of over cells, immunodeficiencies the affect immune development or now both. their that described been have function, infections recurrent of children. often a are and is these very therefore feature disorders in features young highly common variable, overwhelming although Clinical acquired such an consequence of are are are environmental or immunodeficiencies factors secondary adverse contrast, intervention. as of to as other or consequence medical In starvation, a secondary diseases, forms affect principally immunodeficiency of Some pathways. immuneregulatory of be this abnormal can and cancer, certain lead of chapters. to Defects of types lymphocytes, other type in and proliferation autoimmunity, discussed allergy, will immunodeficiencies will mainly we infection. those to on that focus Here, predispose

components can be the immune classified involved. Primary immunodeficiencies on the basis system of the of of defense, of one system component However, the immune of many the in function of because others. the impact defects aspects integration of can immune Therefore, vice immunity, adaptive defects primary versa. can lead innate and in immunity to in defects of immune lead and types it clinical infection of the affected, of instructive Nevertheless, immunity context in patterns to distinct consider these as can is disease. major defects to the are By immunodeficiency, agents. accompany in we infectious examining system the insights the into a gain particular that particular important immune of which diseases response to components to inherited immunodeficiencies and types also how and to between T cell response immune different the interactions lymphocytes. of contribute immune development The B the reveal information us eventually the information and the about for can molecular the necessary diagnosis, lead cure. providing gene these revealing of gene, new often immune Finally, and counseling, to for genetic defective therapy the of processes possibility inherited diseases basis

infections suggests A immunodeficiency. diagnosis 13-1 of repeated history of a

Patients usually a recurrent detected clinically similar or history the of with by infection, pathogens. often by immune same deficiency are deficient. The of a is guide immune part system is infection which of to type the of the or phagocyte suggests infections. against infection immune of function, role or defect system reflecting parts a such bacteria defense Recurrent pusforming, complement, in in pyogenic, by the antibody, these fungal recurrent cutaneous T viral persistent Alternatively, candidiasis, a skin as by infections mediated infection, defect a such defense history host of in suggests lymphocytes. or

inherited gene defects. diseases caused by Primary immunodeficiency are 13-2

to with their or early particular immune susceptibility infancy of childhood in defects the classes advent of antibiotics, most of inherited because Before pathogens. died individuals because normal died infants infection. many of cases were identified, also not easily Such by in inherited chromosome. are on and recessive, X mutations are Most the the many gene defects of genes caused cause immunodeficiencies that males males chromosome, only X disease. an As who will defective by the inherit X carrying all chromosome gene have one be affected a contrast, defective healthy. carriers are X female with In usually chromosome one

of are (see states Appendix proteins to adding in individual knockout knowledge contribution normal function. that our I, the of to A35) have techniques created immunodeficient immune Section mice Gene rapidly many immunodeficiency diseases. Nevertheless,

source defense into against remain human insight the of immunodeficiency diseases the pathways of best infectious normal diseases. bacteria. the types complement, certain example, of or antibody, infection by of deficiencies phagocytic of each risk function of of increase For up This normal of host of by bacteria taken allows defense the of which be reflects against the opsonized followed and by the antibody complement, pathway bacteria fact fixation the that such killed. is binding cells phagocytic the to a causes any of chain this of Breaking links in state. similar immunodeficient events the

disease. defense the teach mechanisms of infectious us also against redundancy Immunodeficiencies about healthy of the deficiency deficiency) chance, first By be with was to hereditary a complement reported immunologist. a (C2 person by components. one defect in such for infection, immune that be component other teaches This might mechanisms a against of there us protective immunity multiple that are compensated deficiency human from abundant evidence pyogenic deficiency although infection, increases recurrent susceptibility not is with Thus, complement every suffers that infections. to complement there

listed Fig. Examples are of immunodeficiency in diseases 13.1. selective in very some the IgA reported), frequently is rare. being None and deficiency (a extremely most common are in the in specific systems. or we the These and lies the sections, defect diseases to where according innate causal adaptive subsequent described diseases grouped immune are have

immunodeficiencies. Defects in T-cell 13-3 severe in development combined result can

cells naive B leading in The summarized are circulating Fig. cells developmental to and T pathways 13.2. in a highly Tcell are of broad Patients infectious range susceptible defects development agents. with to and of central Tcell role responses differentiation maturation virtually in antigens. the This to immune demonstrates all adaptive antibody they (SCID). and said cellmediated combined develop immune immunological memory, responses, nor suffer Because severe from exhibit cannot immunodeficiency thus are responses to neither patients such Tcelldependent

IL2RG (γc). the X chromosome, caused and (IL2R) (XSCID) SCID in is which most encodes receptor common is SCID gene the interleukin2 Xlinked by the mutations form human of gamma the on chain frequent the in IL7, receptors γc all IL4, cytokine is (IL2, of IL9, IL21). and family IL2 required IL15, (see T defects IL7 normally IL15, cells develop with their have and, and and cells all to XSCID defects the NK of fail Fig. owing in IL2family signaling to in cytokines, Patients thus 13.2). hand, help, on is function numbers, Bcell but not. due normal, absence Tcell other their to the are of in wildtype in Xinactivation of mature carriers progress are mutation, the establish preserved and to the a are male; IL2RG XSCID Tcell normal progenitors which through immune females repertoire. who has NKcell allele patients overwhelmingly development ‘bubble a transplant. more known a boy XSCID XSCID he bubble lived the as complications in from bone of with died who decade for is before than a marrow disease’ after protective boy a type Section receptors. and indistinguishable inactivating which and A γcchain associated through signaling Jak3 an physically (see 81), SCID with kinase cytokine is the transduces in γc clinically mutation immunologically of associates with and mutation recessive the NK B development cells cells, This development but the also autosomal of is of impairs unaffected. T

the in roles and development. their Tcell Other immunodeficiencies individual cytokines have more in of and pinpointed mice NKcell receptors precisely in development βc (IL2RB) the a cells, well as mice as for NK growth with key For a mutations for the IL15 of gene factor targeted role as example, defined

Fig. Human immunodeficiency syndromes. 13.1 for listed and gene some the the immune the syndromes. are some susceptibilities and consequence for human the system, resulting rare defect, specific immunodeficiency disease common be in summarized immunodeficiency as different can combined many Severe due Fig. defects, (SCiD) to the described 13.2 in and text. and aiD, processing; epstein–Barr antigen protein; B with activation-induced kinase; deaminase; glycosylase. taP, eBV, unG, ataxia telangiectasiamutated atM, inhibitor signal κ uracil-Dna transporters of transducer cytidine Stat3, transcription iKK, of associated virus; activator 3;

the role maturation and cytokine a in trafficking. for Tcell show also more primarily CD8 of receptor memory mutations T no defect, Tcell IL15 normal they have development, chain a Mice targeted relatively cells maintenance with and α limited impaired of NK itself cells. its or to Tcell specific in the but

IL7 cells illustrating NK not development chain 13.2). NK a development, levels IL7 of receptor that have no (see but cells, essential of signaling, α Tcell normal T while essential Fig. is of Humans for with deficiency the the cells for but humans Interestingly, share which of is genetargeted with a of a cells, lack cells, humans. deficiency not in the case mice the IL7R B with also T deficiency cytokines, provides certain of speciesspecific This a note from against illustrates the humans. to findings mice role cautionary extrapolating and autoimmunity In Treg there impaired production receptor mice that humans and itself 15). cells although normal, and Chapter to whose cells immuneregulatory show FoxP3+ is stimulation, development defective development most abnormalities of T IL2 of predisposes Tcell (see after is in defects T are in to patients NKcell in and of with effects the defects cytokine development The individual limited contrast signaling more global XSCID.

X-linked CLPHSC RAG-2 CD8 pre-T Artemis, Jak3 ZAP-70 cell RFXAP cell B-cell B1 MZ CD45 B cell MHC class RFX5, CD4 MHC pro-B class pre-BCR cell IgD Periphery cell defciency cell T Omenn B-cell cell cell B APECEDSCID CD3˛TAP1, defciency T DNA T CD8 IL-7RˆADA thymus CD8 cell cell cell ˝H, TCRpre-TCR pro-T marrow BCR Igˆ, I °c BTK II natural SCID-like Bone CIITA, CD4 pre-B SCID ˇc, Fig. TAP2, SCID cell B T immature RS-SCID IV agammaglobulinemia SCID ligase syndrome defciency IgˇBLNK B tapasin SCID SCID ˙5, CD4 killer immunodefciency DNA-PKc, defciency CD3˜, B2 T RFXANK, double-positive pro-NK CD3°, AIRERAG-1, XSCID cell cell immunodeficiency. cause B-cell T-cell in and development 13.2 Defects that and shown are here. cells leading circulating B pathways to t cells naive the encode red diseases. proteins immunodeficiency are to in that in Mutations human genes cause (indicated boxes) the known SCiD, immunodeficiency; cell; t-cell cell, SCiD; receptor; receptor; BCR, marginal progenitor; zone hematopoietic pre-BCR, B pre-t-cell receptor; lymphoid common receptor; RS-SCiD, X-linked radiation-sensitive SCiD. B-cell ClP, combined MZ B cell; pre-tCR, severe stem XSCiD, pre-B-cell tCR, HSC, be immunodeficiency in and development. the in genes epithelium thus caused mutations t-cell impair by also thymic thymic that development, can

XSCID patients seem As effective although in normal. cells do responses antigens, their to all serious B with not make Tcell antibody most deficiencies, (see one γc Bcell IgMpositive than carriers defective the the cells have is X the 133), but not B Most, inactivated is all, wholly affected Section XSCID chromosome but dependent normal female by, showing not of on, development chain. rather naive from that B defective undergone switching inactivated Mature have exception. class almost have memory cells chromosome without that the X Section chain receptor of also fact the important cells maturation the for This γc (see 104). IL21, reflect B classswitched that the might which of the is part is for

defects be 13-4 in due also pathway. SCID salvage the purine can to

of include purine salvage (ADA) Fig. deficiency arise adenosine (see that from autosomal SCID of pathway enzymes defects recessive deaminase synthesis the Variants of in phosphorylase purine and nucleotide deficiency. 13.2) (PNP) T to developing catalyzes and of adenosine in inosine which results its ADA conversion and deficiency accumulation toxic and the B Sadenosylhomocysteine, deoxyinosine, deoxyadenosine respectively, its deoxyadenosine the of precursor, and are cells. to and conversion hypoxanthine to catalyzes respectively. inosine and of guanosine the and guanine, PNP precursors more is causes cells. rarer a form PNP affects of SCID, deficiency, toxic than which severely B but T the also of cells accumulation developing in first lymphopenia of within diseases, of In after lymphopenia, lymphocytes, years both progressive few numbers life. profound the decreased of is development the resulting birth, or types, enzymes of each deficiency with of proteins syndrome. many clinical is cell both by are the expressed part Because associated these housekeeping broader a immune inherited defects

receptor result in gene Defects can antigen in SCID. rearrangement 13-5

Another by in is caused group to failures of developing autosomally DNA lymphocytes. of SCID inherited rearrangement defects leading of transitions RAG2 in either Mutations of RAG1 development arrest recombination Bcell V(D)J because cause of (see that at result the to or pro a lymphocyte and in preTcell nonfunctional the failure proteins gene Fig. 13.2). there B complete and cells patients. cells these in of T both is Thus, a lack impaired. the antigen limited undergo is NKcell of are Because effects rearrangement, RAG to development not deficiencies lymphocytes gene that functional recombination. protein, who with absent, in can not RAG2 mutations or a (which of are either children allowing make RAG There other hypomorphic amount V(D)J limited function) cause RAG1 but reduced, small This and group very increased distinctive diarrhea, a called syndrome, infections, includes and to severe Omenn (see similar latter features of in eosinophilia, to lymph disease characterized with 1536). clinical susceptibility addition to nodes the has patients enlargement Section which, multiple opportunistic graftversushost rashes, by disease these or T found activated increased are in numbers children. of cells Normal that Tcell some recombination. RAG An is of low explanation for phenotype activity allow this receptor limited levels gene cells suggesting more found, that No stringent requirements however, B have RAG activity. for B cells are there repertoire present. and of expansion the number clonal of Omenn cells of receptors successfully syndrome, limited patients rearranged, the activation of T in is with specificities highly are and Due the Tcell is to restricted limited number that strongly are autoreactive suggest for The T graftversushost these peripheral phenotype. and that responsible features cells are the clinical is evident until characterized often are not childhood life, very of syndrome, or have Omenn to early RAG disease adolescence. granulomatous with late manifested In addition by been and is immunodeficiency but forms not activity, which reduced that also other absent in associated

recessive patients sensitivity autosomal are radiation. SCID to of an with abnormal ionizing subset by characterized A most seen, produce are and rearrangement there or their abnormal. very these developing of joints They failure and is VDJ few of lymphocytes; T VJ DNA a B in because mature cells are only rare radiation. in This which receptor gene 55) in breaks, Section type also of during to not SCID ubiquitous involved DNA only by proteins (see ionizing repair antigen DNA defects are is but generated doublestrand rearrangement repairing due is increased radiationsensitive patients, due of (RSSCID) lymphocytespecific SCID SCID to the defects. called Owing it radiosensitivity in to to class this SCID from these distinguish Artemis, subunit proteinkinase DNA genes RSSCID (see DNA Fig. Defects for cause the catalytic (DNAPKcs), and in ligase IV 13.2). cell with defects variants RSSCID to malignant repair translocations of DNA transformation, the lead develop breaks that during risk likely more also increase are to in cancer. can Because patients of division

immunodeficiency. signaling Defects receptors cause severe T-cell from 13-6 can in antigen

Several T through block activation been receptor defects the have signaling and gene early of in with the that (TCR) cells development. described thus Tcell interfere thymic the of development mutations (see have the defective chains progress signaling and complex CD3ε, receptor in or doublepositive thymic to the CD3 Fig. to with fail of CD3ζ Patients CD3δ, preTcell stage resulting in SCID. 13.2), CD45. is defect immunodeficiency tyrosine signaling in caused leads mutations that to Another by the severe phosphatase lymphocyte in numbers maturation. and peripheral deficiency Tcell show abnormal mice and with Humans reduction Bcell marked CD45 also a Tcell from defective also the patients a protein occurs (see signals tyrosine form Section which receptor cytosolic ZAP70, kinase who make in Severe transmits the of immunodeficiency 77). the CD4 cells from whereas normal numbers, CD8 absent. are emerge T in cells thymus T fail stimuli cells activate CD4 the T respond receptor. normally the through to that cells that mature However, to Tcell the

light a syndrome gene new signaling that molecular encodes X shed by WAS in the the Wiskott–Aldrich immune and immune is chromosome on formation synapse protein of on basis the (WASp), (WAS), cells defect various has caused which the system. between in WAS (see immunodeficiency a is that responses causes Although of also numbers, 719). and Tcell Section disorder, first reduced bloodclotting by characterized failure as was also the defective and disease platelets a affects antibody described NKcell it cytotoxicity, and regulator key is transduction the that 925). expressed cell lymphocyte platelet of WASp its and all of cytoskeleton hematopoietic a development function reorganization Section and (see in induce is of signals receptormediated through lineages 7.19). are Tcell downstream to signaling receptor Several WASp (see activate of the pathways known Section release polarized the the polymerization and WASp turn Arp2/3 which effector Activation synapse complex, is initiating cells. in essential actin of molecules that formation of activates immune for for by critical is T been Was and whose Tcell crosslinking. to patients cells to gene out, normally In T in receptor respond has WAS, knocked mice fail with is required also patients suggested explain suppressive this natural and recently may cells, to WASp help It with function been has susceptible diseases. why for the autoimmune are of WASp that Treg

in function Genetic in T-cell 13-7 result immunodeficiencies. severe thymic development defects that block

thymic known of and Section descriptively in mice; (see named mutant of nude been SCID years disorder the with strain a is for development associated hair many has body 810). A lack same been have of children with A described phenotype. small the number expressed this selectively mice the FOXN1, gene both transcription in by mutations which and factor encodes In thymus. in is a humans caused syndrome skin and the the differentiation necessary epithelium formation thymus. a and is thymic FOXN1 for of of functional prevents in with mutation lack Tcell thymic function a normal development. of FOXN1, In the patients the normal are all is development lack responses nearly individuals yet impaired. T because deficient and mutation, of of with to Bcell pathogens in the is Bcell the profoundly cells, response

in thymic develop epithelium normally, the DiGeorge another disorder to is resulting which in fails syndrome SCID. within one copy complex this genetic of abnormality The a disorder 22. chromosome is deletion underlying developmental that 1.5 24 deletion causes the approximately containing and 5 in syndrome the smallest deletion with size, The varies megabases genes. between 1. is this TBX1, factor Tbox relevant encodes which interval gene the transcription within The this such are for by copy DiGeorge gene, of of the haploinsufficient patients disorder with single TBX1. is this that deletion syndrome caused a immunity mature, antibody cannot are T environment, and cellmediated impaired. the thymic and inductive Tcelldependent both production cells Without proper but incomplete of normal or with have syndrome absence Patients serum immunoglobulin of, varying parathyroid an and Tcell development levels immunodeficiency. of, glands, thymus the this degrees of with

result the a positive Fig. of the MHC expression as effects to molecules on of the severe thymus (see immunodeficiency Defects selection of lead in in can cells T 13.2). MHC lack class Individuals disease with class bare molecules; deficiency. syndrome of now all the II called MHC II expression is lymphocyte molecules, and Because few II cannot class the selected lacks thymus CD4 cells T MHC develop. be positively individuals by II cannot class so molecules stimulated T be lack develop these few in antigen. also CD4 MHC the cells antigenpresenting cells that The do and normally. expression cells normal, CD8 develop I and MHC T is class central pathogens. most from immunodeficiency, people adaptive of However, such illustrating severe importance in to the T cells CD4 immunity suffer

activation II but in of generegulatory MHC of genes. in encoding by deficiency the the mutations that MHC themselves is class several required transcriptional for are class genes II one mutations by genes not caused proteins MHC gene complementing are C, express B, four and normal that at for II as have required defects indicating in class to D) these patients A, proteins. been products groups MHC (known different least who defined of Four expression fail of the genes the molecules, Genes RFXAP and or group and D, respectively class A, in in mutated RFXANK, (see group complementation the is MHC 13.2). and CIITA, C, identified: to have been B, mutated groups the genes each Fig. II RFX5, corresponding transactivator, are of multimeric in RFX, is transcription. complex, are a last which that involved These control gene three components encode of the proteins is promoter sequence genes. in which class region DNA RFX a MHC an Xbox, the present II of all binds named

associated and chronic A of more as limited I who immunodeficiency, patients class bacterial condition almost deficiency. number ulceration molecules—a been cellsurface skin small respiratory no infections a have I MHC has known with class in MHC vasculitis, with observed of surface. few molecules proteins, levels class mRNA contrast reach deficiency, proteins In those and I individuals the class encoding normal very cell MHC MHC MHC to of have II but of affected the with I class production normal encode subunits mutations generated Section tapasin, mutations condition in (see TAP1 of to another peptide or transporter peptides which TAPBP, nascent the reticulum, molecules, the for loaded into is 64). of due which peptide TAP2, I into This cytosol they where responsible the the in either or to endoplasmic MHC encodes component in transporter are the complex transporting of in Fig. CD8 the reduced epithelial (see numbers thymic cells surface molecules Although cells results I on class reduction MHC T in the of not people class MHC to 13.2), abnormally deficiency are susceptible with I infections. viral and This I role combating given in surprising infections. viral presentation the T of is cytotoxic of key cells MHC CD8 class I allow peptides T CD8 for these is, that can clinical sufficient evidence pathways presentation TAP2deficient class to phenotype of cells control certain molecules, pathways patients function to however, of viruses. TAPindependent of TAP1and MHC the and development indicates the There compensate for and by

effects cells thymic with defects lead besides other of a to those Some phenotype in immunodeficiency. that express efficient The factor proteins to a AIRE self thymic negative enables cells so gene transcription many selection. epithelial and to encodes mediate dystrophy), developmental 15). by to and complex in syndrome immunodeficiency polyendocrinopathycandidiasisectodermal (autoimmune which (see lead 823, and called Section is characterized a AIRE Chapter Defects APECED autoimmunity, defects,

that an extracellular in antibody and cause production bacteria some to inability viruses. clear

development, identified as and Bcell Bcell that specific RAG1 are development and to that (see both RAG2, inherited Fig. to In such are have Tcell also in crucial addition defects been proteins to defects 13.2). clearance characterized with antibodies. and these defects some by specific are inability extracellular to efficient an requires bacteria with viruses Patients cope whose have and neutrophils on not that and that recognized such by directly are capsules phagocytosis. macrophages polysaccharide bacteria, Pyogenic as the streptococci, staphylococci receptors stimulate but escape immune innate immune can be cleared response pathogens, response. by the and are successful an adaptive bacteria extracellular by elimination The enables bacteria (see Section and to destroy complement and ingest antibody the Opsonization phagocytes by 1022). principal deficiencies is effect a to The in therefore production antibody control bacteria. by failure of infections pyogenic because Susceptibility increased also infections, those importance enteroviruses, antibodies the of viral is in through by caused gut. the body to notably viruses the of that neutralizing some enter

C. failure Bruton’s of description child 1952, The male antibody. disease an produce immunodeficiency account, of the of was to a first Ogden in Fig. by serum of (agammaglobulinemia), the (XLA) Xlinked condition Because of Xlinked immunoglobulin inheritance Bruton’s is characterized in absence called (see agammaglobulinemia it is the this was and 13.2). then, been described. recessive autosomal Since agammaglobulinemia of variants have bacteria, pneumoniae, Streptococcus such are a result with infections usually pyogenic of enteroviruses. as identified Infants these as with and recurrent diseases in have months infants In be production 3–12 normal regard, that in first the it noted deficiency should a of immunoglobulin life. transient this because comparable to newborn antibody those of mother 1017). Section maternal of of the transplacental (see transport The levels infant the IgG has infant antibody amounts (Fig. is catabolized, at As begins to produce about IgG gradually months 6 the of its IgG until decrease levels this own significant 13.3). levels are and low the ages quite IgG Thus, 1 months between year. 3 of IgG a with to in lower premature levels especially and after period begin susceptibility maternal birth. heightened can of This who to of immune reach babies, also competence later infection, lead afforded protection of Because transient the

Fig. infants in about low of fall 13.3 levels 6 to newborn Immunoglobulin at levels age. months is born Babies which high gestation. the levels are mother of from across actively during maternal igG, the placenta transported with almost birth, level igG 6 for about time catabolized. of falls production igG, not the as the begin which starts during total of igM immediately; however, the does igG of after months, is acquired the maternally production susceptibility igG to of 3 to low months which year, age thus, about levels can to disease. are 1 from the lead

XLA antibodies, maternal maternal in antibody after several by when detected declined. months levels birth, infants newborn typically the is have infant

transduce tyrosine (preBCR; preBcell that encodes the kinase gene member The 720). protein kinases signals which through of BTK tyrosine see a kinase), of Tec in a the Section called receptor (Bruton’s is XLA defective family Igβ. composed the 83, μ chains Section the preBcell successfully composed with light is VpreB, the surrogate and of of receptor complexed As rearranged heavy signaltransducing with and discussed and chain subunits Igα λ5 in including recruits differentiation and required proliferation preB of the cytoplasmic of the BTK, convey proteins, preBcellreceptor Stimulation cells. for which signals Fig. stage (see preBcell arrested at function, In the BTK absence maturation of the largely is Bcell see and deficiency 13.2; agammaglobulinemia. 83), profound in Section also Bcell resulting do Some kinases. Tec cells as of however, other compensation a mature, perhaps by result B

their embryonic two of X randomly inactivate During females development, one chromosomes. allele development, Blymphocyte cells BTK required for mature BTK develop of is only normal the cells. active into Because in B which is and female Thus, active a inactivated. all abnormal cells mutant the in is one carriers normal gene, X chromosome B the the in chromosome X BTK of is nature protein carriers female This allowed BTK be the of of fact was the even identified to XLA before known. macrophages the contrast, of T carriers active an In cells in are X mixture mutant and and equal of X BTK the chromosomes chromosomes. normal in for required Nonrandom Bcell only B types, that other that B BTK for cells the B than in and cell cells rather other is cells required of but shows in the conclusively cells or stromal act the must not themselves the development Xinactivation gene (Fig. BTK development 13.4).

of other cause components block severe agammaglobulinemia preBCR also XLA. to Bcell Bcell deficiency in recessive the similar Autosomal congenital of development deficiencies and and early that Igβ encode XLA, mutations much rarer λ5 (IGLL1); μ the heavy and and cause second (see (IGHM), Igα that the of in the include most is disorders which are (CD79A) agammaglobulinemia; (CD79B) genes These chain and common Fig. than 13.2). arrest the also Bcell adaptor, Mutations by the deficiency. linker early selective cripple Bcell BLNK), signaling Bcell results receptor that that (encoded of development Bcell in cause protein

bacteria. pathogens pure defects than with Bcell resist pyogenic Patients many other can suppressed latter infusions with from be antibiotics Fortunately, pool immunoglobulin and with monthly the human a of of large collected donors. it there fairly many infection. successful pathogens immunoglobulin, Because as in shield pooled are against serves this antibodies common against a

lead function antibody and T-cell abnormal that to activation responses.

bone responses. T immune differentiation their B development antigendriven require and cells and in or activation effective thymus, to the After mount marrow responses after in and Tcell (Fig. defects thymic activation early immunity in development, have Tcell antibody Analogous on cellmediated and occur defects to impact both selection that an differentiation 13.5). immunity impair while largely cells and specific to switching B and ability to undergo activation IgG, their IgE differentiation the leaving IgA, Defects to cellmediated can class intact. of either relatively that these immune results in T or deficiency on of can Depending circumscribed. differentiation process the of or where characteristics Bcell profound occur, the the be defects

is feature hyperIgM patients defects that common (see Bcell affect A with Fig. syndrome class of switching 13.5). but and help. Tcell Tcell serum limited normal make high Band require very against IgM, responses antibody have patients or development These levels antigens normal of that Thus only immunoglobulin are trace amounts. IgM isotypes produced and in other than IgD This extracellular highly patients renders these to susceptible with pathogens. infection Several hyperIgM elucidate in these helped for been cells. the essential distinguished, that causes have somatic normal and hypermutation for recombination classswitch pathways and have to syndromes B are found have both B Defects helper in themselves. in and Tcell the function cells been

(Xla), the tyrosine called X-linked X chromosome, a is in BtK, encoded of defective. tec on protein the family agammaglobulinemia kinase is which 8-3), of signal transduces triggering through development. receptor, BtK, further (see in in μλ5:VpreB individuals, via which Section the stage B-cell a a pre-B-cell normal consisting B-cell proceeds development no males signal Xla, in can further. B receptor is develop the cells expressed, be the no transduced and, pre-B-cell although with one development. female cell in in early two the mammals, inactivated permanently each is including in chromosomes humans, X of only Because pre-B BTK chromosome express female that chromosome defective choice half will inactivated of further. in random, to with can have cells BTK the which inactivate carrier of the a wild-type cannot meaning gene, they is the develop gene the the and B cells mature active. in have carrier, always the the chromosome nondefective X therefore, cells. have of only chromosome their in active types, contrast half cell X the is in which this sharp nondefective all to other lineage that in a of of that is lineage. development cells nonrandom X-linked of required gene the inactivation particular the indication is clear product a cell for the X-chromosome stage the detecting is sometimes to possible bias. at also X-chromosome develops required, identify the which inactivation the in it gene by development at point product which is traits the such needing can of to gene. one of Xla the using mutant nature carriers know kind this as X-linked without of identify analysis,

Fig. activation cause differentiation and T-cell 13.5 and immunodeficiencies. Defects in B-cell and and activation B the differentiation here. cells pathways naive t shown of cells to are leading in are indicated of human relevant to in mutated genes products immunodeficiency diseases red the boxes. protein be the known common B-cell t-cell BCR, tCR, variable receptor; CViDs, receptor. immunodeficiencies; defect (WaS) cytoskeletal many function this figure that note affects the the for Wiskott–aldrich not included syndrome immune-cell in in in is the clarity. sake schema, steps of and function at in

Fig. ligand activate deficiency to fully. with are B 13.6 cells unable CD40 Patients their CD40 of deficiency, tissues are unlike a node a lymph ligand syndrome, devoid in panel). as (bottom lymphoid which (top panel), patients hyper-igM centers normal with germinal manifests t for is the centers, B-cell switching for where B-cell isotype germinal takes required extensive activation proliferation cells and by both formation of place. R. Photographs of Geha and courtesy Perez-atayde. a.

BCR mutated intrinsic killing B-cell X-linked B macrophage genes hyper-IgM syndromes lgG CD40L, cell CD4 CVIDs cells TACI, TCRCD4 ICOS CD19, syndromes macrophage activated mature lgA AID, hyper-IgM defciency resting lgE IgD hyper-IgM T CD40 not IgA intracellular plasma IL-12, NEMO or known cell syndromes UNG, activated

by (see CD40 form The the hyperIgM Xlinked (CD154) which deficiency, hyperIgM syndrome, in is syndrome encoding common CD40 ligand is most of Fig. ligand gene caused or mutations 13.5). cells, ligand CD40 to cells, on Section B CD40 engage T is normally 104). expressed cells, cells, (see activated enabling antigenpresenting them on macrophages dendritic and including the protein absence isotype CD40 initiate cells CD40, their the of In undergo B centers the in of germinal of but with males do deficiency, or switching cells ligand B engagement (Fig. are formation not normal, 13.6). therefore circulating pyogenic severe of infections and highly all levels isotypes are extracellular by to bacteria. in except susceptible These reductions IgM antibody have patients

IFNγ optimal CD40 deficiency 1 type the for patients and which immunity of manifest with ligand CD40 production by cells important dendritic for combined and cells, for and immunodeficiency. cells a the is also in NK have also of required defects macrophages is of of TH1 Because production signaling IL12, thus form activation their T lead costimulatory cells impairing to Inadequate molecules can thus on (see to interaction of levels cells and 917). stimulate naive CD40L–CD40 crosstalk T cells, dendritic cells dendritic ability via Section between lower in such jirovecii, pyogenic pathogens are by which mycobacteria, have prone macrophages. that by infections antibodies, classswitched by as such infections activated and are susceptible intracellular These of therefore extracellular require also the opportunistic particularly defects normally as Pneumocystis to patients bacteria, but is killed to pathogens, clearance

genes. other syndrome A in with patients mutations similar in two has been identified a been few is syndrome Not have hyperIgM in with patients an which of one gene variant the mutations found autosomal in (see Fig. unexpectedly, recessive CD40, encoding 13.5). syndrome, occur that of IKKγ, form Fig. subunit as in as another NEMO is known the factor signaling to which pathway protein known mutations component leads encoding also Xlinked of the of gene intracellular CD40 activation of kinase hyperIgM an NEMO (see a transcription the the modulator’; downstream the deficiency, NFκB essential essential of In IKK), (‘NFκB 3.15). CD40L–CD40 This mutations points different of hyperIgM in the result at similar that syndromes in immunodeficiency signaling syndrome. pathway shows group a combined (see the other NEMO impairment of nonimmune beyond of as role the its well dysfunction Bcell additional including pathways, signaling 1315), manifestations, results NFκB in class switching abnormalities Section immune of in many view In of deficiency as skin.

of variants of intrinsic syndrome hyperIgM the Bcell recombination. are defects to in process Other due classswitch or having opportunistic spared, increased are and susceptible to intracellular agents show are infections, function differentiation do but as Tcell susceptibility P. defects Patients to jirovecii. they bacterial severe because extracellular these not pathogens such 107). for which required both One Section hypermutation classswitching and is is gene the defect cytidine somatic (see activationinduced to for in switching deaminase (AID), due class mutations gene (AICDA) switch greatly reduced AID the fail defects have antibody inherited to Fig. autosomally isotype in also with (see and hypermutation Patients somatic 13.5). and centers, lymph in accumulate nodes B germinal abnormal causing spleen. the cells enlargement of Immature normal AID class in also in function these repair the DNA a patients class and recessive was have patients glycosylase 1010), small autosomal an switching. somatic in defective recently hypermutation, Section normal syndrome defect variant Bcellintrinsic hyperIgM of uracilDNA number see but enzyme which identified Another involved switching; (UNG; of is with

examples deficiency immunodeficiencies variable common antibody immunodeficiency, common include to (CVIDs). of of Other as predominantly forms primary the most referred heterogeneous disorders undiagnosed until a mild. CVIDs genetically group clinically that of and childhood adulthood, typically is the are go because relatively or deficiency immune late defects production to in CVID one other patients or 13.5). causes can more with deficiency, are that immunoglobulin have (see Fig. Unlike isotypes limited immunoglobulin of exists both been autosomal forms, recessive common inheritance and primary and both have familial and most immunodeficiency, the autosomal deficiency, in sporadic dominant IgA described. IgA asymptomatic. etiology in understood, and patients deficiency The these are of not patients is most develop recurrent subclasses defect often of associated one an in do IgG is In the found. patients IgAdeficient who infections,

have encoded is A of minority the (TNFlike in gene mutations TNFRSF13B. activator the transmembrane TACI receptor and interactor), transmembrane patients small CVID CAML which by protein is are APRIL, for can and dendritic provide for cells, T the and Section Bcell receptor class produced 103). and by switching signals (see which cytokines cells, TACI the activation survival BAFF and which and costimulatory macrophages, Other have with selective in IgG described. subclasses deficiencies also been patients but isotype affected numbers depressed. these are serum Bcell immunoglobulin the are patients, levels normal of typically in many in are have bacterial these deficiency, asymptomatic. patients of infections, as recurrent Although IgA some patients immunoglobulin switching affect identified. CVID that have with other been class defects are in Included Bcell is in defects with the 13.5). inherited CD19, of patients component this (see a group which Fig. coreceptor is the molecule people linked been CVID genetic A has to a costimulatory of with small defect ICOS. that deficiency of percentage ICOS Section on are activated. T described As in cells 917, they upregulated when is differentiation, Bcell of formation for cells. have Tcell including in deficiency of ICOS and effects memory the switching help the role confirmed stages its essential of class later The

(HIES), The Job’s in immunodeficiency also considered final syndrome hyperIgE to syndrome. be is called this section This surfaces), and infections the is of and candidiasis of infection very bacteria, rash. high or IgE, eczematous chronic serum caused (noninvasive skin chronic disease mucocutaneous skin concentrations and pyogenic pulmonary recurrent mucosal by characterized fungal skin dermatitis by an pattern, inherited or in is variant. latter skeletal abnormalities manifesting dental and recessive with dominant the found recessive the autosomal not HIES in ILC3 of and is downstream activated for of STAT3, is is cells factor in inherited several which the variant transcription IL6, receptors, the in IL23, cytokine TH17 activation of dominant of and those and to which The autosomal differentiation including HIES cells. defect the central IL22, epithelial barriers. cells enhanced skin antimicrobial and is IL22 the resistance mucosal STAT3 of also of activated for and important IL6 signaling by is defective, peptides. of production in cell is by response cytokine recruitment TH17 in neutrophils cells production activating patients, orchestrated antimicrobial an of also epithelial as of TH17 the IL22, is the differentiation important Because these deficient of normally the defense is underlie the epithelia, and barrier impaired This at to bacteria such and extracellular against thought fungi as mucosae. skin abnormal as and to of deficiency. responses an understood, TH2 elevated a of but TH17 it IgE is accentuation due of skin be might not The cause mucosal result the the 8), that is is protein function cells the gene of of an autosomal HIES, of recessive which mutation the characterized. cytokinesis DOCK8 in In encodes (dedicator poorly in variant immune the the as function, variant in that infections cutaneous allergic (for of DOCK8 a as NKcell well recurrent broader defects to from by this manifestations. well is and because simplex), infections viral example, STAT3 distinguished play opportunistic thought caused occurrence by function, HIES role Tcell as and as herpes is autoimmune of additional However,

type deficiencies central pathways pinpointed 1/TH1 type responses. genetic cytokine by and are 3/TH17 of agents to

the Inherited in the defects defects effector as the through of that receptors been function involved which development cytokines Tcell subsets defined, different signaling act. they have and in or have are in pathways major above, production. the have consider do to In deficiencies contrast we not antibody that defects those in immunodeficiencies considered here Tcell and immunity, 1 number intracellular with have by species. from Listeria suffer pathogens restrained especially been who of and individuals persistent fatal small Salmonella, attacks Mycobacterium, type normally discovered families A sometimes by macrophages, IFNγ 1 for microbes enhanced induced 112). cells: within their activities microbicidal NK by specialized survival cells, cells and eradication cells, Section are by and TH1 requires ILC1 type These produced (see the a IL12 is inherited cytokines 13.7). development abolish (Fig. these key mutations of that by of the function variety to IFNγ, and of functions impair Accordingly, conferred or susceptibility in or 1 infections cells type the (IL12RB1), and in (IFNGR1 of have two receptor β1 of IL12 (IL12B), with been IFNGR2) IL12 subunits the receptor and R2) (R1 Patients mutations and identified. genes subunit the chain p40 the the encoding IFNγ avium, due have Mycobacterium or virulent the atypical, prevalence affected strains in more to the as the to greater they tuberculosis, frequently Although from nontuberculous, environment. suffer susceptibility strains atypical of mycobacteria, of the heightened M. more individuals such likely after develop bovis vaccine Mycobacterium (BCG), of also a that M. live the tuberculosis. may infection vaccination Calmette–Guérin M. They against with bovis used as is disseminated bacillus strain type a infectious to due in and IL12 subunit Because the defective IL12 disease results type 3 IL12 1 Fig. IL23, functions risk (see and p40 deficiency p40 shared by broader (TH17) is 13.7).

Fig. that by of defects activated 3/TH17 is and 1/TH1 effector the type receptors Inherited ii 13.7 also, type type cytokine is because Stat1 impair in pathways immunity. (iFn-α type antibacterial Shown for are and i il-12, (iFn-γ) pathways antiviral and have defects been signaling in iFn-β, defects immune in interferon impaired not which in inherited interferon il-23, iFn-γ result and and Stat1 shown), described. function defects iFn-γR2) results note cells (p40) in cells/ subunits whereas these both of primarily impaired result nK or subunits bacteria. il-12p40 receptor in defense, and in (iFn-γR1 cells ilC3/tH17 defense in il-12Rβ1 iFn-γ that cells/tH1 the ilC1 because of either intracellular deficiency against impaired and and il-12 by il-23 receptors. shared, and respectively, are their

shared IL12Rβ1 susceptibilities of in deficiency which receptors, receptor. the than is Similarly, the IL23 results the IL12 of by its broader or IFNγ and chain, deficiencies

mycobacterial Fig. to mutations other signaling lossoffunction associated and IFNγ (see infections in receptor increased recessive intracellular Autosomal susceptibility with also by impair are and bacteria STAT1 13.7). defects shared to and to IFNα due I susceptible with infections. receptor interferons), patients in in (type are also However, its function to signaling IFNα IFNβ STAT1 response viral former. are infections, a the mycobacterial of partial suggesting of who to infections, with function requirement STAT1 STAT1 Interestingly, have stringent been viral more protection patients in identified of not susceptible against loss but

this 13.8). identified in the In (see have functions cytokinemediated for to TH17related defects hyperIgE of Section STAT3deficient the (Fig. above been HIES lack described pathway component 139), addition other that defects Candida susceptibility a is that heightened spp. by immunodeficiencies type intracellular common susceptibility infections impair feature bacteria to to 1 heightened immunity, Whereas to particularly bacteria, pyogenic and

aureus, S. these respectively, 3 characteristic deficiencies. type of and albicans is C. in against This and reflects barrier TH17 extracellular and fungi specialized cells of defense the function bacteria. ILC3 deficiencies IL17 for and IL17F ligands, agents receptor heterodimeric Inherited for against key confer in host IL17RA, component infectious shared IL17F–IL17A cytokines and in role to thus defense susceptibility the them. a homo and these identify to pyogenic in in dominant, A chronic mutations found bacteria candidiasis autosomal susceptibility and has patients with been STAT1. mucocutaneous gainoffunction similar downstream cell example, development receptors), receptors is 3 defenses. by STAT1 cytokine TH17 Because II I these (for signaling type impaired with have mutations and type of type IFN impaired individuals several due Note defective bacterial this STAT1 type to who to infections mutations, contrast is are 1 intracellular patients to lossoffunction in with that immunity. predisposed

of forms in of production these cytokine result autoantibodies some to neutralizing defects inherited In immunodeficiency the in effector cytokines. genes, against addition those risks similar This in deficiencies. cytokine results primary caused infectious by to that in patients is 137) the gene; against IL17A, IL22. autoantibodies develop defects IL17F, see Most mucocutaneous candidiasis APECED development Section and/or of by (caused syndrome AIRE with due the chronic to against unknown. Patients have who been impaired reported, for also basis protection autoantibodies this with although neutralizing is atypical have mycobacteria the against IFNγ

of infections. in pathway uncontrolled defects 13-11 to inflammatory responses cytolytic the lymphocytes Inherited cause lymphoproliferation can viral and

formed from late of components lysosomes. granules endosomes and Cytolytic are their granules cells and delivery cytolytic Once from multiple of cells. target in steps cytotoxic formed, exocytosis to there are the steps of or exocytosis pathway highlighted immune the key the cytolytic by the (Fig. is in importance The regulation in that inherited cytolytic granules impair either defects of formation 13.9). fatal organ and lymphocytes and activation organs, hemophagocytic uncontrolled a causing and result tissue as that infiltrate T (HLH) as of macrophages and which severe These expansion failure. syndrome, necrosis manifests condition, often CD8 in known multiple lymphohistiocytic a destroy themselves, reflect particularly viral following family is inability hyperactive herpes immune virus response initiating to the of possibly thought infected an cells and such targets, by (EBV). infection, Epstein–Barr cytotoxic virus as to The inflammatory macrophages increased and cells by impaired cytolytic with TNF, the release which of macrophage activity to and not patients associated the notable colonystimulating release regard is cytokines of of release caused and IFNγ CTLs In granules, an that of proinflammatory contributes factor it IL6, typically such impaired, is of despite this this NK the disorder heightened (MCSF). by disorder the which including phagocytose The leukocytes, erythrocytes its syndrome name. and macrophages activated blood cells, gives

lymphohistiocytosis are autosomal HLH, hemophagocytic that of the (see the referred pathway as in There multiple by cytolytic Fig. also recessive is are (FHL), variants familial protein to that affected distinguished 13.9). include of family the (FHL5), of granule protein, of is syntaxin Examples the the that proteins of syndrome the target mediate activate protein with fusion cytolytic proteins (FHL3); is formation Munc182 the which SNARE involved the FHL2); and of cell reorganization inherited to for in protein 11 (and of membrane required of defective Munc134 when deficiencies (FHL4), in member associated perforin, pore fusion; a a SNARE the priming process. other can affected biogenesis exocytosis components in lysosomes, immune occur defects with such of and cytolytic are can as the secretory Because individuals, nonimmune shared defects. as of granules vesicles, additional a that subset the loss partial of of skin also function immunodeficiencies by cytolytic granule particular, characterized are pigmentation. affect In exocytosis vesicular defects of the to transport or melanocytes. that This also in are pigment in for that melanin due required formation is organelles skin store melanosomes, the proteins by which syndrome, RAB27a lysosomal include these protein, CHS1, mutations and of regulates by caused small a immunodeficiencies GTPase, syndrome, in mutations Fig. Examples caused Chediak–Higashi Griscelli a in trafficking, (see including integral cytolytic granules, tethering to to to 13.9), enable of is intracellular structures which certain cytoskeletal their vesicles, trafficking. the

and lymphocytes, myeloid In accumulate and patients T cells, Chediak–Higashi giant granules syndrome, with melanocytes. platelets, lysosomes in abnormal a cells, vision dysfunction causes hair platelet retinal typically is The and because increased metallic abnormalities pigment is in bleeding. poor of silver color, addition fusion, defective experience cytolytic intracellular to of extracellular NK of killing defective the and pathogens and cells. in have phagolysosomal CTLs defective patients Because patients phagocytes activity of these the from therefore fungi. and in Affected a of children severe, by recurrent suffer life early infections bacteria range to lymphohistiocytosis, triggered typically is of an the EBV, by This infection viral followed development disease. often accelerated by as leading hemophagocytic such phase of abnormalities in the a syndrome Three (RAB27A in defect: results pigment and and variant pigment only have identified, 1 type types the variants defect Griscelli both are mutation), found. 2 by gene 3, of immunodeficiency each caused in abnormalities; been distinct the in defects the Although children immune

Fig. cytotoxic 13.9 exocytosis the (FHL) familial lymphohistiocytosis in in components hemophagocytic granules cause syndromes. Defects of involved polarization recognition, of the of perforin-containing toward formation. antigen granules of Ctl Following immunological at the cell site is synapse cytotoxic target the there plasma the to Cytotoxic along a they transported where through membrane, RaB27a-dependent dock interaction. microtubules granules are triggering Munc13-4-mediated plasma the connecting Docked with N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive large vesicle syntaxin receptor) of part change accessory docked which the vesicles protein of a by SnaRe 11, a primed is conformational are complex in (soluble membrane. factor fusion contents that granules 11-containing pore space, plasma synapse-bounded the allowing actions of formation initiated target-cell the the reaction Munc18-2, via complex cytotoxic a of SnaRe into perforin-mediated in the through is releases intercellular the membrane. syntaxin the pathway lymphohistiocytosis proteins red defects the the the affected exocytic are the associated familial in are in inherited sites of by syndrome. highlighted hemophagocytic each as in that is indicated,

myeloid lack syndrome are cells the Griscelli intracellular type latter. their much syndrome, that common of characteristic 2 granules with have with of in those giant the Chediak– Higashi

the and associated by lymphomas. syndrome of lymphoproliferative 13-12 Epstein–Barr virus with fatal with is development X-linked infection

is immunodeficiencies, pathogen. a to single some susceptibility unique there primary In a virus, family results the from case virus albeit similar independent to for that rare two vulnerability immunodeficiencies via lymphoproliferative is herpes Epstein–Barr (EBV), the mechanisms. with a Such defect Xlinked specifically typically cytotoxic active cells NKT individuals to by cells and the B expressing selflimiting T NK EBV the cells a control in antigens. of cells, B virus specificity normal for due actions with infection causes EBV infects of and cells, to is state 1324). is latent cells development the virus not (see Section Following in completely maintained B infected EBV, cleared, immunity a in but the of can T is hypogammaglobulinemia levels presence types this and the In in overwhelming proliferation development of lymphomas. the circulating accompanied immunoglobulins), however, infection nonHodgkin’s for immunodeficiency, of of Bcell certain cytotoxic cells that (low unrestrained (severe lethal, of the B break of down, and resulting control EBVinfected mononucleosis) infectious potential cells, by EBV These the syndrome. (XLP) rare lymphoproliferative in occur immunodeficiency Xlinked results genes: protein], gene SH2 1A XLP Xlinked from molecule SAP in Xlinked lymphocyte (SLAM)associated activation apoptosis [signaling domaincontaining the (SH2D1A), of encodes or inhibitor mutations (XIAP). which the two of one syndrome gene

the syndrome, defective cells, receptors immunecell cells in in 80% family XLP1, the Fyn this of which for defect the In accounts coupling cells, kinase SAP with Srcfamily (Fig. in T approximately tyrosine with SLAM of of results and NKT patients NK 13.10). between the cells cells outcome and interact or their binding modulate cells. NK T heterotypic of homotypic target family antigenpresenting interactions and SLAM and between cells through members to deficiency of is responses SAP, and cells, in the ineffective development severe the In a absence that NKcell Tcell are infection and control role of the NKT SAP indicating EBVspecific cells. nonredundant has cytotoxic made, NKT EBV of and of there cytolytic and EBVreactive caused in cells by There of hemophagocytic proliferation and activation, T cells cytotoxic unchecked that occur inflammation, in results systemic in those macrophage is defects to similar NK immunodeficiencies features pathway (see that the

caused disease Fig.13.10 is by in and SAP abnormal signaling, lymphoproliferative inherited and X-linked TNF defects receptor resulting XIAP, respectively. family (XLP) SLAM in immune t B which receptor by SlaM of cells, killer natural and are macrophages. members cells, is an cells, dendritic (nK) cells, expressed family, is members. or homotypic via between initiated Signaling heterotypic interactions family which tyrosine 2 SaP, recognizes homology recruits SlaM activate Src upper signaling the Fyn of (SH2) factor domain-containing kinase in the motifs to domain SlaM cytoplasmic the (left tyrosine-based Src-related panel). residues SlaM recruit to signaling then phosphorylates components. Fyn of tyrosine additional additional with upper lymphoma. epstein–Barr disrupts cytotoxicity, which in patients of virus activation signaling, SlaM Fyn (eBV) in impairing panel) tand severe and in nK-cell results Mutation XlP1 and SaP infections (right thereby results also which Defective in expression responses. cells, of co-stimulator antibody in SlaM t-cell (iCOS) impaired tFH inducible signaling upregulation impairs caspases family normally activation of panel). Fas, apoptosis-inducing tnF such receptors, by is as (lower by XiaP inhibited with repeat initiator its executioner and (8 both 7) caspases interacts baculoviral their 9) domain inhibit and actions. to XiaP and (BiR) (3 through inhibitory caspases is defective patients, that caspase lymphoproliferation clinical activation includes resulting eBV. in control the XlP2 and defective, phenotype abnormal complex to of of in XiaP leads that regulation

1311). Section Moreover, cells Tdependent impaired and of and TFH patients causes B between responses cells hypogammaglobulinemia. signaling SLAM defective antibody XLP1

Fig. a lead the 723), TRAF2 syndrome in factors Defects which to XLP2 normally activation caspases binds and the protein, Section and called of (see TNFreceptorassociated TRAF1 inhibits (see similar the apoptosisinducing Xlinked XIAP 13.10). enhanced and results and apoptosis T activated the in XIAP turnover NK cells deficiency of cells. phenotype not XLP1, which well a similar to the basis of is lymphoproliferative leads this to understood. Paradoxically, maintenance depletion required also indicating of normal that, for like the NKT severe in is cells, is these cells. SAP, there of As XIAP XLP1, control defective infection less is As EBV this prominent. also although in XLP2, XLP1, there in is of latency for to these impaired EBV be The defined. reason of exact suppression immunodeficiencies in the remains

dendritic inherited defects Immunodeficiency development by cells. is of the caused in 13-13

pathogens and result been diversity with in from the loss studies cells, consequence of transcription as that these mice defects genetargeted deletion advanced of of function of of these a dendritic Our factors understanding against the protection the loss the in of cells specific result of of subsets subsets. and that from has has is the into of and that the primary IRF8 genes different from in factors defects deficiencies development of the In identification these that in challenging, begun cells encode function relative result insights where to roles provide GATA2 species. of of transcription and study humans, dendritic the cells more immune

mutation An dendritic patients of largest autosomal in the GATA2 group an inherited deficiency of has been identified dominant cells. of with progressive of DCML condition plasmacytoid) as of NK dendritic loss subsets a of Affected individuals B and (conventional all well and cells, been monocytes, cells reduced deficiency. numbers develop termed lymphoid has a and as that impaired in Although are lost. normal these their dendritic cells as numbers Tcell are function becomes patients, the loss all, of GATA2 function of of hematopoietic The lineages. suggests but products unaffected lineages, in of several not redundancy thought to progressive unknown, for in The reflect stemcell seed affected a products maintaining populations. of lineages basis the for but that in these GATA2 progenitors is is the decline role dendritic these deficiency the are defects monocyte Given are the and all pathogen individuals susceptibilities. cells, diverse, in as of immune a substantial hematologic of also have These patients malignancies. risk

regulatory 8 associated of factor in in inherited specific defects to Two that cells. interferon (IRF8) the are dendritic are with the be first described defects development is transcription mutation In the variants, both in the the of factor. DNAbinding domain an circulating In plasmacytoid dendritic dendritic autosomal cells are all is loss monocytes types cells; absent. of and form, of recessive there conventional and all Because bacteria, of primary deficiency severe T infections by to range impaired early in susceptible opportunistic are development these caused for including effector the intracellular cells, their dendritic cells, fungi. with viruses, of life, and and naive in antigenpresenting T defects those a are results cells cells patients circulating also of due develop to thought They this a the myeloid monocyte–dendritic the number cell in of the granulocytes; pathway. developmental of in is striking increase precursors pathway diversion the to down immature be absence granulocytic severe inheritance subset in of characterized of equivalent deficiency contrast, with subset less a more be CD11bpositive that one there (thought autosomal mutant In is of of of patients by of dominantnegative IRF8, phenotype, mouse the the dominant CD1cpositive a allele selective cells a dendritic is the to

Fig. associated 13.11 certain complexes. immune are accumulation of susceptibility with components to complement infections the and Defects in C3 to lead susceptibility of the pathogens, alternative pyogenic in the extracellular pathway early to components particularly bacteria. and Defects in the of components apoptotic complexes immune classical 10-20) processing clearance predominantly Defects and to the in immune-complex (see of leading disease. affect of the early the Section cells, pathway of bacterial the is in lectin recognition the with mannose-binding infections, lectin molecule childhood. mainly pathway, Deficiency early associated mannose-binding (MBl), of species, to susceptibility associated agents in strains with of only implying are membrane-attack Neisseria organisms. against pathway effector Defects important the the defense in the causative meningitis chiefly these that and components of is gonorrhea,

cells). dendritic bacteria, Mycobacterium without the atypical in results autosomal heightened patients seen myeloproliferative spp., susceptibility to This recessive the with particularly syndrome intracellular in variant.

tissue and damage.

mainly The far to adaptive are discussed system. the disturbances immune diseases so of due In few innate system. immunodeficiency affect and the some immune sections cells of the diseases molecules that next at look we cleavage bind complement Chapter acts can an converge to that where pathways and be start by activation to in of complement it it on any allowing covalently pathogen We the of (discussed opsonin 2). three system, C3, component activated with as which surfaces, the Not seen patients surprisingly, deficiencies substantially that complement associated with spectrum antibody in the overlaps deficiencies production. infections of with with in particular, bacteria increased 13.11). opsonization there antibody efficient to clearance extracellular require (Fig. that for complement susceptibility and/or In by is by phagocytes bacteria, of promotes bacteria. susceptibility clearance of associated C3 a to of C3 central in as as phagocytosis by that role pyogenic well itself, of pathways, and in by with C3 of emphasizing a the defects increased effector Defects any the pneumoniae, infection S. three including range the activation as capsulated are the

membraneattack downstream of contrast, and have of susceptibility In Neisseria result (C5C9) exclusively complement to components in more defects in the almost C3 species. limited activation effects, intracellularly, pathway defects via found in against and by indicating properdin, antibodyindependent components these A with largely susceptibility Neisseria membraneattack defense the bacteria, complement is mediated is lysis the alternative survive complex. to D species patients which in can that similar factor extracellular is infection endemic that with studies 1 infection from organism person. year to approximately risk Data this show each rare, meningitidis of Japan, N. 2,000,000 in largepopulation the is where normal in a inherited a one increase population of complex of with membraneattack risk a compares the in of proteins—a the in with in 1 person 200 same deficiency risk. This to an 10,000fold

C9 C7 with leads C8 components spp. Neisseria Deÿciency Membrane-attack C5 infection C6 to pyogenic C3b with only deposition and Neisseria infection spp. to bacteria leads C3 Deÿciency disease bacteria leads pyogenic C3 immune-complex Neisseria infection leads disease to with Deÿciency convertase Sometimes spp. immune-complex and Deÿciency to MBL childhood P C1 PATHWAY C2 MASP2 Factor leads Factor ALTERNATIVE to but disease C4 D in of no C2 MBL Deÿciency CLASSICAL infections, mainly C4 bacterial PATHWAY MASP1 immune-complex PATHWAY MBL

which complement systemic The complexes early components 1020) cells, in cause (discussed apoptotic erythematosus. important as and lupus pathway classical of immune elimination pathology for such the significant diseases particularly autoimmune Section in are the can of This Chapter of 15. complement discussed inherited is aspect deficiency in in (found mannosebinding common initiates 5% 26), independently Deficiencies population). are of complement (MBL), in activation Section which antibody of lectin relatively the (see infection in associated increased of in an with mild immunodeficiency be deficiency bacterial results MBL a that early may incidence childhood. the patients (MASP2). serine gene in that A MBLassociated phenotype is the similar with defects protease2 encodes found in

complementrelated set (Fig. Another caused is of proteins in complementcontrol diseases defects by 13.12). that from Deficiencies body’s in lead protect protectin of proteins (CD59), Section membraneassociated destruction (DAF) in hemoglobinuria, decayaccelerating in activation, the or resulting surfaces the cells factor the paroxysmal of blood disease to cells, as 216. control discussed nocturnal complement red various and proteins complementregulatory as factor H have soluble such in factor outcomes. I Deficiencies is activity C3 factor defect rare 216). a (see the C3 results leading pathway to a deficiency alternative in I convertase, de that of Section Homozygous deficiency uncontrolled facto Deficiencies a I, of so (hemolysis) known or function leads also condition called because red impaired H MCP, and as (uremia). in can blood factor cause factor hemolytic–uremic kidney cells syndrome, it lysis to atypical

a angioedema known patients which of is (see striking loss the 216). in A (HAE) syndrome cause defects, the of consequence with seen Section as complementregulatory protein C1inhibitor hereditary complement to pathways, activation (edema) vasoactive accumulation Deficiency results blood C1 of production local laryngeal mediators that regulate of failure in fluid clotting and in result swelling both a the excessive tissues and can that suffocation. inhibitor in to the leading cause

phagocytic Defects widespread permit 13-15 cells infections. in bacterial

function phagocyte normal or absence severe numbers is total indeed, a neutrophils survival can in Deficiencies environment. associated with be a with immunodeficiency; in incompatible of microorganisms adhesion, grouped activation, phagocyte deficiencies phagocyte types: be can of production, phagocyte killing (Fig. in Phagocyte into general phagocyte immunodeficiencies four and 13.13). in turn. consider We each

are of as neutrophil classified neutropenia cyclic deficiencies (neutropenias) or (SCN) Inherited production congenital severe either neutropenia. ×109 a per congenital can 3 are numbers 0.5 which In of than count per or liter). 109 neutrophil × inherited less dominant ×109 trait, the 5.5 neutropenia, as be blood recessive is persistently to liter (normal severe characterized 21 neutrophil undetectable near very risk. of fluctuation is numbers periodicity from normal cycle neutropenia infectious or time of approximate with an Cyclic low days, in in by to resulting of The encodes autosomal neutrophil mutations elastase most the of of involved or azurophilic, (ELA2), granules dominant degradation causes are that the gene sporadic of common the microbes. component phagocytosed a in or SCN primary, block 2 the granules myelocytes of a and causes apoptosis elastase developing developmental Altered of at to promyelocyte–myelocyte targeting stage. defective cause of Some mutations ELA2

Fig. 13.13 persistence Defects infection. associated with of cells in are phagocytic bacterial in defects in result neutropenias neutrophil congenital development Defects defense. by in antibacterial profound caused to infection impairment deficiency). integrins phagocytic β2 with sialyl-lewisX, the cell defects or of of adhesion subunit selectin (leukocyte and adhesion ligand sites the (CD18) a common in leukocyte prevent migration defects (tlRs), signals by the cells. example, inability toll-like for transmit of in immune to receptors or agents infectious through innate due proximal sensing many MyD88 to impairs iRaK4, dehydrogenase deficiency. defective myeloperoxidase burst in and is (G6PD) chronic the deficiency, granulomatous respiratory glucose-6-phosphate disease, leading is and of chronic infections CD4 chronic to granulomatous to cells in macrophage disease, stimulation granulomas. hence activation persist defective, because t is syndrome. in Vesicle fusion phagocytes in Chediak–Higashi defective critical killing and removing phagocytes role diseases bacteria. pathogenic in of these the illustrate

cyclic mutant a how is 21day causes the in neutropenia; neutropenia mystery. a elastase cycle still ELA2. a on autosomal acts by which dominant form caused rare that A is in the repressor mutations GFI1, encodes oncogene SCN transcriptional of neutropenic arose observation to that the finding are overexpression mice from of lacking the protein Ela2. unexpected due Gfi1 This

been forms recessive identified. SCN have of also Autosomal HAX1 severe as disease. referred of to protein apoptosis in the increased resulting cells, leads mitochondrial to developing Kostmann’s in neutropenia a myeloid Deficiency sensitivity with associated The metabolism. heightened is in SCN neutrophils defects genetic developing of highlighted apoptosis to glucose by also demonstrate glucose6phosphatase or catalytic (SLC37A4) in during recessive increased results the 3 glucose6phosphate in development (G6PC3) encoding genes the mutations that the neutropenia. 1 subunit with translocase granulocyte Patients apoptosis neutropenia spectrum or anemia with chemotherapy, aplastic infections. Acquired a pyogenic with is associated of bacterial also severe associated similar malignancy, CVID, including other feature Finally, CD40 immunodeficiency a XLA, can ligand also be syndrome, deficiency, deficiency. and diseases, of Wiskott–Aldrich primary neutropenia GATA2 lead of to accelerated Some patients destruction that formation exhibit autoantibodies of neutrophils.

of cells phagocytic infection of Defects sites can cause migration the extravascular to serious immunodeficiency. in emigrating blood regulated process Fig. reach Leukocytes (see such tightly by from in vessels sites a 3.31). infected to prevent in adhesion stage macrophages referred molecules tissues, are and neutrophils involved and leukocyte Deficiencies can this from (LADs). of penetrating in process as deficiencies each the into of which tightly endothelium. the site leukocytes common integrin migration LFA1, an adhere of Deficiency MAC1, the and the leukocyte to infected CD18, β2 cells’ abolishing prevents a is subunit component the ability by in to p150:95, the and LAD referred be common the to is characterized, LAD was type as LAD1, variant. most it it to 1 first Because is now LAD, or Reduced described that ligands rare deficiency on antigen involved a the to sialylLewisX the in owing other selectins. in GDPfucosespecific rolling fucosylated transporter the biosynthesis of sialylLewisX who patients been and endothelium leukocytes the the has is for lack of in type LAD2. LAD This or 2 is to as referred deficiency a the from highaffinity results binding for in required induction the of Kindlin3, involved firm integrins adhesion. of of protein β state LAD3 are autosomal or impaired recessive bacterial LAD formation. in characterized absence causes early of wound by the pattern fungal has bacterial severe, infections, that healing pyogenic of infections of life pus an variant and and, in lifethreatening inheritance Each patients these resistant antibiotic in that The to treatment. infections occur are in with aggregation platelet also associated that cause defects increased LAD3 bleeding. is

innate is including microbeassociated A of molecular Section 35). of immune patterns key recognition cells, see phagocytes, the in through their activation Tolllike step receptors (TLRs; defects have by Several primary caused identified TLRs. immunodeficiencies are that been components in of intracellular signaling except protein TLRs and all required the TLR3 (see kinase and through adaptor Signaling recruits for downstream are the pathways requires Section IRAK1, the of activation which NFκB MyD88, kinases IRAK4 activates and 37). which MAP pyogenic inflammation, Autosomal invasive genes in as infection. recurrent, a or a elicit and a by recessive infections MyD88 IRAK4 have ‘cold’ similar that peripheral severe mutations the little bacteria known situation encoding phenotype: MyD88 family receptors. IRAK4 functions Note of the with of and signaling molecules many that are shared IL1 defect molecules at Thus, in IL1 part in to of be immune family may abnormalities signaling these least inherited with by the attributed patients members. aberrant that Note NEMO (see activation. normal also TLR block of and impairs also which switching impairs its receptor 139), signaling class NFκB Bcell Section through deficiency, family IL1 Immunodeficiency associated in with function. affects defects NEMO immune innate adaptive therefore and both by TLRs infections TLR3 protein’s Interestingly, in are example, TLR7, role with despite viral the in TLR9). mutations, except patients acidsensing (for MyD88 signaling TLR8, nucleic each typical not and of increased this the interferon defects these TLRs of regulating This MyD88. in intact of that that responses activation (IRFs) despite remains indicates induce factors downstream interferon

in Remarkably, found been have only one—TLR3— linked to of in the ten defects humans, immunodeficiency. TLRs with of While phenotype, been reflecting substantial identified TLRs been TLR5), overt an have defects example, have not in redundancy. they other a level associated likely (for immunodeficiency herpes simplex doublestranded senses due impaired cells other hand, central nervous infections recurrent TLR3, of encephalitis) of (herpes the which homozygous with encoding system. RNA, production system in nervous the simplex type patients the have by gene (dominant) the (recessive) hemizygous interferons On I mutations and virus1 of to typically (HSV1) endolysosome. molecules TRAF3, from inherited which Those susceptible encephalitis, to involved with the the transport to are or patients TLR3 in as HSV1 TBK1) endoplasmic similarly is UNC93B1, in example, required TRIF, TLR3 mutations TLRtransport signaling deficiencies the in protein of with are for (for the reticulum HSV1, redundancy nervous Interestingly, their these of of have but or TLR3 not from in ligands patients indicating function leukocytes no to in the central system. TLR3 defect those these cells, response predisposition the a limited TLR3independent other other only Similarly, show protection viral types patients most of implying of infections, existence viral infection. these to against

(PRRs) other been signaling have by than receptors pattern that defects Genetic affect TLRs described. recognition molecule downstream an on receptors Ctype is lectin CARD9 cells. involved of in expressed adaptor signaling myeloid cytokines, Dectin1, CARD9 signal Ctype and 31). IL6 through that each to lectin Section macrophageinducible fungalassociated secretion including (see induce recognize patterns IL23 molecular Dectin2, proinflammatory of (MINCLE) and suffer 1310), to TH17 example, in immunity results patients mucocutaneous the with candidiasis. result deficiency this errors patients with of cell with responses deficiency; CARD9 and IL17RA chronic see (for inborn that deficiency IL17 deficiency, IL17F fungi, Section impaired recessive like Autosomal normally can However, which in skin suffer as (athlete’s such and infections ubiquitous fungi pedis infections, that by common nail filamentous foot). tinea are patients dermatophytes, addition, superficial cause these

Fig. The diseases. autoinflammatory 13.14

ingested their cells known microbes to destroy the once (see affect them Most in defects and Fig. phagocytic other ability of ingest 13.13). an (CGD) a to result kill by infections and to granulomas Patients form highly are granulomatous with fungal Fig. bacteria inability ingested of bacterial chronic susceptible (see and disease phagocytes as 11.13). oxygen the The Section such of (ROS) the is in 32). production in defect case anion this reactive species (see as superoxide has finding to Discovery notion this disease molecular gave the that idea the the kill target the defect is to that sufficient generation bacteria weight challenged killed of agents of this been these microorganisms. since directly; not itself by ROS in invading level of influx now agents microbicidal into the action thought for killing cause are phagocytic in the to that which vacuole, optimal pH the the the increasing the is an key K+ ions microorganism. of and proteins, peptides ROS It

NADPH in oxidase defects the (see 32) any the proteins granulomatous of constituent cause affecting expressed disease. and can monocytes Genetic of Section neutrophils chronic with bacterial some granulomas. the chronic of have cases formation Patients which the in disease lead to infections, intracellular (G6PD) dehydrogenase impair killing lead and Deficiencies a phenotype. also bacterial and similar, severe, in (MPO) myeloperoxidase to although glucose6phosphate less

‘autoinflammatory in of molecular the can Mutations 13-16 inflammation disease.’ regulators

are cells are associated life, a activities disease. diseases with which mutations death, There in small in control of number severe genes inflammatory that the and of inflammatory inflammatory affecting in a we have they chapter included do this lead they immunity—the them singlegene of to innate because are not response. aspect Although defects crucial immunodeficiency, and These represent autoinflammatory mechanisms as they to can that normal diseases: absence limit of the even the lead known conditions in a of (Fig. are inflammation, inflammation failure infection 13.14). (see attacks inflammation, characterized various severe severe by is at an of Section the can and sites occur with throughout and (FMF) Mediterranean episodic acutephase malaise. fever 318), response which fever, associated are Familial body cause MEFV, be fever. discovered in which The FMF association to a encodes its with was was reflect mystery called pathogenesis the protein mutations until pyrin, of a to its gene and that pyrin IL1β. pathways inhibit proteins apoptosis of in lead domaincontaining Pyrin in involved proinflammatory such of and inflammatory cells, cytokines as pathways secretion to that the the are to is to proposed of pyrin a activity inflammation. failure in functional an that apoptosis, absence cytokine unregulated control defective It resulting and leads mice, In causes pyrin an in to lipopolysaccharide increased sensitivity a defect of and apoptosis. absence macrophage that encoding associated the known quite syndrome mutations disease caused with periodic receptor clinical TNFRI. is by a similar A (TRAPS), different manifestations, TNFreceptor gene, in as TNFα levels have TNFRI, of TRAPS because receptor. of levels regulated TNFα circulation to in to binding the not increased this with Patients which by is lead proinflammatory reduced it receptor to antiTNF 168). Section therapeutic soluble to disease treat agents etanercept, such responds rheumatoid (see with with as patients developed arthritis a The blockade TNF primarily pyrin, autoinflammatory associated are 1), dominantly phosphataseinteracting and which protein gene arthritis, interacts the acne gangrenosum, inherited with syndrome—pyogenic encoding PSTPIP1 pyoderma another (PAPA). with Mutations in (prolineserinethreonine normal The the to limits mutations its increase function. that of proposed binding been it PSTPIP1, has pyrin regulatory interaction and pyrin and sequesters

stress are diseases (FCAS) and the stimulation of that mutations to normally in are NLRP3, the of linked of they and result senses syndrome a clearly due infection as cell inflammation, cold damage The episodic Muckle–Wells Section (see syndrome autoinflammatory ‘inflammasome’ component inappropriate familial because a 39). autoinflammatory to cytokines. stimuli activation lead the to of mutations proinflammatory NLRP3 of such production the unregulated and absence the of in The joint cold with dominantly the rash, conjunctivitis. is these as fever—which well urticarial of in exposure FCAS—as to inherited with and syndromes pains, case induced present by episodes of Patients and are recurrent dermatologic in also predominate. symptoms and articular arthropathic, disorder episodes short, severe although autoinflammatory syndrome which NLRP3 (CINCA), Mutations fever are in with infantile neurologic cutaneous neurologic, the chronic associated common, as pyrin predominantly epithelial pathogens, and innate are NLRP3 in Both leukocytes cells. act barriers such to cells in and as that intestinal expressed modulate related The cytokines include stimuli and stressrelated inflammatory that in pyrin and cells. molecules changes dramatically the receptor drug to anakinra, responds syndrome IL1. Indeed, for the of an antagonist Muckle–Wells

therapy transplantation be or correct useful Hematopoietic 13-17 defects. genetic stem gene cell to can

the correct that defects is transplantation Section phenotypes other replacing by some (see defective to possible hematopoietic the frequently immunodeficiency component, development lead in by SCID 1536). and It to generally (HSC) lymphocyte stem cell main leukocyte from result The these antigen (HLA) human polymorphism. in therapies difficulties To the share with HLA alleles the must some be host. graft useful, alleles cells 821, epithelium we HLA selected. T be learned in positively by can determine the the expressed Section As which thymic HSCs are used When stroma, a and from normal the antigenpresenting cells thymic with graft. function to are derived immune T to cells the restore both individuals the shares alleles are (Fig. that be activated recipient, by cannot some graft host T unless selected Therefore, the epithelium HLA antigenpresenting least thymic the cells at on cells with graftderived the 13.15).

APC, transplant. recognize cells and recipient Hematopoietic Donor the thymus in be cells activated can cells T selection MHCb-restricted stem MHCb undergo MHCb infected cell on by MHCa×b MHCa×bmacrophageAPCMHCbTcells shared MHC One allele

Fig. stem a least and function. at MHC cell the recipient hematopoietic restore share some 13.15 The graft must of (HSC) immune to donor molecules

from molecules with is the some a which genetically transplant illustrated the an donor cells different donor MHC marrow share in recipient. HSC donor in shared MHC is that the ‘b’ designated and HSCs of in not the and shared designated type blue; shown ‘a’ the type MHC yellow. is illustrated is the on by the cells. and thymic junction the on dendritic cells recipient, by selected MHCb selected recipient developing at dendritic cells epithelial negatively donor and epithelial cells residual with are encounter both in from the donor and corticomedullary HSCs lymphocytes stromal positively recipient’s derived the cells selected are shown apoptotic as cells. negatively cells. can activated the MHCb recipient’s donor-derived in cells antigen-presenting infected t recognize then cells activate cells can recognize the the periphery molecules; t that the (aPCs) MHCbbearing

response. Host-versus-graft failure Graft

Fig. bone caused correct of used problems Grafting be in to can can 13.16 maturation, defects arise. immunodeficiencies by but lymphocyte marrow two MHC panel). attack in First, bone of causing recognizing by cells (top host marrow, if the can t cells their antigens, are there they graft-versus-host the mature disease prevented this (center of panel). t-cell the by depletion bone donor marrow be can the Second, these t stem recipient bone cells, can has if (bottom attack panel). the competent cells marrow usual by 15). causes the mechanism rejection the failure (see transplant of this graft Chapter of

causing contaminate marrow mature, the that also that is T host the postthymic HSCs a attack (Fig. cells prepared from graftversushost foreign and danger donor blood might as it, bone disease There or recognize (GVHD) peripheral panel). top 13.16, graft can the by of mature donor This depleting overcome be cells. T hostversusgraft for some and out to than using engraftment cells immunodeficiency recipient, and myeloablative HSCs disease the the carried where of space of For drugs) cells of marrow, minimize diseases bone usually is to threat T (see cytotoxic treatment the (HVGD) typically of transplantation, form residual NK generate before in the both (destruction there SCID other are Fig. transplanted panel). third 13.16, on The regimen immunodeficiency. the intensity of dependent nature the of myeloablative is the the engraftment tolerated, patient’s a can diseases prior only HSCs where be HSC suffice of may chemotherapy fraction of For cure persistence for nonmyeloablative and to cells is of sufficient transplantation. donor (myeloablative) of require intensive the other chemotherapy required. engraftment of In XLP, complete more may blood donor full as conditions be cells cells, elimination and patient’s which such

approach specific have inherited been gene an many identified, therapeutic immunodeficiencies somatic alternative is cause therapy. Because gene defects that patient’s gene of of normal stem and introduction the vector, marrow corrected isolation into of the This of reinfusion the with patient. cells use strategy involves the defective a the a viral bone blood, from of peripheral copy the HSCs or used Initially, were to retroviral for ceased complications some severe in vectors gene due trials, therapy but were patients. in of CGD, was and due protooncogene. received Although retrovirus the with insertion leukemia to the WAS developed SCID, treatment, genetic this Xlinked some who corrected within a defect patients patients can insert strong transactivate control promoters of retrovirally vectors and genes genome inability neighboring site is problematic. therefore the in which encoded the to with use viral the genes that in The has gene selfinactivating lentiviral avoiding shown vectors More of use as of for correction recently, the and this a complication. promise means retroviral has generation cells demonstrated. patient’s own been of Also, stem for a from somatic (iPS induced a pluripotent cells) cells the technique can give become can to somatic expression progenitors factors rise of transcription to a cells of Forced HSCs. reprogram that pluripotent set is reinfusion, not cells defective in ‘repairing’ ex This targeting gene stem specific the vivo patientderived before promise but offers by of genes established. yet approach into selfrenewing many treatment mainstay stem corrected for are will of of immunodeficiencies. genes primary introduction methods the Until cells remain identified, allogeneic transplantation better HSC for

major death. Noninherited, 13-18 causes are infection secondary and of immunodeficiencies predisposing

of us system. have the primary The immunodeficiencies about much the biology specific immune of proteins taught conditions rare. Fortunately, are these contrast, secondary In common. immunodeficiency relatively is the many is of Malnutrition secondary populations major immunodeficiency. devastates feature malnutrition world, a around and affects is famines frequently in cellmediated caused and by infection. death This particularly immunity, itself children. death causes malnourished in which an Measles, cause is immunosuppression, important of measles unpleasant developed In an but the world, illness is are major uncommon. complications in measles the mortality. high malnourished In contrast, has a infection another malnourished. in the Tuberculosis is important starvation responses. mice, in protein clear how by not In but affects affecting immune specifically is antigenpresenting humans function, causes immunodeficiency malnourishment cell it immune of provide the and part answer. may Links the endocrine systems between

in is produce to during fat levels fat directly leptin, amount starvation (fat are the the hormone levels consumed. related the body; present therefore Adipocytes of fall cells) leptin when which of in responses, atrophies. and with and genetic mice the reduced thymus leptin humans deficiency Tcell have Both mice deficiency, administration by leptin. both mice these inherited reversed be In leptin of those and starved abnormalities the can with

states associated as hematopoietic immunodeficiency lymphomas. Secondary such leukemia are tumors and with also infections. and that associated increases of Myeloproliferative leukemia, fungal with progenitors functional either neutrophils, diseases, such which bacterial (neutropenia) neutrophils as lack excess myeloid of be can deficiencies of susceptibility properties immature to or mature of an invasion infections. cancers opportunistic by Destruction from or lymphoid other peripheral promote of tissue lymphomas metastases or can

of are and surgical the graphically lifelong diseases to spleen infection function absence of S. (a organism within rare destruction this spleen overwhelming illustrating removal Congenital inherited asplenia a from spleen), spleen, cells predisposition of the mononuclear in phagocytic the of with the certain role the blood. pneumoniae, of by clearance by associated function infection vaccinated against their antibiotics be take throughout lost have often spleen are and recommended who pneumococcal prophylactic life. should to Patients

therapies. immunodeficiency certain also medical a Secondary is complication of cancer drugs to to major A susceptibility cytotoxic treat complication is infection. of immunosuppression used increased and drugs cells, Many the cells of normal including and these marrow lymphoid bone kill of systems. all dividing of major of cytotoxic is drug side effects therapy. Infection one thus the even of infection suppression or and malignancy. such tolerance heart for for a as kidney carries solid Immune transplants, to allografts, risk organ host also substantial induce increased because forms infection The immunosuppressive of their introduction therapies an biologic for to of of recent some effects. autoimmunity led has increased risk of been rheumatoid that infrequent, infectious For with increased, has complications. block arthritis autoimmunity instances administration but in of forms other associated of example, TNFα with antibodies or patients of

Summary.

any in molecule almost occur response. immune the Genetic can involved defects in in humans. development about deficiency characteristic immune defects information provide diseases, normal give the to system the of rare, much which, functioning and although These rise both without fail. role of immunodeficiencies particular, Inherited cells which and in immune T humoral and illustrate adaptive the immunity vital cellmediated response the immune the about information importance cellmediated in of roles and immunity the innate humoral and of in separate cellsurface in lymphocytes growing have lymphocytes of phagocytes provided functions in complement adaptive signaling B the response. specific humoral T and molecules number the immunity, or a immunity, They and of of causes are still also understand. inherited we do disorders not There immune some whose normal of study these The us more control. immune and its the diseases teach about undoubtedly will response Acquired immunodeficiencies. in are the the common primary, immune the than system, defects more immunodeficiencies, much inherited secondary the which major immunodeficiency pandemic general virus subvert evade (AIDS) pathogen, or immune the human subversion immune characterized successful of deficiency by created pathogens extreme mechanisms individuals. briefly acquired how one a next defenses the by (HIV), In and sections syndrome affected immune system has the consider we in detail by then

subversion immune and defenses. of Evasion

often we normally microbes In immune would defects immune defeated system. the section, a pathways learned be to healthy infection, how in lead that by previous by specific organisms causative are of abundant the clinical because immunodeficiencies ubiquitous dominate and ‘opportunistic’ the infections inherited in often the These expression environment. with true microbes immune A those infect of pathogens that can defenses. normal minority are new their least immune adaptive destruction avoid the long immune innate to and to is defining at by and of in infected enough A ability host feature components the pathogens replicate spread to systems, of hosts. defenses. other replicate acute elimination infections, cleared term that by establish a At and of one chronic pathogens establish new end they the that host persisting spectrum while are in an quickly, response; host infection, the immune by at long pathogens before are immune evading a are the find successful the have pathogens that and immunity these of by for achieve diversity strategies system, years strategies over points. hosts multiple millions subvert to a ends, immune different remarkable employing their detection often coevolution Successful with and avoiding at strategies evolved use of of destruction several itself. as antiimmune strategies pathogens as sophisticated The are immune by employed the system evolved pathogens They any against strategies protection. that success host have ensure for the achieve to vertebrates to diverse be must

(multicellular) as parasites protozoan metazoan all pathogens. and bacteria, Viruses, act can or (unicellular) respectively, cause of major (metazoan) skin not intestinal and While parasites fungi and common in further are worm do be here. not considered and will causes typically normal infestation, lifethreatening they people infections infections helminthic and major and of parasites causes contrast, In caused infectious protozoan bacteria, mortality the agents. are number viruses, select by a of morbidity are caused malaria, of people infects million threats by 2 pathogens and kills over Mycobacterium largest to immunodeficiency the falciparum, each 100 human to humans; annually. million infectious tuberculosis, and people worldwide three Plasmodium disease these respectively, and (HIV), AIDS, tuberculosis, virus 1 the strategies same. within—and Although of mechanisms to each employed the and pathogen, the the for of pathogen propagation for are the immune many between—hosts thwart differ innate adaptive survival type employ of system. immune and different we the types immune subvert briefly responses of, the the lifestyles the or Here evade by, to and pathogens consider pathogens, elicited principal strategies the

by antimicrobial antibody, avoid recognition receptors destruction by to and complement, pattern peptides. and strategies detection

epithelia. tissue following or on of barrier or (for they colonize gastrointestinal in spaces invasion bacterial across cells, the host tract), pathogens whether tissues Extracellular outside respiratory barrier replicate surfaces or of blood example, antibodies, their that 1110, by immunity, type and in of antimicrobial cells production responses, barrier development complementfixing typically epithelia peptides prevent invasion. which microbes the as from Both immune of and pathogenic, epithelial cells elicit species the orchestrates Gramnegative and 3 positive discussed neutrophilic and and, opsonizing barrier are these Section they clear and positive Gramnegative but Some of immunecell by share the are similar expressed bacteria MAMPS and properties. distinct, activating potent outer Grampositive in activate contain contains cell of and pathogens LPS, peptidoglycans, Gramnegative whereas the NOD2. NOD1 wall which membrane, and activator a their TLR4, cell TLR2 of pathogens strategy on pattern evasion shielding of used immune MAMPs surface cells detection is by by avoid immune of therefore their (Fig. these One recognition pathogens to receptors 13.17). of carbohydrates pathogens binding. A Gramnegative with the moieties lipid other TLR4 LPS Several core modify interfere and with that as than Indeed, some lipid agonists. produce bacteria rather A act variants of TLR4 that antagonists mechanisms produce Select pathogens or recognition modulate peptidoglycan. hydrolases have Grampositive to to degrade by that peptidoglycan NODs, evolved

Fig. by system. subvert immune host used to 13.17 bacteria the Mechanisms immune bacterial different strains extracellular and evasion/subversion listed of of intracellular mechanisms pathogens. examples by are used far of mechanism each Pseudomonas Brucella that pneumoniae, strains column of examples aeruginosa, gingivalis, the Porphyromonus (e.g., pestis). abortus, right listed Yersinia bacteria employ Streptococcus are in the

Fig. against specific. type is 13.18 pneumoniae Streptococcus defense Host strains antigenically of capsular pneumoniae the distinct S. different have polysaccharides. phagocytes opsonized capsule complement, the and until antibody allowing the by destroy it. to phagocytosis effective is bacterium specific prevents type against of antibody one

other not a has infection type. to individual no an one type a with cross-react with to S. subsequent immunity types, different so protective does the immune pneumoniae of response adaptive immune individual with he or infected time each S. new pneumoniae. must she is an type a different a generate

Grampositive limited also a their membrane A capsule. pathogens can number carbohydrate outer shield cell with of thick bacterial recognition and the on and activation deposition damage membraneattack the addition of cascade. to direct surface, In thereby complement by of the antibody capsule of complement, complex inhibiting alternative peptidoglycan prevents complement avoiding of pathway the the pathogen the clearance also by (see capsule The Fig. of impairs phagocytes 13.17). modulate to epitopes antibody. for variation of of cause pneumonia, pneumoniae, surface case also the a carbohydrate as important an of Streptococcus bacterial expression recognized In by antigenic platform the capsule serves the antigenic S. types are in 90 structure Over differences of polysaccharide distinguished the their known pneumoniae by of capsules. tests specific by different so often serological serotypes. are using distinguished are reagents in The types antibodies as known as and serotype with immunity, not with can protects against type reinfection to lead typespecific but that a different one with which Infection serotype. S. times essentially distinct in Thus, same (Fig. represents of same that each the the the of disease can with system, immune of view from a pathogen individual result cause many organism, point serotype the adaptive pneumoniae the 13.18). cause helps enteropathogenic Neisseria rearrangement antigenic coli, of in mediated Similarly, to meningitis. by DNA which gonorrhea of variation success also for bacteria E. and and or species, the occurs account major on of and bacterial colonization. the antibodymediated and used are surfaces antigenic pili to Fimbriae or attachment bacterial attachment surface targets expressed and blockade for for hostcell are surface. display stored recombination partial can the pilus pilus pilin gene undergo the loci in expressed bacterial locus genes on (pilE) The a for (pilS) generate encoding Neisseria ‘silent’ constantly with shifting to the the By constantly evades immune bacterium clearance. pilus, antibodymediated expressed changing

pathogens the (for H). bacterial inactivate proteins the (for the host strategies to example, the Protein convertase of decoration extracellular C3 by of antibody antiimmune inhibitors to binding example, other expression factor with Among the of surface A); are block used bacterium mechanisms the cascade; complement and functional complement that Fcbinding of have (AMPs; cathelicidins). defeat mechanisms and for also peptides example, antimicrobial bacteria to These evolved defensins lyse amphipathic pores that bacterium. significant cell charged small peptides antimicrobial generate membranes into activity negatively These by inserting cationic and the have to degrade and binding, produce proteases AMP composition can AMPs. membrane minimize that can Pathogens alter to the their

including is structures: and IV systems secretion of (Fig. An intracellular directly bacterial to and capacity cells immune proteins type extracellular modulatory bacteria, Gramnegative respectively) III T4SS, specialized type and pathogens, inject both their host feature unusual (T3SS into via the 13.19). or surface assemble the of directly bacterial are provide bacterial into conduit through These target the and proteins a injectisomes, on needlelike cytosol secreted structures, which cells. response: host mechanism, NFκB factors and that bacterial of this range response delivered block inflammatory that signaling MAP via immune are aid kinases. cascades including central virulence the factors the subverting to A in bacterial are causative Among the by of remarkable these Yersinia of pestis, most plague. proteins agent bubonic (Yops) the the Yersinia outer produced YopO, the cytoskeleton, phagocytosis. actin which YopE, example, and several Secretion YopH, into for these factors of (for YopT) of essential phagocytes is disrupts of pathogenicity of immune of these number roles lacking components or demonstrated by by played bacteria T4SS T3SS structures. by loss the subversion Gramnegative are of a The essential pathogens mutant in

seeking the phagocytes. bacterial within can evade system Intracellular shelter 13-20 pathogens by immune

macrophages, primary as cell, effectors host. these within vehicle host bacteria—complement major as To their well avoid a for specialized extracellular pathogens surviving for directed the evolved dissemination have phagocytes against antibodies—some and as using mechanisms within bacterial the strategies: to within three of escape This by general resistance is the into from phagosome phagolysosome. the mechanisms and achieved the ‘Trojan phagosome–lysosome fusion; cytosol; killing strategy horse’ blockade protecting by fusion tuberculosis, but contents. bactericidal up Mycobacterium itself the prevents the macrophages lysosome, the from actions taken phagosome for the lysosomal the with of is of example, Other from multiply. they cytoplasm where bacterium into microorganisms, as macrophage, phagosome of the escape monocytogenes, the Listeria the such the then extracellular They tissue environment. in the emerging the adjacent spread cells to into without at of hijacking They the the assembles protein actin, which into bacterium. rear filaments the do this cytoskeletal by drive filaments then lysed vacuolar projections bacteria adjacent to into cell. vacuoles the are cells; actin of The cytoplasm listeria, by into forward the the bacteria the the releasing the adjacent Moreover, on to Listeria the infected surface blebs the induce formation bacteriacontaining been shown cells. of of has phosphatidyl on express leaflet. outer serine the These membrane which blebs leaflet of the is for to phospholipid on apoptotic and as uptake outer normally membrane is when exposed cell signal membrane recognized This membrane leaflet, debris. the phagocytes the inner by a restricted normally by thereby In delivered phagocytic antibodies. cells, is this way, Listeria to attack directly avoiding

Fig. a secretion Salmonella (see III system Following type uptake, species use vacuole the cytosol to of and the host secrete composition alter as the avoid membranes as in effectors to Salmonellacontaining such to 13.19) SifA destruction. into so order prolonging hosts. delivered Salmonella inject new the phagocytes’ bacterial factors Remarkably, can lifespans of their cellular to be apoptotic that the delay death can macrophages, host cargo also until by the of bacteria the intracellular oxygen counter into ingesting phagolysosome microbicidal Other phagocyte. reactive actions or species delivered peptides

Fig. systems host to secretion specialized bacteria 13.19 use cells. into inject Pathogenic molecules effector

secretion compromise infection. or and host assembly—a system, virulence pathogenic a target into proteins iV to Gram-negative inject establish number of iii injectisome—to type defenses use protein or a complex, cells needle-like bacteria spans from base proteins, two pass serves the membrane a the penetrates bacterial ‘nanoinjectors’ formed proteins host-cell tip that of as docking structure allow translocon, effector these composed by is base membranes, α-helical is into are which assembled anchored than in to host that a polymerization the for and cell. 20 that bacterial a more complex of a subunits, are to the and the and the repeating needle

Fig. polar and are macrophage to leprosy. two different leprae Mycobacterium responses forms sharply T-cell of 13.20 in the (top cells as stain of photographs, lead to in very panels). disease can dots two the red with infection whose different leprae, dark forms M. small controlled in is infected the organism macrophages. tuberculoid of well cells activate that leprosy growth by tH1-like (left), damage. inflammation such contains inflamed, and peripheral causes nerve local effects, local the lesion as the is granulomas but only and tuberculoid is in nervous to tissues in and stages disease leprosy there connective (right), grow disseminated system. lepromatous uncontrolled late widely and to the of the in is macrophages; infection major bacilli is the damage peripheral are these forms two (not stages shown). polar several between intermediate there shows the the Rna with as forms the disease the demonstrating sharply northern cytokine lepromatous patterns blots different, shown four of lesions are of and with two that panel isolated of by analysis patients in leprosy polar from lower leprosy. four patients tuberculoid the (il-2, produced cells il-10) form, dominate cytokines cells tnF-β) lepromatous whereas in and produced in the form. Cytokines tH2 and by tuberculoid il-5, the tH1 iFn-γ, typically (il-4, by dominate it cells therefore that lepromatous leprosy, predominate cells tH2-like in tH1-like in leprosy. seems tuberculoid and M. the the iFn-γ of macrophages, bactericidal be in of activity can macrophages. actually leprae, would induction enhancing killing activate il-4 expected to inhibit whereas G. patterns courtesy Photographs courtesy cytokine of Kaplan; R.l. of Modlin.

of As bacteria that for immune target tradeoff activation cells. intracellular NK risk a and their cells intracellular these effectors T lifestyle, pathogens: killing response expression IFNγ in cells TH1 discussed a and secretion phagocytes intracellular As activation type 115, function is that 1 of major enhanced the Section activate of of or by cells CD40L. for of immune NK Tcell MHC feed phagosome, Additionally, escape induce peptides for presentation antigen the thus such that for of cell mechanisms pathway destruction. I the their cytosolic generate responses host target as and those Listeria, that pathogens that class intracellular cytotoxic have evolved peripheral activation and requires cells a Mycobacterium nerve leprae, caused host In infection leprosy, TH1 macrophage and with skin defense effective NK by (Fig. disease by 13.20).

infectivity growth IL-5 infection. TH2 in lesions Lepromatous IL-10 ˜orid Tuberculoid show cytokinesTH1 in TNF-˜IFN-°IL-2 cytokines leprosy Hypergammaglobulinemia leprosy Tuberculoid patterns Disseminated High macrophages Lepromatous Cytokine IL-4 Lepromatous Organisms diffuse Bone, T-cell absent responsiveness. damage Low and or cartilage, nerve result T-cell exist leprae forms polar forms, and lepromatous leprosy, in several response leprosy are also There different intermediate M. to tuberculoid leprae forms Infection responsiveness. antigens but Mycobacterium can clinical of with two Normal No local levels low Tuberculoid present levels at Low antigens M. Organisms and response in˜ammation. Normal leprae Speciÿc leprosy infectivity Granulomas serum undetectable to to immunoglobulin Peripheral nerve damage

is response. and but in normally cleared, vesicles host macrophage tuberculosis, able not persist Like 1 leprae is a grow restrained, to M. by M. and type patients are peripheral and mount 1 found, type bacteria with produced, the nerves survive. is antibody disease normal immune associated macrophage typically little live activation, are damaged and, responses, the progresses slowly although patients and In few inflammatory who by skin responses the to tuberculoid called is of leprosy. its tuberculosis, variant Because this similarities deficient to mounted an lepromatous ineffective in type is leprae which response type to in responses contrast leprosy, is 1 2 This M. instead. and are abundant results and destruction the untreated. in that macrophages bacterium is This of growth tissue eventually fatal, in gross if levels infection high due probably controlling they ineffective the to antibacterial leprosy, high bacteria. are the lepromatous antibodies produced reach intracellular are in not patients do Although bacterial of load, the antibodies at because with

also parasites. by practiced protozoan Immune evasion is 13-21

have Plasmodium in Most vector host, and of of cycles, an intermediate complex flies, which occurs arthropod protozoan such in humans mosquitoes, species, life such Trypanosoma example, which as and common (for as an or ticks). parasites, part part occurs unusual, the when normal blood host is barriers a transmission route by in by are the the is infection that to directly or meal. their to of agent bypassed these organisms bite delivered infectious The of a of intermediate taking blood associated function of normal innate completely infection. during bypassed many Thus, barrier are defenses immune the with adaptive that evasion infections episodic most complex have chronic characterized eliciting the developed result by Further, cellmediated despite responses. successful strategies varied immune disease in these manifestations, and often organisms immune antibody ‘hideandseek’ and their of

(see Trypanosoma has a As brucei, a the variation evolved agent to response antibody antigenic above for capacity some in 1319), Section for or remarkable causative trypanosomiasis, described pathogens humans. elicited infected evade sleeping sickness, of bacterial the glycoprotein, potent clears elicits which variantspecific glycoprotein antibody most the single a that coated rapidly trypanosome The a of with of parasites. protective type response (VSG), is distinct each antigenic with genome, however, VSG a properties. trypanosome contains about protein encoding 1000 The genes, by site placed in active being VSG expressed the expression is gene into the genome. parasite A be can rearrangement at gene one gene VSG a is VSG the expression Only changed a by into a it expressed new gene time, that and places site (Fig. 13.21). Fig. effective within a recurrence under disease of host population pressure the elimination selective different trypanosomes the to antibody response, (see escape a the express So, multiply few an that and cause of VSG bottom 13.21, panel). in disease. is resulting and the the whole VSG, new made active and Antibodies quiescent periods cycle of are repeated, then against cycles immunecomplex chronic to lead of antigen The and damage clearance

Fig. to Antigenic trypanosomes surveillance. in them immune 13.21 variation allows escape is trypanosome with variant-specific glycoprotein (VSG). the a covered surface a of active. about site in end each genes one only chromosome the gene different specific 1000 encoding expression a but has trypanosome the telomere within at the of is VSGs, VSG observed conversion. mechanism although gene been gene the genetic mechanisms several the is changing usual have expressed, for the becomes which the an is into inactive telomere, telomeric active. is copied where and it at transposed not gene, expression site, an trypanosome first initially are antibodies infected, the against expressed individual VSG by is population. raised When the new antibody variant, host of to the switch VSG type, small is their new although a a the unaffected. gene spontaneously initial eliminates trypanosomes variant and number the the the grows, variant as is repeated. new sequence events whole of

to sickness that resulting damage, the eventually in name. gives its neurological finally inflammation, sleeping and coma health they evasive problem action in a system to make defeat, and major trypanosome difficult the cycles The of infections very are for immune Africa.

Caused serious disease. species, and another widespread by is malaria Plasmodium immune brucei, Plasmodium Like avoid elimination system. to species antigens the their Trypanosoma by vary humans. plasmodia of in hosts cellular different parts life undergo within cycle different their In addition, form is hepatocytes organism, which infected Initial the is targets an the sporozoite liver. the of of in by bite and mosquito infection transmitted by the rapidly burst to merozoites Here, circulating that blood from organism produce to cells. red infect the infected replicates hepatocytes in the red Thus, morphs eradication the cells. the the of parasite second to blood host, system parasite liver, efforts its focuses immune as the on escapes cellular and it red preventing detection by cytotoxic the that within lack only blood the molecules, And infected CD8 infected merozoites cells MHC I blood cells, red cells antigens by cells body the of escape cells. are class T produced in because the destruction elegant of to represents This the cellmediated adaptations evade immunity. one most

is subversion protozoan also Immune practiced by parasites. macrophages. an that obligate is sandflies, which major, Leishmania intracellular by the dermal bite of within tissues tissue to humans transmitted is of replicates parasite 1 dependent intracellular As vesicles, response. is true is of L. phagocytic that eradication major pathogens reside of on a immune within type other host, NK Through differentiation incompletely that cells the TH1 of IFNγ production of the mechanisms thereby the IL12 major inhibiting function understood, of and macrophage inhibiting and cells. production inhibits L. specifically its by are by clearance has induce major addition, of L. In that shown the IL10producing Treg actively to suppress infection. cells been

of immune to different a use mechanisms keep RNA 13-22 system. step of antigenic ahead viruses the variation adaptive

Viruses the are most both of pathogens. diverse and simplest They relying only can propagate cellular host living machinery and replicate to replicate within themselves. cells, on material innate responses sense cytolytic adaptive respectively. provoke intracellular T genetic that they As immune intracellular CD8 activate cells, by cells—NK viral pathogens, and and immune obligate cells and PRRs They viral cells. and to mechanisms responses, interferon replication in also infected limit which cellintrinsic both I activate induce uninfected type early with response specialized are matures. NK plasmacytoid the produce adaptive in host sensor of play along early role dendritic levels cells, many I interferon Although infections interferons, are and, type in defense a antiviral type innate high for cells that central cells before I viral cells production production to cells complement arms cytolytic that help block of IFNγ. cells adaptive antibodies viral infected for which TH1 produce of The and immunity: CD8 destroy entry provide destroy T involves of cells, complementfixing and induction opsonizing virally enveloped virusspecific and activate cells that into viruses; and all uninfected latter

to The are used immune defeat varied defenses the by strategies as as themselves. pathogens viruses genome. of viral type general strategies some the However, to relate genomes polymerase. lack must RNA the replicate which proofreading viruses polymerases, ability RNA their of using DNA than large RNA support A a viruses genomes. viruses, RNA consequence cannot consequence have this rate the mutation is that that DNA practical viruses of greater with of epitopes a immune system rapidly mechanism opportunities targeted altering the However, adaptive evasion. antigenic as this immune for them also affords by for genomes, viruses reassortment during themselves Further, have RNA viral to replication. lend segmented some which are common and Both acute responsible these several for of that by a been mechanisms pathogen influenza virus, seasonal major has infections causes used viral pandemics. a throughout for world. one of responsible virus is influenza single type At time, the most any cases directed virus this virus. gradually of protein main human chiefly production develops immunity against hemagglutinin, antibody type, to viral the the through influenza neutralizing protective population the the of The surface both individuals, mutation (Fig. potential its able Because mechanisms type were rapidly the running of to of be in immune hosts alter use out it danger is from cleared might virus not to it antigenic 13.22).

drift. in mutations glycoproteins—hemagglutinin viral and of point caused surface first the called genes The the by two antigenic neuraminidase—is these, encoding major with the antibodies arises that mutations 2–3 flu years a it neutralization variant by population. Every present allow to in virus the evade the T destruction. also escape mutant virus are the T epitopes viral with cells, mutations recognized cells, cytotoxic by that Other infected affect that CD8 consequence proteins with cells may in particularly against variant, proteins some T because level and previous old changes is memory new produced the thus has still with susceptible most the of are the People of there crossreaction in antibodies flu viral and but to relatively population the some the the variant, immunity. immune are virus still minor, to cells antigenic typically Thus, drift mild. resulting from epidemics are

reassortment RNA shift, as virus. that in hemagglutinin the known major changes virus influenza changes result in segmented and the Antigenic of are in from genome expressed by antigenic result the often cells of cause global disease, because if substantial severe and is T with pandemics at by Antigenic poorly, new all, recognized antibodies hemagglutinin the shifts mortality,

Fig. allow type A 13.22 influenza variation of with virus. repeated infection types Two and at hemagglutinin viral that for surface directed is the mediates neutralizing binding responsible protein is cells. entry to immunity antibody protective (H), which into viral for of hemagglutinin. the antibodies protective involves point the on sites with altered drift antigenic emergence binding (left mutants panels) can the been only in that variants virus is some as t previous to but still virus, epitopes previously can in infected grow that individuals. immune strain a and of new cause disease the mild have cells antibodies the altered, recognize new not host antigenic pig. a the (right panels) of or shift rare bird viral two reassortment Rna genomes event probably involving is influenza viruses, a in segmented the of different a in their and cells large therefore are not antibodies changes infections hemagglutinin, antigen-shifted in have produced and viruses t earlier protective. these widely, the that strains years. that infection spreads cause influenza 10–50 occur causing severe every shifted pandemics these molecules shown. but three are simplicity genome, only in viral each there are eight Rna for

previous against variant. the directed of an the (see gene segmented of in the in hemagglutinin animal influenza the the replaces is viruses which animal hemagglutinin to gene in human virus Fig. animal genome due Antigenic the the host, virus shift virus reassortment RNA from and influenza human 13.22).

Hepatitis chronic virus is C an cause of the acute virus and RNA both infections liver. can that (HCV) is cause chronic of States, infection It bloodborne the liver most the United cirrhosis. viral in of cause and leading the common to virus, capacity a evade mutation high HCV elimination. has of influenza that it As immune for allow with epitopes the viral difficult target heavy against CD81 which its glycoprotein to both region a and in binding influenza, to glycosylation high rate surface the HCV which unlike of produce presents binding binds However, CD81) its due effective responsible of antibodies, to neutralizing hepatocytes (E2, of for mutation. against Antibody responses limited therefore of effectiveness. are HCV cytolytic variants of evade that of high select mutation Similarly, rates of epitopes responses. escape Tcell for Tcell HCV the the subvert immunity. induction that impairing factors thereby HCV cells, there expresses also evidence of function that of dendritic Finally, is Tcell

multiple 13-23 mechanisms subvert to CTL DNA use responses. NK-cell and viruses

infections the pathogens, diversity subverting greatest establish that for evolved mechanisms escaping of defenses. immune or all viruses have Of the chronic can DNA to low less relatively RNA DNA antigenic defenses. employ Unlike thus immune viruses, rates variation evade able have are to and mutation viruses them remarkable to nearly of every proteins can have genes lower viruses much that viral support defense. larger aspect because to able allows a accommodate However, these subvert genomes, mutation encoding of their rate of number antiviral been them poxvirus, of of our 50% focus case that herpesviruses, genes. can immune to In here, of viruses dedicated the genome and the all be especially DNA will adenovirus, over evasionrelated large be these viruses, state Further, mechanisms have particularly that which the a actively evolved known them of to allow in some virus enter latency, not replicated. herpesviruses, as the is load not the it does latent In infections. state, molecules cytolytic disease; signal cells, establish can because cannot T virus’s eliminated, viral produced be MHC that peptides I to class presence virus the however, are lifelong to the cause and no resulting 1324, can recurrent reactivated, be discuss in As will latent in we Section infections illness. establishes that nine one varicellazoster and cause out which infect of virus and (which of chickenpox causes (EBV, which (CMV)—infects genital humans, herpes), shingles), and Epstein–Barr common most ten labial of eight cytomegalovirus people, at (HSV)1 lifelong the least can types—herpes the herpesvirus and (both and simplex five latency. infectious mononucleosis), virus of Of typically types causes 2 (Fig. which by highlight Here viruses we these succeed major mechanisms 13.23).

viruses the NK Central the cells. to of is and longterm evasion CTLs DNA of survival by of signals cell cells a molecules The I presentation surface CD8 to viral infected kill the peptides cell. at T class MHC of immune Many viral which by the called class infected producing of viruses the peptide:MHC complexes the prevent large evade I recognition cell proteins (Fig. on DNA appearance immunoevasins, 13.24). class step every of has in the at processing and described. presentation key inhibitor one viral least Indeed, of I complexes been peptide:MHC reticulum endoplasmic block Some by immunoevasins peptide transporter TAP targeting the entry into the (Fig. 13.25, panel). left (see molecules prevent Viral reticulum endoplasmic surface retaining Fig. by also from class peptide:MHC I the the proteins can MHC complexes in reaching cell middle 13.25, panel). Several used the directing by reticulum endoplasmic the initiates normally them known into to which synthesized pathway catalyze a back class viral misfolded (Fig. as degradation process degrade cytosol the I MHC of newly dislocation, proteins proteins molecules by 13.25, right panel). class preventing of peptide:MHC for these formation class assembled/folded stably I divert the complexes complexes, pathway disposal. the peptide:MHC By (ERAD) into ERassociated viral proteins I the degradation impair mechanisms, the CTLs. viral factors multiple or completely viral these block Through of to peptides presentation inhibitors T II as processing not of viral inhibitors viral have are to described; the pathway The pathway, CD4 class target I limited actions cells. also these MHC ultimately the been inhibitors of class their than dendritic cells antigens to crosspresentation. cells T many as cells, CD8 the attention via viruses of target Finally, come other persist CTL cellular are primed been viruses although destruction well is cells, interfere even because it not have their block and that mechanisms dendritic recognition generated. hosts to described, the after effectors can are not with Viral that in of this pathway viruses required the known

to a viral to that NK evade function is of the recognition infection, detection innate I attempts acute class the cells molecules as their of pathogen and by cytolysis addition cells role to in major MHC downregulated a to response In foil have CTLs. Accordingly, NK cytolytic viruses that MHC I evolved pathway cells. to the class the have mechanisms also target activity repress of of that inhibitory receptors MHC homologs inhibitory of (KIRs) to, engage class receptors not killer expression I here are Strategies limited include, leukocyte (LIRs). and viral but class HLA a of I human produces homolog called CMV For example,

Fig. that Immunoevasins antigens viruses by bind the MHC I produced to class processing interfere 13.24 of molecules. with

UL18, which and cells NKcell on an signal inhibitory binds blocks that NK LIR1 cytolysis. provides receptors that on products inhibit as pathways. have well effector defined NKcell been Viral as NK antagonize activating also cells,

mechanisms subvert evolved additional have functions viruses immune the to system. of DNA or include their The the or mechanisms viral cytokines proteins expression chemokines receptors, homologs of used of and viral

Fig. immunoevasins. targeted in The reticulum the by endoplasmic peptide-loading viral complex is 13.25 entry left the (eR). peptide of reticulum to panel the blockade shows endoplasmic binding the the virus protein iCP47 from peptides uS6 to through prevents interferes of with the the transfer simplex in whereas cytosol, peptides CMV human from (HSV)-1 herpes from taP. atP-dependent protein taP cytosolic shows middle the eR i adenovirus of in molecules the panel the e19 the protein. by class retention MHC MHC motif, certain with competing and prevent to retains in the same molecules with this association the through binds eR-retention loading. tapasin an and them time at eR peptide taP how right an panel mK3 synthesized the murine virus herpes targets molecules. the e3ubiquitin i class shows protein, MHC newly ligase, (see with Section the of associates cytoplasmic and tail tapasin:taP addition K48 the subunits complexes mK3 with of to MHC linkages class i directs 7-5) molecule. ubiquitin the degradation tail of the the initiates of the MHC polyubiquitination MHC proteasomal pathway. the of cytoplasmic the by of process molecule

inhibit actions. cytokines or their receptors to their that bind inhibition cytokines, As decoy major by cytokine factors by proteins, antiviral inhibition of IFNs. with strategies in transcription, family viral whether binding receptors production induced diverse of this JAK/STAT signaling inhibition IFN inhibitory on or the or are effector of by II and transcription of centered are of type receptors, interferons interference defense, I cytokines others. viruses Some and of DNA also the produce antagonists TNFα, cytokines IL18, IL1, proinflammatory among immunosuppressive of also Viral cytokines are homologs produced. a the by IL1, adaptive responses tolerogenic promote IL12, viral production by including antiviral called IL10, of than downregulates cells, producing which to immune cmvIL10, several antigens. responses to IFNγ, homolog of impairs the cytokine CMV and proinflammatory rather immunogenic cytokines TNFα,

chemokine by producing interfere with chemokine that also chemokine ligandinduced chemokine through receptors. decoy or interfere natural either with receptors homologs viruses responses Several signaling produce viral receptor 40 the Gproteincoupled Collectively, receptors of seven and (vGPCR) to chemokine homologs belonging poxviruses superfamily. transmembranespanning herpesviruses over T associated been has of ‘exhaustion’ CMV CD8 cells. infection promote to that is antiviral with shown chronic Finally, 724), suppresses death1 of setting by of receptor CD8 are function. receptor induced this expression of activation superfamily, Section (PD1) CD28 in the the programmed T inhibitory effector its Tcell by ligand characterized (see PDL1 an cells CD8 which is viral ongoing this load, interaction clearance. antiviral pathway CD8 Blockade of that indicating impaired effector the restores involved and the activation function of viral in decreases PDL1–PD1 viruses infections, establish in implicated mechanism as virus has hepatitis A chronic that (HCV). such C can similar been RNA host–pathogen immune subvert have quite viruses of to that clearance is the discovery of strategies to remarkable, to our Suffice relationships. range mechanisms on have these that the and understanding mechanisms a it say continues evolved of impact major

vivo Some immunity by latent ceasing wanes. to 13-24 viruses replicate in persist until

enveloped characterized mentioned infections. viral in are class agents are viruses DNA major infections As section, the large, lifelong that their herpesviruses, humans a to cause latent previous in that establish the ability of by we replicating. the within by without evolved also subvert these strategies genome mechanisms considered indefinitely cells viruses have which have a nucleus they number maintain immunity, of infected of While to their small to by and their of establish productive, cycle, or contrast latency called cellular actively expression lyses the lytic, In of of an host, latency, (LAT). a region its a associated genome replicates transcript the or phase can viral herpesviruses life virus phase, lysogenic the wherein it that viral that In lifespan—and of the cell, to host the the harbors. might with viral remaining addition the produces genome suppressing with the cell’s of clear apoptotic the prolonging cell LAT factors of interfering death mechanisms that immune and both interfere the genome, transcription cold area. cause which infected neurons An and sores, virus spreads cells herpes then serving of the epithelial infects the to sensory is example simplex (HSV), infection, neurons. effective virus the in sensory epithelial controls response a persists the latent but state the immune An in down epithelial and reinfects tissues the the such of Factors the or which hormonal neuron sensory travels (Fig. then sunlight, changes the axons virus, infection, reactivate as bacterial 13.26). producing At again immune sore. local cells, infection the active the and new this epithelial point, controls becomes the killing response a by repeated be times. This many can cycle

Fig. reactivation infection. virus simplex and of Persistence herpes 13.26 innervate initial such the infection response, skin by the in is sensory those the residual neurons axons cleared infection persists trigeminal whose lips. as effective an the ganglion, in but immune of immune and alteration served sore the the ganglion by environmental from in skin virus some stress results. the virus When the nerve the status, reinfected and/or a area in reactivated, cold new in is by usually is be repeated process this many can times.

infected: few peptides cytotoxic sensory I MHC the MHC class virusderived very cells levels molecules, CD8 of class infected reasons neuron There for neurons I to which is present T why carry and are to neurons remains quiescent first, on virus them. it and attack harder recognize the generates molecules; two second, makes low of be cytotoxic low for beneficial that a I the have is The because inappropriately regeneration, which level will by capacity it cells. reduces MHC neurons, T risk class expression limited targeted for neurons infections. It cellular does, persistent reservoirs make as attractive however, enter often Herpesviruses latency. chickenpox, or or the after is by in latent Herpes immunosuppression. ganglia and root a be few causes zoster acute dorsal illness remains which can reactivated over, one stress (varicellazoster), varicella in is the cause of the to which by nerve spreads served area shingles, the then skin the or by disease and root. of skin down the herpes reinfects reappearance the infected dorsal the rash marked It classic zoster, immunocompetent herpes zoster only Unlike a frequently, herpes once in usually lifetime in which reactivates an simplex, host. reactivates

the persistent in Yet a infection most virus herpesvirus, establishes (EBV), another Epstein–Barr individuals. infection primary being passes enters EBV after latency cells a often B in without diagnosed. that as fever. mononucleosis is or individuals, a initial infectious severe, acute In disease glandular of the of cells minority known infected infection causing B more the component MHC infects cells to II complex, CR2 the EBV coreceptor B class by molecules. Bcell a of (CD21), and binding to disease In cells mononuclear leading cells proliferate the blood the antigenspecific proliferation the in its name. virus, and primary that infected of the white most cells gives and excess the turn of to infection, T in of the produce destroying process, cells, is released from and the be B Virus the in recovered them can saliva. from virus cytotoxic eventually infected which is cells. kill infection CD8 virusspecific proliferating cells, by T The B controlled the become quiescent A in EBV infected, and B however, fraction these of latently lymphocytes cells. memory remains

accompanied quite of of These patterns genes. two expression forms different by viral of infection are 70 EBV proteins. has a more encoding than DNA genome large are be recognized. and viral of by the replicating which for virus, these viral are peptides providing can expressed a required cells of Many source replication by infected virus B a cells and In host latent the viral infection, is of survives within set the proteins a limited contrast, expressed. in very without replicating, viral (EBNA1), is One to nuclear which needed antigen 1 the is maintain the of genome. Epstein–Barr these elicit into its with Tcell would own EBNA1 degradation interacts 62) Section to (see prevent the response. proteasome a peptides otherwise that

of isolated genome can equivalent infection: from their who immortal of apparently the by cells, T have EBV individuals socalled retaining become cells cell vitro. infected in transformed in into EBV latently culturing lines, B absence cells tumorigenesis B Latently cleared infected cells be the the giving vivo, Infected occasionally called in malignant lymphoma. to transformation Burkitt’s Bcell rise undergo a lymphoma cells B transporters 63), so for of unable process to (see and are presentation human the lymphoma, on and class is (the TAP2 I peptide Section class TAP1 endogenous this downregulated HLA molecules antigens cells I). expression MHC In cytotoxic CD8 provides deficiency how for attack This these T explanation escape one tumors by cells. of surveillance. have lymphomas, as function acquired Tcell a EBVassociated Patients of risk developing a of immune result failure and an presumably increased of with inherited immunodeficiencies

RNA a hepatocellular and liver the chronic DNA carcinoma. infect cases hepatitis acute an B some cause and in virus) (HCV, The viruses (HBV, hepatitis hepatitis, and and cirrhosis, C virus) liver up types and a role cases HCV Immune of have hepatitis infection, set chronic the clearance important many both an in of but probably in infection. responses HBV by infection, the with early the the liver infects a of HCV activation subverts Although immune virus during stage response adaptive the mainly primary interfering maturation. and dendriticcell CD4 to cells. of differentiation, T leads be CD4 This help for T because infection becoming lack cells which activate TH1 cytotoxic CD8 responsible is activation of and a consequent of of inadequate the chronic, most the Tcell naive probably thought to to cell lack seen antigen CD4 levels evidence is memory help cytotoxic CD8 Tcell allows antiviral restoration CD8 that improves decrease the Tcell viral treatment in and of the after of Tcell There and function. function its thought an to it capacity. delay evade helps virus RNA is by replicate the virus synergize that genome that maturation HCV the dendriticcell with in caused to the to another uses lacks property polymerase immune The response: of proofreading to change in and allows a it to viral mutation evade its thus This high which a contributes antigenicity, immunity. adaptive rate

Summary.

by disease their host own to recurrent promote persistent or them or replication. normal defense can mechanisms subverting avoiding by agents Infectious cause There immune subverting many different ways the of or response. evading are all infections. important to mechanisms, and response medically variation, latency, persistent Antigenic immune effector the to and of immune contribute resistance suppression disease others for cause pathogens spread some In the not the cases infection, immune of part use if some to immune would response problem: it and activation the is not were response. immune of these prevent nature of its to mechanisms each a immune and about the approach something medical different us teaches to the weaknesses, and requires Each infection. response or treat

Acquired deficiency syndrome. immune

syndrome of a is acquired human the The example the subversion deficiency immune most by virus immune caused (AIDS) extreme immunodeficiency by (HIV). pathogen high and certain when results become disease characterized opportunistic T to The loss in malignancies. which, progressive have cells, infections by is sufficiently of a depleted, CD4 they susceptibility that 1959. earliest case was in Republic reported from in infection of The of HIV to date in humans (Democratic was sample documented the of stored a Kinshasa Congo) serum AIDS of cases 1981, It until were not that first was however, reported. officially the the be body by by to seemed HIV, was and to suspected identified. isolated disease spread causative 1983 Because was be agent, the a cause fluids, with contact new virus, the and

are are There HIV—HIV1 closely related. of and at least HIV2—that two types rate in child, HIV1 high are of exposure to transmission uncommon is transmitted has shared to therefore example, by While more sexual which loads contact transfusion, blood (for from types mother in needles), both and bloodborne HIV2. HIV1 transmitted; viral and easily a replicates is blood higher HIV1 who to HIV2. more is AIDS, disease to progress Although indistinguishable than patients AIDS progresses in greater and rapidly with incidence worldwide. of cause by most prevalent is the HIV1 therefore AIDS far elsewhere. while and rarely are found West is HIV2 HIV1 to HIV2 And both endemic Africa,

to from humans other primate Africa. in to originally seem spread have species Both viruses genome simian HIV1, (SIV), has primate that immunodeficiency suggests precursor sequencing Viral of virus passed the isolates of

Fig. and origins of 13.27 HIV-2. HIV-1 Phylogenetic (main), groups: diversified genetic four different (non-M, or different marked by are K. classified in genomic major letters into to further and sequence parts non-O), world, into is a of subtypes, basis on predominate. and HiV-1 the M (outlier), of shows variability which non-n, non-O), (non-M, the the clades, designated O P n are subtypes that sequences analyses of of responsible rise transfers chimpanzee virus Similarly, and events: Gorilla gave and mangabey M at of rise gave u). HiV-2 transfers are groups demonstrate from chimpanzees of of cross-species gorilla Ptt) lowland SiVcpzPtt gorilla from gorillas to lineage, (M, SiV P. and SiVsmm and from or newly four of O originated (subspecies troglodytes, sooty two least Pan (groups nine transmissions described to separate Phylogenetic the humans simian to different central gorilla) n, independent for and groups (SiVcpz), zoonotic groups that monkeys from a two lineages troglodytes HiV-1 four O, (subspecies while SiVgor (SiVgor), n, HiV-1 P) HiV-1 immunodeficiency HiV-1 western transmission a–H and experimental stump-tailed infections resulted from SiVsmm, SiVmac and SiVstm rhesus with macaques macaques respectively. of chimpanzee stm, stump-tailed immunodeficiency cpzPtt, mangabey troglodytes; simian cpzPts, sooty schweinfurthii; monkey; Pan troglodytes macaque; chimpanzee mac, SiV, troglodytes abbreviations: Pan smm, macaque. virus; of Figure courtesy Drs. and Beatrice learn. Hahn Gerald

on 13.27). occasions four least humans to whereas gorillas, sooty from mangabey (Fig. lowland HIV2 or independent in at western the originated chimpanzees variants most century, to of early recently. was two from the to major HIV1, transmitted have four infections (responsible is N twentieth to transmitted half other the best for of first whereas O worldwide), the variants HIV1 that twentieth also century; more the transmission of chimpanzees P) M of dates the estimate (groups group ~99% the The of HIV1 humans prevalent in group been and appear than time its to to has its infections equilibrium primate SIV human coevolve As zoonotic is and nonhuman true in insufficient host. been pathogen for pathogenic where there generally for virulence, in HIV less an host host that is is other attenuates development do whereas Thus, that primates nearly considerably more AIDS develop universal primates HIV1infected receive in disease nonhuman of not is to of at with all. some variable, AIDS development in is SIVinfected treatment, failing humans

AIDS. cause not immediately does infection HIV infection treatment, Without years. development the time several AIDS of is following adults to of average CD4 virus. immune response as the T to long immune and system, the of of well the the virus tropism of infection reflects development for delay cells The symptomatic unusual between nature deficiency as immune the the of 35.3 treatment by years is from of in (Fig. infected disease, come despite are AIDS followed an many and great the pathogenesis and worldwide, of estimated now pandemic, epidemiology presaging prevention of death to a understanding strides AIDSrelated million of in HIV the greater causes and died 1.6 for the from million HIV people 2012 that have and 13.28). is of the adults which in Africa, over infected. twothirds global for 20 every incidence, 1 In subSaharan accounts most Indeed, HIV/AIDS time its human has the short as a the infectious since identification emerged new in single as agent deadly pathogen. new is peak peak from in declined incidence steadily in Nevertheless, there worldwide of of since of its cause mid2000s. infections 1997, and cases has the optimism: the its declined HIV HIV/AIDS since annual has for deaths number the annually incidence declines with is infections Among the Africa. the new regions rapid most subSaharan in of increasing there are areas (for example, Eastern Central Asia). of focal incidence Europe and Still,

HIV slowly 13-25 that to a that AIDS. chronic infection establishes retrovirus a progresses is

in HIV virus is enveloped Fig. structure shown whose an RNA is 13.29. the virus an virion, copies are the cellular decorated infect in and envelope two of numerous by establish RNA copies that are proteins to viral to viral used contains or that target infection two Each virus cells, particle, and required host. enzymes with genome is of infected of enzyme. viral in usual genome is of a the from retrovirus, must cell—the into named the transcription—by because reverse be viral (retro) the DNA pattern so HIV an example RNA of transcribed reverse transcriptase the generates integrated DNA This viral replication. chromosomes intermediate a to is hostcell enable into that the viral and the viral RNA direct of proteins as both from produced new synthesis the genomes of later integrated the serve as viral transcripts to DNA particles. mRNAs RNA enclosed a each the envelope. cell the by in These from membrane escape budding membrane, from plasma

25 million/2.3 and Asia South-east Sub-Saharan Worldwide cases South 260,000/32,000/17,000 in million/48,000/20,000 Asia Eastern and 1.3 250,000/12,000/11,000 Africa totals East in 800,000/270,000/220,000 Africa million Latin Europe Central Western Caribbean 1.3 million/270,000/220,000 860,000/29,000/17,000 Oceania in America 51,000/2100/1200 Asia 2012 2012 million/1.2 1.5 total North North new 35.3 million/130,000/91,000 and deaths cases million 3.9 million/86,000/52,000 million/1.6 2012 Fig. million/1.6 Middle East Europe America still a is disease AIDS of more burden. major but new The the slowly is regions infection in of incidence HIV world, increasing many 13.28 of in number epidemic. 2012 with one-third living decreased grow, large of number peak but the of the individuals since and is HiV/aiDS infections the to over by continues the new is infections including cases, some 50% new peak million million the with 2012, decrease estimated approximately have since approximately since 30% declined were in that it cases a 260,000 2001, 1.6 new Worldwide, 2005. and 35.3 aiDS, individuals HiV, with in infected 2.4 deaths in there around 2012. children new million in of from Health Epidemic Update, Organization, unaiDS/World 2013.) (AIDS

the of they slow, called diseases retroviruses a meaning that belongs lentiviruses, cause. group the of the lentus, of because from gradual the Latin course to HIV continue persist signs overt years for many replicate to disease. causing viruses and of before These prevent that replication immune point the of itself, that the but can the the acute an case leading ongoing an targets is virus to rarely of the In infection infection system cells to controlled of not immune response apparent, is virus. HIV, initial that producing immune years. to controlled be initial cells and to and for infect does system, the replicate system cells latency although many the of immune HIV the establishes acute new continues within infection Thus, by seem immune that exhausts and/or system, resulting AIDS, to opportunistic As death. deficiency, this the cause immune discussed in leads infections below, ultimately malignancy will that or be

Fig. (HIV). The of virus human virion immunodeficiency 13.29 cause of HiV-1, leading the aiDS. is the illustrated virus infects. roughly than measures spherical the and 60 is it virion nm cells in about t 120 the or times diameter, smaller enzymes in protease—are viral virion—reverse the packaged transcriptase, the capsid. are shown schematically three and the integrase, in viral that many of these in reality, enzymes molecules in are each virion. contained Gelderblom. of H. courtesy Photograph

protease gp41 lipid proteins integrase infects HIV the nucleocapsid p17gag MHC spike complex, and envelope cells reverse system. transcriptase (p32) gp120/gp41 replicates gp120env genome within immune matrix (p10) 13-26 RNA viral (p64) or of membrane proteins

replicate defining of immune its to ability of system. characteristic the HIV activated within cells and A is infect CD4 and primary T the are HIV macrophages, targets cells, cells. Three types of dendritic infection: immune cell support CD4 viral of replication. majority great these, T Of the cells surface the determined its of ability particular types, receptors enter by of expression for to cells. as HIV’s specific is virus cell those on the tropism, cellular known the gp120 cells form associated HIV means by trimers two of and glycoproteins, the which enters a envelope. noncovalently of gp41, viral in viral complex gp120/gp40 which subsets cells bind to of extent and lesser macrophages. dendritic expressed of a cells, with CD4, The complexes high on on subunits CD4 affinity cellsurface molecule T and the trimeric to is gp120 Before the the virus, must host entry also cell. bind coreceptor of a fusion gp120 and on receptors The coreceptors are and CCR5 CXCR4. major chemokine the naive T expressed While T macrophages, of CXCR4 memory is memory CD4 predominantly cells, CD4 expressed is dendritic primarily and subsets effector cells. cells, CCR5 on by central and coreceptor transmission chemokine As of the the of particle infected within is an a individuals between importance viral bound propagation and we HIV its will person. particular given discuss below, by in that change undergoes gp120 a a bound exposes site After is binding conformational the highaffinity by that CD4, coreceptor. in portion fusion of cell’s peptide) and cell, of to viral the This, structure into of the plasma gp41 inducing its the membrane membrane. unfold (fusion the a with insert envelope plasma target causes turn, the the associated viral genome allows This hostcell nucleocapsid, viral (Fig. composed the of and enter cytoplasm proteins, viral to 13.30).

has it cells, Once to replicates similarly retroviruses. entered the virus other copy. DNA transcribes a into (cDNA) RNA Reverse viral the transcriptase complementary encodes cDNA, (Fig. genes viral The nine which sequences, 13.31), partially that (LTRs), viral then into each terminal cleaves repetitive is of the genome the called genome. reside by end viral long hostcell at integrated and DNA recognizes repeats integrase, which binding viral generegulatory LTRs control that contain the integration sites hostcell DNA proteins genes. and required for for the provirus the expression of the are of into provirus. the cDNA The known copy integrated is as

three pol, major small, with Like gag, is HIV and the env. genes— retroviruses, other genome proteins the enzymes the structural encodes encodes of env the envelope in and viral The gene core, viral the involved viral encodes nucleocapsid replication, pol gag glycoproteins. and translated pol give polypeptide proteins. that individual pol) then gag protease viral the polyproteins—long by cleaved chains to functional are into by (encoded are mRNAs The transcriptase, encodes viral major virion’s that protease. replication: three alone required viral enzymes the reverse for pol Thus, and integrase, are which then The viral of protease gene, assembled a to gp120 the trimers envelope. into product cleaved the by as hostcell are in gp41, be has gp160, env and viral six encoding other, ways. that has regulatory proteins genes various infectivity and smaller, in replication affect HIV of Two are and essential Rev, in replication viral cycle. Tat regulatory early the these, functions that perform vivo. for four—Nef, in production remaining and The virus essential Vpr, Vif, Vpu—are efficient

host herpesviruses, in quiescent. establish HIV the in infection like virus, progeny remains provirus produce replication its the cycle retroviruses cell other complete a latent or, which can to and whether related be unclear, a determines the is infected. or of infection but What in to thought is productive to a activation results of infection state latency cell cell the discuss initiated immunecell transcription integration following next induced activation. by As will host the which of by provirus in the factors, is section, we transcription are

enters the CD4reverse genomegp41 transcriptase from genome is copies the Viral on late viral membrane RNA. fuses assembled nucleus particle transcription enter with viral cell T bud which to ampliÿes and The chromosomal cytoplasm Tat transcriptase to Virus gp120 RNA double-stranded Gag, DNA Env host cell CD4 RNA cDNA Viral provirus nucleus binds cell of cDNA co-receptor particles, Pol, cell and viral virus are cell and into Reverse into proteins genomes envelope and integrated DNA co-receptor translated allowing viral cDNA viral into membrane are multiply and singly T-cell transcripts provirus viral of gp160PolGagTatNFB˜Rev early tat RNA spliced, or transcription genes of RNA low-level unspliced translation transport allowing Rev spliced induces activation rev cytoplasm of to increases

Fig. HIV. life 13.30 cycle of The as top by that using the is altered binds to CD4 row: binds so for that a entry. acts co-receptor virus chemokine CD4 viral which now a gp120, also binding receptor it release binding releases of the membrane into cell envelope viral the with fusion of causes the viral core this the cytoplasm. gp41, and which reverse-transcribed transcriptase. genome, which viral in using the reverse the Once the core double-stranded releases into viral the Rna cDna is cytoplasm, with becoming cDna the double-stranded integrated integrase to a cell association and migrates Vpr protein nucleus the the provirus. genome, the and is viral the in into HiV and to initiate the the of CD4 nFκB of row: expression the Bottom of which factors and genome. the transcription activation nFat, ltR cells proviral transcription induces t bind transcripts producing proteins, first spliced tat mRnas including regulatory the processed, several encoding extensively are and viral Rev. and Rna can provirus that form to them from transcription stabilizing the in both transcripts, the a tat enhances be binds translated. the the binds cytosol. Rev them to transcripts and Rna transports of of unspliced are and increase, viral Rev less the transported as levels nucleus. spliced extensively transcripts out which and the particles. the new spliced singly and structural these virus many proteins to viral new are also form genomes, encode the of virus, transcripts with are the packaged unspliced proteins unspliced transcripts,

of cell latency, that a soon becomes favors infection might productive after activated infection dormant Thus, favor replication. viral viral infection whereas cells of cells, that initial consequences has can after which, when longlived and macrophages can of very This infection. a case are activated HIV are provirus T in latent of dendritic provide the and even the unlike important cells, years reactivated, be T CD4 cells reservoir latency macrophages do divide, shortlived not dendritic cells in Because that tissues cells these in and are

Fig. HIV. of 13.31 The organization genomic repeats the in retroviruses, terminal transcription in flanked regulation of all viral genome. Rna (ltRs) involved of HiV-1 has viral an like by integration long genome and viral can overlap be frames, genes in frames. several in reading and the the different genome of three read genome. this a to proteins the small virus encode in many allows products—Gag, by all retroviruses. synthesized protein and env—are three Pol, main infectious the are and listed. of genes their products the functions the different known Rna. gag, mature of present products env the be particle, in the together pol, the known with viral are viral and to split nef are so genes mRnas proteins tat, are produced Rev, genome. and their the for viral in of transcripts, splicing by viral the in case is one shown of only exon, translated. in yellow, nef, the

U proteins Gene and transcriptase, pol matrix Polymerase Viral Regulator Gene rev Group-speciÿc protease, product/function vpu pol env antigen integrase env Negative-regulation gag Transactivator and vpr nef enzymes expression R of Core infectivity protein tat vif Transmembrane Envelope glycoproteins. proteins tat Viral Viral protein LTR factor gag Reverse viral LTR binds unspliced Allows DNA regulator fusion Positive Affects nucleus Transport transcription of of virus from transcripts infectivity of gp120 is export particle internalization partially and spliced required for CCR5; nucleus. and CD4 and gp41 to virion Augments production. of Augments virus cell release Promotes membrane and arrest viral replication enhances degradation in and vivo intracellular of vitro. Cell-cycle in CD4 from shortlived. vif nefrev vpu and II be class cells Decreases expression would CD4, host rev MHC tat vpr I cells. of a virus of the primarily HIV tropism latency longlived for consequence of the CD4 Thus, is T for are CD4 characteristic pathogenesis the combined and cells cells provirus features AIDS. of progressive of leads of depletion activationdependent The T and tropism to central HIV CD4 to that its T the transcription of

source replication. major the CD4 T HIV are cells Activated of 13-27

its of host complete that to can infect provirus cells. replication and infectious requires the HIV produce other cell activation cycle virions transactivation This host a the proviral cell. factors due transcription for of of is by expression requirement gene to host viral the and can of initiate transcription Two NFAT. factors NFκB transcription genome: transcription nucleus, 714 bind Sections gene cellular (see for their Both require activation they 716). and to and the DNA factors translocation of where induce these in host. While enabling by T provirus primarily additional is cells, the in this CD4 of infected transactivation is expressed NFκB immune the HIV, in cells all cell by of an activated factor NFAT coupled cells T tissues, that the are HIV replication. the immune major being CD4 cellular CD4 in for and fact with cells longlived abundant T This, to contributes source which regulated consider by T the is cells. CD4 transcription we HIV mechanism Here the in provirus of

can by cells 716, Sections cells in T activation NFAT As of antigen antigen translocation absence 714 1112). the by of activation and also discussed of in effectormemory nuclear NFκB; of activate and NFκB T cytokines induces activation and (Section it of is macrophages alone, activation T antigendependent CD4 transcription addition provirus and receptor activated stimulation memory as cells. HIV Thus, NFκB, NFκB via be of might infected cells in and to dendritic Tcell NFAT independently in in by provirus of promoters Binding to the transcription proviral viral by NFAT RNA and LTR. binding in of initiates NFκB transcript is proteins viral of (see for viral translation produce mRNAs The in ways various Fig. spliced to 13.26).

of Fig. genome least enhance the and proteins—Tat the At two viral (see Rev—serve to production of viral 13.30). (TAR) region a activation to in binds 5ʹ LTR. transcriptional the Tat T1 partner, that viral to the genome. of and RNA cyclindependent form ability and phosphorylates polymerase fulllength This kinase enhances its its (CDK9), transcripts complex cyclin recruits generate 9 to cellular a way, for Tat productive circuit this of In replication. a feedback positive viral amplification provides out nucleus binding important the is to by sequence, specific response a of RNA transcripts for element the RNA Rev viral Rev shuttling viral unspliced (RRE). from the nucleus spliced have the transcripts. export of mRNA cell cells incompletely mechanisms to Eukaryotic prevent for complement pose which viral of proteins, as viral on encode as problem of RNA export dependent This genome. is could a the the mRNA unspliced full that the species well retrovirus, prevent export, to host of after transcripts spliced later, cell. of export infection occurs Rev of transcript viral normal and cellular host unspliced that requires fully Tat the Rev mRNA encodes destruction means While a the mechanisms of by viral by mRNA their early export the

depends Vpr. viral Nef, the of proteins on Vpu, The also replication and success Vif, products well cellular restriction retroviruses. viral to of host evolved of replication inhibit proteins immune have antiviral viral function mechanisms in manner that defeat clearance, appear factors—host cellautonomous These a to as to as multiple (negative in life regulation critical performs functions the Nef viral factor) cycle. a sustain expression receptor the the in downregulating inhibitory receptor HIV and activation life the to Tcell costimulatory in viral threshold of the signaling lowering part state establishment persistent It cycle and early acts Tcell infection, CTLA4. by of for of greater in sustained activation and actions Tcell result Combined, replication. more viral that these promotes class immune to cells. actively infected evasion I to immune contributes expression also of cells making II by cells by T induce and an Nef downregulating molecules, less MHC infected class of be response antiviral killed cytotoxic likely or the surface promotes Nef to interfere CD4 with clearance the otherwise of during virion budding virion also molecules, which bind would and release. viral proteins. catalyzes deoxyuridine in reversetranscribed a the to infectivity viral cytidine ability of called APOBEC, conversion factor) cDNA, to deaminase (viral to acts thereby its which encode overcome Vif deoxycytidine destroying membrane overcome release. is plasma the of and the SIV, cell which the called variants (viral unique required tetherin, of and protein factor its to both and into is to mature Vpu envelope inserts cellular host block of a the HIV1 U) to virion (dNTPs) and by to cellular protein synthesis T target intracellular in pool understood, HIV1 viral it cDNA function cells (viral is cells infection SAMHD1, but for the myeloid transcriptase. factor The reverse R) of available limiting restriction that of not inhibits fully appears by Vpr protein a quiescent the deoxynucleotides CD4

is There routes establishes 13-28 are several by which infection. and HIV transmitted

uninfected transfer fluids occurs HIV with body from the after infected one. of an Infection to an person spread is intercourse. infection sexual HIV most commonly by products routinely screened delivery also are needles has in been drug the transmission intravenous use blood eliminated where of therapeutic exchange by or Transmission of infected the for the HIV. countries blood used occurs, latter blood although route of products for contaminated by largely or infected during important or child, can transmission virus milk. birth, mother in utero, breast of which is from through An to occur route an load 15% to from transmission on to the and of of about infected breastfeeding depending Rates whether the untreated in (from mother the transmission. child, breastfeeds 45%), the mother increases child an risk mother viral as her the vary

transmission antiretroviral rate load (see use to decrease of to during The 1335). the drugs dramatically reduces Section pregnancy child the maternal viral

The infectious example, T macrophages). for (for which and has via infected can or transmitted tropism virus particles virus CD4 free as the cells be cells present milk. Infected semen semen, vaginal in free well found secretions, is virus mother’s in blood, blood, can or be also vaginal fluid, in as but as are cells or breast milk; present we influencing HIV CXCR4, thereby virions section, express CCR5 the infected. bind differentially next either can or As types discuss the gp120 in that variants cell genital cells express immune which initially macrophages. a number and primary of transmission, that virions infection infection CCR5—effector in cells, memory mucosae, gastrointestinal of small In dendritic establish T and the sexual mucosal HIV are the dominant CD4 by sites cells, cells (mucosal before The mucosa. T virus spreading nonmigratory) in cells locally via replicates draining to dendritic macrophages are these the lymph nodes cells or not), and of in replication is and TH17 do is which cells (naive these subsets tissues cells T mucosal viral cells, express for favored of T TH2 cells. lymphoid CD4 initial CCR5 enriched compartment TH1 The so broader disseminates the widely in reside. concentration T high to virus replication lymph in the the and cells lymphoid the bloodstream, the highest is via body CD4 access tissues accelerated cells, where CD4 number T (GALT), where gains nodes, After of regional a of gutassociated there

variants tropism with for roles of different play different co-receptors disease. in HIV transmission and progression 13-29

make infection immune To new with contact host, a cell. HIV in establish must CD4expressing a CXCR4. gp120 determined type CCR5 cell different viral the of for coreceptors: The or by targeted chemokine the affinity is of tropism ‘X4,’ variants the two HIV are and major respectively. to Accordingly, ‘R5’ as referred that at of dominate sexual harbor for resident strains are the upper on early and in CCR5 cells cells viral thus of tissues dominates virus tract commensal gastrointestinal sites microbes constantly tracts (mucosal immune Because male CD4expressing numbers female for R5 transmission)—CCR5tropic rectum are transmission—sites immune infection. typically the transmission, and activated and or exposed transmission; of to required genital major large for of mothertochild

the mucosae, must of epithelium HIV these contact tissues. in Before it immune intestinal genital and the traverse can CD4expressing cells variants the an advantage. virus have CCR5tropic of also Here, the ectocervix, rectum, stratified, the lines singlelayered columnar or upper squamous oropharynx, the epithelium: epithelium or two of multilayered, Infection the occurs of and tract. foreskin that the esophagus; rectum, types endocervix, vagina, lining of GI mucosae and penis, across the epithelium to cells Epithelial variants HIV been of and epithelial not CCR5 R5, endocervix the X4, and but rectum monolayer. can through selectively shown express the translocate have expressed the Other transcytosis molecules ectocervical foster across also glycosphingolipids the participate; cells vaginal or mucosae by of epithelial also cells epithelium. virus gp120binding epithelial expressed by of transit establish can virus fast. rate barriers The is infection at epithelial to which 30 60 within exposure. been penetrate of SIV minutes the to virus cervicovaginal shown epithelium to has

cells provide dendritic epithelial addition avenue for epithelium. across cells, traverse transcytosis to processes interdigitating the HIV between In ramify direct of an to that the epithelial cells lymphoid up cells complex picked mechanism ferrying T to CD4 by dendritic A transfer cells seems in HIV to tissue. lectin the (CD206), and DCSIGN. viral langerin cells the Ctype binding can as mannose HIV of attach gp120 such receptor by to receptors (CD207), dendritic to of the infectious state. virus days for vacuoles, up into bound portion remain where in A is rapidly taken an can it encounters it In the or carried mucosal cell, tissue virus the way CD4 (Fig. draining being lymphoid environment until in this whether and local stable is to T protected after a susceptible remains 13.32). sites, replication. Finally, T have early to reside sites mucosal cells T be and viral some epithelium CD4 of been the at cells), within shown (intraepithelial CCR5expressing cells can or dendritic HIV CD4 Thus, either infect T T CD4 via interact with cells. directly cells that

dendritic to cells have nodes HIV early into T internalized transfer cells that using lymph is bind migrated to Intraepithelial cells CD4 HIV endosomes Dendritic DC-SIGN HIV

Fig. mucosal by tissue. transporting lymphoid Dendritic from surfaces infection initiate can 13.32 HIV to cells

and by During rapid primarily for there is the virus, lasts (Fig. of CD4 replication weeks the influenzalike typically illness, characterized several of infection, acute in is cells an CCR5expressing phase T which 13.33). This blood the and due circulating abundance to the period T virus CCR5expressing the (viremia) is of by latter an cells, decline marked of the rapid CD4 in primarily

viral (left dendritic panel). to cells of the adheres HiV intraepithelial gp120 surface binding DC-SiGn by to of the HiV transported shown). to access or that cells cells dendritic cells dendritic bind world; (not some also sample subepithelial to it dendritic to directly to injury across is between to the epithelial gains epithelial can cells them external have protruded possibly of cells and sites mucosal at to virions early internalize (center HiV cells migrate and tissue mildly Dendritic panel). lymphoid endosomes acidic into are HiV virions panel). dendritic t cell translocated transferred to cells in the when cell the the a encounters the to t CD4 back (right tissue, cell secondary lymphoid is and surface, HiV

Fig. course untreated typical of The 13.33 HIV. with infection · more first as t-cell starting falls, other μl–1. blood the an become frequent weeks few cells in count typified peripheral about symptoms illness, influenza-like 500 by CD4 at the are acute viral sometimes disease, high then the called titers the virus phase. enters in with of seroconversion disease symptomatic CD4 counts blood. fall When the t-cell controls an follows, 200 immune adaptive response · is the cells μl–1, aiDS. to patient the have below which said t-cell levels CD4 but per are restores in measured cells the CD4 that does clinical and purposes illness not of cells largely for t note eradicate counts virus. acute without the μl–1), · (cells which this treatment. phase, · than rather lasts 5–10 asymptomatic milliliter per (cells years is microliter ml–1), cells the typically in used and book. unit infections elsewhere this Opportunistic

extensive the replicating are GALT in more resistant appear viral and T death dendritic by CD4 that lysis cytopathic virus). effects of (macrophages killed cells cells by to might and GALT gut to rapid in the constituents breakdown translocation cells fostering in production due The of of virus immunecell increased of activation the immune the compound of the depletion microbiota. by barrier the acute viral infection, the of of high. during is preponderance Because R5 during strains phase uninfected time especially of of titers this transmission high and the risk viral contacts to

patients once acute adaptive all Fig. viremia established is (see its reside virtually high an immune in The phase and response 13.33). in Cytolytic detectable for infected HIVinfected (seroconversion). antibodies kill cells antigens viral those become develop and virusspecific and CD8 cells, specific T serum the of early CD4 sharp in resulting drop response The a CTL virus, in a control of of rebound in Tcell and viral counts. of development results titers the a disease of good virus this a to of future set indicator of at usually infection, the referred point, in The progression. that persists is level plasma stage blood as viral disease a asymptomatic, latent, CD4 point, this declining several slowly phase or typically over to and the by years. clinically At transitions marked Tcell viremia numbers, low held is HIVspecific virus it in to During cells the time continues and antibodies. replicate, by but this actively principally CD8 T check,

the longer selective strong antiviral Under brought there immune are response, detected for mutants cells. by adaptive immune selection that pressure is by HIV escape no person gives many population This within infected and as different to viral broader even the a to in variants variation rise a single whole. dominant 50% T cells that infect type the Late in switches CXCR4 via to from variants in approximately of R5 cases, X4 coreceptors. infection, viral rapid in progression a This decline to by AIDS. followed count CD4 Tcell and is viral accelerated which this The T tropism CD4 exact loss in leads shift of to is mechanism unknown. by cells infected under virus pressure appear On an uninfected X4 selective transmission within exerted critical by the of response variants from then, individual. to variants infected disease balance, to contribute progression immune individuals, emerge the the antiviral of for that R5 whereas

to 13-30 infection. CCR5 resistance co-receptor HIV the deficiency A of genetic confers

transmission of for of with of infection HIV Evidence exposure of in come importance the has remain to seronegative. risk HIV1 CCR5 studies high from who a individuals are resistant macrophages HIV. and Lymphocytes HIV cultures people these to from in with inoculated infection homozygous frameshift to discovery deletion these protein. mutation region by HIV and that that nonfunctional leads called of variant they from is of coding to 32basepair individuals The a a for resistance a explained Δ32, a infection truncated are caused by the CCR5 0.09 homozygous). of and mutant the the about is are high 1% 10% are The carriers of at allele Caucasians allele (that is, frequency this of heterozygous population about in Western Africans black been Central from has mutant or Africa. allele in in Japanese not The found or HIV to by deficiency CCR5 to contribute any, of progression rates. a some in appears reduction Whether is against modest, infection protection if but heterozygous it controversial, provides addition gene the with structural to gene, rates region the promoter progression. of CCR5 disease in the variations different been associated have polymorphism of In the of this suggests the CCR5Δ32 HIV incidence a epidemic. variant of in for the Caucasians selection in past pandemic The high allele predating bubonic as smallpox Both unproven. but and yet put agents, as forward plague this have is selective possible been

but immune eliminate does controls response An not HIV. 13-31

HIV but very if Infection the response immune rarely, an ever, contains it. generates with that virus eliminates only levels virus A shown, together Fig. is adaptive to of infectious the in adults various immune HIV timecourse plasma, of the in with in response of elements 13.34. virusmediated in earlier, phase, depletion the CD4 results in in noted cytopathicity a substantial T mucosal was tissues. acute particularly As of cells, recovery Fig. the numbers replication and to transition and There a viral curbs phase Tcell response immune good as disease of develops of is asymptomatic (see the initial 13.33). T of months immunity, maintain CD4 effective the low few However, less after from replication a the in period cells 200 persists, and and, more too than years, (defined 20 AIDS microliter a numbers develops than blood). variable virus CD4 per lasting to as to Tcell fall peripheral factors until longer immune effects, activation immunity: viral and they virus, progressively induces T maintain can destruction cytotoxic ongoing cells cells, deplete indirect) activation CD4 (direct and latent against insufficient that by Several Tcell no HIVinfected the conspire cytopathic directed lymphocytes regeneration of in thymus. to factors turn cells, the initially ultimately T and to the roles in cytotoxic soluble CD4 antibodies, contains the but consider cells, infection HIV fails. CD8 infection section we in mounting response of In that immune this T

from peptides infected cytotoxic viral cells reveal in kill T of cells blood specific cells individuals peripheral can Studies for vitro. infected that T infected period. to before In levels any productively cytotoxic that cells load to are thought quasistable infectious cells containing asymptomatic the viral of characteristic virus vivo, is many released, they of traffic replication, are the kill at sites thereby HIV where CD8 from of control CD8 load. of by comes cytotoxic for the cells to T activity T importance the clinical Evidence relating and viral of studies HIVinfected cells numbers the cells infected with also large control T retrovirusinfected infected from increase T evidence in is followed that antibodies cells animals experiments CD8 with rapidly cells; CD8 SIV that viral macaques by cytotoxic load. There is cells in remove direct monoclonal treatment a of

a by virus, infected of CD8, cytotoxicity In cells addition mediated and of antiviral in recognition variety produced important to CD4, NK cells factors by immunity. are with direct CCL5, and CCL4, binding inhibit CCR5, HIV1 T compete for are engagement at with to competing by R4 and CXCR4. the infection such as CD8 CCL3, released of strains that coreceptor spread strains by virus still R5 factors for bind of Chemokines whereas of with the cells site unknown CCR5, involved may and as spread. be virus also in IFNγ controlling such Cytokines IFNα

that major host to have addition response to being cells in for target HIVinfected cells. also Evidence HIV the shows a T important role in an infection, CD4

Fig. The to 13.34 immune HIV. response infectious during during virus asymptomatic virus of infected is relatively lymphoid present the low levels peripheral is the tissues. at blood in a individuals prolonged persistently replicated phase, in which decline (see Fig. period, t-cell gradually counts this During CD4 virus directed antibodies cytotoxic the high at and CD8 t levels. 13.33), against cells although remain two to antibody core one of the protein different the protein envelope p24. the (env) to and figure, shown HiV, responses one are in and is levels blood. HiV-specific infectious there lymphocytes increase antibody t HiV of progressive in in the the a cytotoxic eventually, (Ctls) decline, and also peripheral

strength found viral An HIV responses and the inverse of antigen proliferative Tcell between to is load. CD4 correlation the Tcell type the addition, of important. In CD4 virus mounted appears effector response against patients viral CD4 with cells activity, an TH1 type whose greater infection load B. in including T is control and IFNγ correlation inverse of of and express acute granzyme production There infection show strong cells AIDS not patients by progress do Moreover, from to CD4 after proliferative responses. antiviral T who long HIV of infected early with responses is acutely individuals treatment CD4 recovery a drugs HIV associated antigens. Finally, with proliferative to antiretroviral in levels in with reduced is persist people viremia. stopped, associated of and some are CD4 If therapy antiretroviral of responses the these continues of ultimately patients and infection in However, immunological these to control infection will the fail. persist control of long infection, HIV and responses then the tropic term. kills for HIV cells If infection are these the explain may inability control the is the the response host them that immune in to Tcell of the CD4 fact essential for

Antibodies are course early proteins HIV cells, ultimately like infection, generated the virus. against of in T unable to the clear are but, response. antibody virus epitopes, a generating As viral under mutants the the the of for selective shows Tcell escape for pressure capacity high antibody aspects CD4positive of (ADCC). antigens block target viral cells (1) or in attachment viral and against envelope important: antibodies gp41 antibodies be infected the neutralizing order to target cytotoxicity and (2) cellular appear gp120 generating for antibodydependent response that entry into generating to cells, Two nonneutralizing months); such of mutants relative the antibodies this buys all (typically CD4 that produced Although the antibodies the nearly eventually period in bind time epitopes a can who the virus escape generate neutralizing inaccessibility before HIVinfected, prolonged for to produced. be hampers coreceptors development and antibodies are neutralizing viral chemokine are of of antibodies, the titers, by viral socalled in found these viral modify generation which established disease. significantly emphasizing antibodies typically multiple that strains, infection is neutralizing Indeed, the those with block broadly high cannot can fact have year extensive before Analyses is effective that neutralizing first HIV the indicate hypermutation to rarely that infection. they induced following antibodies of undergone somatic offering passive vaccine Nevertheless, infections. animals mucosal by effective that that administration might of against HIV could developed HIV, from protect new an the experimental can infection hope prevent some be antibodies

a important and NK late infection contrast replication, early is antibodies, growing of that cytolytic CD8 there In play develop nonneutralizing in in viral in restraining viral antibodies evidence to cells. cells, neutralizing concert infections ADCC that the neutrophils in to by replication in actions modest develop recruit are which role appear macrophages, restraining and with T and ahead however, persist. and rate mutability allows of the the Again, it step a to stay high of virus allow important mutations antibodies, to failure or occur as system longterm HIV in the immune recognition variants escape can the the and that by resulting to are CTLs replicates contain virus The infection. to contributing of molecules nonneutralizing immune I often for found, epitopes—immunodominant or is class epitopes—and and targeted specific response An mutations been in mutations the by neutralizing cells in particular MHC HIV by have immunodominant B have by as presented antibodies. peptides T dominated epitopes have to responsive T the thus epitope, been survive. viruses the found allowing wildtype cells mutant Mutant both wildtype and to peptides to inhibit

progression immune is HIV While ultimately to clear. its response in disease restraining is unsuccessful, the importance the of is course HIV in perinatally, in the best This adults. in with perhaps case is than much infected disease tragic more exemplified children fulminant of whom the of by well that close a that the response neonatal immaturity system infection already system, poor phase immune viral as child. in is has strain the an the reflects a to immune acute This due genetically of infection as immune to evaded to of virus that lack poor a AIDS. the leading phase, results rapidly the to in latent essence, immune of response In

13-32 major reservoir of HIV infection. the Lymphoid is tissue

viral immune the it In response that antiretroviral advent allow to blunt of identify the replication Section is therapies (see and persist. the 1335), HIV infections to of to important ongoing view virus efficiently active, the reservoirs that blood, be are of in load and present of RNA infection in major the terms in HIV appears virions lymphoid Although HIV turnover measured the usually reservoir to the tissue. infected in surface addition in trapped follicular cells of the of dendritic and form is dendritic cells, CD4 in cells, HIV to T centers. Here, the immune on also macrophages, complexes germinal infected These not a longer. are themselves of reservoir months, as infective but act if cells virions that persist can for not may seem latent replicating to are thought major infection. being harbor macrophages without by cells shortlived these it, not able killed and tissue reservoirs HIV to Although be dendritic cells and of are the spreading to cells the However, persistence. tissues, brain, be to other virus’s contribute where infected appear such virus longterm nervous may to in in the important they as central system

antiretroviral virus in productively CD4 it estimated very have can halflife—about from plasma that is studies more T than be cells the that receiving derived days. infected 2 treatment, a From of detected short the of patients 95% that is Virusproducing T are lymphoid cells areas while and thought Tcell of tissues, infection to cells are these found activated being succumb immune to in in CD4 T an the response. become produce CD4 Latently can activated CD4 T that also T to cells by reactivated infected memory antigen virus cells. that other spread cells infected, latently virus. is large or further infectious proviruses, that population a are by do produce infected to of defective not which In addition productively cells latently Unfortunately, infected memory halflife cells months. have mean of 44 CD4 extremely long around an T have over for means that years replication eliminates that clear This drug 70 completely viral administered to the to would be therapy virus. effectively be life. infection, infected HIV and to then, treatment eliminate patients require Practically, for never able will an

the variation alter rate can the Genetic host disease 13-33 progression. of in

pandemic could of It the in course disease the became clear vary early widely. HIV/AIDS the that untreated infections from die while do. or not all to AIDS progress nearly Indeed, individuals and ultimately opportunistic HIVinfected cancer, all do to A progressive to have virus of percentage the seroconvert, small but seem exposed people not disease. other without for counts and Their are antiretroviral therapy. decades competence immune measures CD4 maintained of Tcell in Among represent (undetectable low lowlevel by replication) subgroup, assays, controllers, of longterm circulating ongoing clinical these despite 300 viral levels virus and individuals. have nonprogressors, standard elite infected approximately called one unusually 1 control discover able their being They to intensively infection. are studied to are they how of infection to group consists second A and diseasefree. engage who highrisk in that repeatedly yet behaviors individuals them expose virus remain early progression; action exposed in were virus or such in strains defective unable ever highly to acts progression with an with HIV to plausible ?, effect has direct Although infection infected been l, it infectious aiDS; these late reported truly e, that aiDS evidence is unclear in of individuals, attenuated individuals of prior no support. were whether mechanism acts or O’Brien, From and G.W. nelson, S.J., Nat. : Genet. 36:565–574. with ltd. Reprinted © Publishers from 2004. Macmillan permission

infection. successfully establish to protective of provide In of of factors individuals study is virus host might immune understanding how these control might and what to a better the host interest genetic it considerable response. case, better response as predispose define could any a the insights might that of could provide development It better mechanistic vaccines. guide also

the Although infection of genetic being itself are virus a number impact the growing that variation toward progression of in rate defined infection, of of affect the HIV outcome host can AIDS. gene variants that genomewide and, highly better (Fig. individuals more genetic resistant to of individual accelerating of susceptible sequencing) define variations studies wholegenome example, association (for genetic recently, 13.35). The distinguish variation highthroughput are and tools discovery and (GWAS) exome implementation effectively affecting cases As one of of infection, progression. when is infection that slow allele may mutant CCR5Δ32, a in host Section variation and HIV HIV1 when discussed heterozygous clearest the genetic CCR5, blocks of 1330, AIDS homozygous progression HLA-C particularly another of disease and polymorphisms are Genetic in control. predictors alleles, HLA-B major currently class HLA and HIV in the the are I determining locus, factor in strongest the groove progression. defining Evidence molecules I as GWAS key from to mapped determinants polymorphisms of HLA has class peptidebinding disease the in levels that well as of HLA also are outside peptidebinding the of control molecules, those Polymorphisms noncoding as regions implicated. groove, expression more better rapid prognosis, others, among HLA-B35 whereas The I progression. a are associated alleles are HLA-B57, HLA-B27, with associated class with and HLA-B07 HLA-B13, HLA disease and alleles HLA-B, because and more Homozygosity diverse. (HLA-A, is infection progression, is the with also response associated less rapid HLA HLA-C) I presumably class of Tcell to confers polymorphism that viral HLA-C of 35 one this kb CD8 control associations cells. to to greater immune of strongest singlenucleotide Remarkably, upstream correlates of of the greater being enhanced T due locus; the expression with a presumably levels polymorphism control viral the HLAC—with with presentation increased (SNP) is control peptides NK of 326), alleles the polymorphisms KIR3DS1 on delay immunoglobulinlike of progression (KIRs) certain Section AIDS. in HLA-B, Certain receptors receptor with present cells particular killercell in combination (see to the also the HIV also restriction in and production Mutations implicated as of of such have progression. affect cytokines IFNγ the the been IL10 that

Fig. that in AIDS progression influence to 13.35 Genes humans.

Prevents Acquired B*35-Px CCL5 I64CCR2 of AIDS transition AIDS Accelerates innate escape clearance T-cell epitope AIDS AIDS C CCR5 cell-mediated Interacts CXCR4 Codominant of of ˜32 Dominant class Recessive Homozygous I expression Decreases Delays reduces Decreases Delays In1.1cCCL5 breadth Delays immunity, (E) B*57 P1 HLA CCR5 ModeGene B*27 Effect Accelerates AIDS expression HIV-1 HIV-1 (L) Accelerates Cytokine (?) and CCR5 B, expression with Recessive HLA anti-HIV Defects Recessive Knockout Acquired Allele infection HIV AIDS AIDS Increases Dominant CD8-mediated entry Delays Accelerates Mechanism A, action immunity, recognition CCR5–CXCR4 Impedes of Dominant P. Accelerates jirovecii (L) pneumonia activations (? T-cell Alters 3´ACXCL12 response infection Dominant immune Enhances )E3KCXCR6 Stimulates (? cells AIDS HIV+, (E) Delays HLA-Bw4 Clears –179TIFNG (?) Dominant HLA– Accelerates AIDS Epistatic with )H7CCL2-CCL7-CCL11 to The a available HIV to Accelerates to Limits infuence 5´AIL10 destruction AIDS of Dominant Dominant function as increased susceptibility infection result Delays eventually AIDS IL-10 immune progression infection leads opportunistic Genes Decreases of and death. infection AIDS 13-34 CCR5 (L) lymphoma to expression 3DS1KIR3DS1 Decreases that Prevents

opportunistic immunity microbes infections cellmediated variety below When appear a with is numbers decline (Fig. a level, Tcell critical lost, of CD4 and 13.36). and thrush (oral Typically, candidiasis) resistance oral early tuberculosis, is species Candida which cause to to M. tuberculosis, respectively. lost and HHV8). herpesvirus and that herpesvirus a zoster), Later, latent Kaposi patients cytokines probably the herpes Kaposi Bcell response infection endothelial cells a from or to (KSHV, sarcomaassociated in a aggressive of (caused called by of activation produced shingles from and from sarcoma, from tumor the both lymphomas, EBVinduced suffer results introduced. opportunistic was pneumonia has effective therapy Since P. by antifungal caused most it AIDS, before (previously P. fatal was jirovecii been typically the carinii) called the of earliest common infection; recognition of hepatitis and rapid C hepatitis. associated more with by common progression is Coinfection virus or Mycobacterium the member a with final of bacteria of more the stages group infection avium cytomegalovirus is of prominent. In AIDS, infections It of are tumors all note important not to still AIDS get significant. all but less these prominent patients there are is tumors, that that with and other infections or and common lists tumors, Tcell infections count and CD4 the controlled zero. Figure most until are drops opportunistic which toward 13.36 typically the

the most of jirovecii death P. in are mycobacteria. and infection prominent cause being infections major respiratory with aiDS, the by defense effective of activation most Host or these cytotoxic t pathogens t cells macrophage effective against CD4 cells. requires disease such in Opportunistic in cause severe pathogens patients. are but as patients normal present hosts, immunocompromised environment, cancer aiDS primarily and the various such the suggesting [associated with rare Kaposi cells (see patients can are also and tumors Chapter 16). sarcoma human lymphomas, as t normally several herpesvirus aiDS cancers, causative (HHV8)] susceptible surveillance to such herpesviruses that of immune by 8 prevent

block in cells. of virus infectious an 13-35 in rapid increase lead T CD4 decrease that replication to titer a and Drugs HIV

is indicate all phases rapidly drugs block that asymptomatic cating of virus HIV the the replication infection, including that phase. repli at Studies with

particular replication. of have at proteins aimed viral in drugs arrest been Three the ing target viral insertion synthesis provirus viral host which viral produce virion integrase, which of viral of genome; These polyproteins enzymes. viral viral the into to is and the the are reverse for cleaves protease, which is transcriptase, and viral for required provirus; required proteins was analogs first such nucleoside inhibited United licensed antiHIV drug in by the to tran is which scriptase the as Reverse zidovudine (AZT), be States. reverse and Inhibitors of integrase, of protease uninfected transcriptase, prevent infection

antiretroviral patient Therapy of (% drugs days) with

Fig. antiretroviral infection therapy. introduction with in advanced with of the combination United 13.37 in mortality parallel patients fell States The HIV the drug of calendar deaths, as each expressed the per quarter number the person-years. 100 the graph shows deaths of based F. from data Figure Palella. on

Fig. the drug during time-course treatment. circulating of of in reduction 13.38 The blood HIV reversetranscriptase periods and by particles combinations production inhibitors. arrested using HiV inhibitors can viral of of for protease prolonged be new the treatment is virus cells infected the such are no initiation new production treatment, and die infected. the after of cells curtailed as virus phases. decay of three occurs the in half-life transcriptase phase cells new once are and CD4 are provirus weeks, that particles, 2 not does cells; is is productively the already the late half-life during the reverse viral very declines at being virions protease can integrase the t released. protease virus reflecting acts of of produce half-life the while phase from inhibition the a days, make of the first virus in established, lasts time step needed not to and viral virus, cells; about which to maturation about this production because, (t1/2) prevent continue 2 infected infected are all by further in cycles is blocked, prevented. released However, of virions cases, and replication therefore infection

United of protease in therapy morbidity and analogs, States reduced cocktail 13.37). and mortality the patients advanced (HAART), and a viral (Fig. between with combination inhibitors of active highly HIV nucleoside also known The introduction dramatically therapy as 1995 infection with antiretroviral 1997 in levels of limit close and plasma) RNA per ml viremia, show patients to (Fig. of reduction treated long eventually with dramatic in a of HIV a copies period maintaining rapid detection (50 HAART the for Many 13.38). the It HAART. are after how circulation from unclear particles the is the so of virus rapidly removed initiation cells specific removed opsonized phagocyte most of mononuclear that antibody the by and seems and are complement system. by they likely It in lymphoid may the follicles particles cells. on HIV dendritic follicular be trapped of Opsonized surface also

also cells, many steady CD4 increase the compartments the in a system of slow despite remain that HAART but other by T compromised. is immune fact accompanied recovery have in established the numbers. Three mechanisms Tcell complementary been CD4 for into a of cells treatment as onset die. at infected that redistribution as the viral tissues memory is lymphocytes replication were productively circulation the lymphoid from of first The T the CD4 the more half-life during phase. hours, decrease plasma first is of has of and rapidly circulation, from levels this 6 in 95% in is virus cleared Released virus there where a it a than the now about lasts months; about has for half-life 6 of phase 2 virus weeks. a second the stimulated divide During this infection. productive macrophages phase, from and from cells t infected virus released CD4 and develop infected latently to resting, is infection. reservoirs t of thought then of from in a length and there the is phase that that other integrated is unknown it third memory cells long-lived reactivation provirus results of years. cells might for remain infected this of reservoir present many latently impossible is phase viral of in below plasma Measurement detectable present decay this of are levels at because viral levels (dotted line). courtesy treatment of on Months G.M. Data Shaw.

starting this within of weeks occurs controlled; is treatment. immune with T by is second of infection reduced of cytotoxic in controlled; infected associated HIV activation the The lymphocytes. is this killing reduction abnormal T a cells is levels CD4 as The presence circles which emergence (TRECs) cells by new by from thymus, Section cells indicated naive slower Tcell (see third much of is in these caused laterarriving is the of receptor excision and 59). the is T the

thereby at those Although all greatly and HIV to progression AIDS is HAART stores. is decreasing infected, effective preventing viral inhibiting eradicating ineffective it at the transmission by replication, rapid leads of virus Cessation a HAART that patients indefinitely. so multiplication, require of to therefore rebound treatment (Fig. other investigation high This, stimulated coupled of have viral replication into targets the sideeffects HAART, to with block and cost of permanently. viral eliminating well infection as eradicate 13.39) ways reservoirs as to which fusion by gp120 which drugs CCR5 entry host insertion or binding classes antiHIV of inhibitors, of integrase viral block viral inhibitors, the of viral block and include New the reversetranscribed genome viral DNA. block inhibiting replication gp41; into to the the Another and under including HIV APOBEC development of restriction TRIM activity (see enhance factors, is to 1327) approach the 5α. Section after preventing destroy and TRIM uncoating it newly enters of replicative viral release mutation cells. cDNA causes targeting capacity, and formed and APOBEC extensive nucleocapsid RNA HIV1 5α to and limits of the viral the by infections coding its HIV

Given the HAART success greatest blocking the to of active infected viral latently of cells purge the become cure. of barrier in replication, inability a to reservoirs existing has therapies latently viral to of cells. measures being combination with immune replication enhance clearance strategies infected virus this, in infected in considered and induce would To cells overcome that are latent IL2, of that deacetylase activate target Examples of that the activate TNFα), such replication example, use as the provirus. virus or can ways inhibitors, (HDAC) transcription latent administration (for to epigenetic IL6, include activate agents modifiers, that viral of histone and cytokines and using HAART reduction that agents has shown that significant load in no latent viral from alone. gained target date, a trial over To reservoirs clinical however, viral activation provirus replication activation. of so stochastic, viral activate cellular the harboring of cells immune replication latently to given that recently intrinsically in viral cells fail latent was will that in many discovered is any Indeed, cycle it infected cells latently of This virus represent aimed avoid to can out’ barrier of elimination eliminated. formidable to latent that strategies could ‘flushing infected be a at so it adaptation HIV

Viral inhibitors entry inhibitors. assembly inhibitors integrase Virus Protease transcriptase inhibitors Reverse Viral into analogs viral viral cDNA Nucleoside transcription non-nucleoside RNA interrupt of analogs and

Fig. for and infectious targets budding HIV life Possible of the virions. interference 3.39 with drugs only that as yet, inhibit cycle. transcriptase have in by therapeutic drugs at be developed. attacked action HiV could and reverse been principle, protease the Combination by using cellular drugs viral Rna, a single multiple different therapy into effective cycle: transcription reverse integrase, than points more using life drug. viral Dna cDna kinds viral of of insertion virus entry, of its is in viral of the cleavage and by polyproteins assembly protease, viral

for who for HIV Berlin Berlin highlighted hematopoietic to underwent (hence strategy a been in patient stemcell of treatment patient). the single (HSCT) in cure referred as alternative leukemia has An transplantation a donor using cells to was was mutation, patient CCR5Δ32 coreceptor By propagation. who for viral reconstituted resistant homozygous immune the stemcell with the leukemia) Tcell and counts The found rebounded (or any he was patient’s following of of to posttransplant. evidence of HIV therapy free CD4 infection cessation be antiretroviral infection. has so that he than suggesting for cured has 5 years, remained He more been of and number infected the practical individuals rarity complications In population of never cure of level. of this be the HSCT, approach will a CCR5deletant large the for risk at view of worldwide, with donors, HLAmatched Moreover, risk a there viral CXCR4tropic reinfection variants. of progression is or by posttransplant combined reservoir leukemia) or therapymediated (in permanent This case that with interventions— might of eradication inductive therapy genetic does, achieve for latency of blockade this a outcome a dramatically cure. establish replication—whether chemoirradiation however, viral by by

course accumulates variants. the the HIV result can in of 13-36 many drug-resistant In mutations, infection outgrowth of which

with substitutions a 1010 generation per 109 course approximately of rate is generation of nucleotide 3 cycle rapid the the of of of single thus per of of day. virions a replication with to replication, in HIV, mutation 10–5 coupled variants leads the a and many day, × every HIV infected The in patient to rate system. arises immune errorprone challenge retroviral poses This and from the to nature replication the formidable mutation of a high of fidelity. relatively cellular lacks Reverse with are DNA transcriptase the copied polymerases, RNA of proofreading genomes DNA retroviruses into and low the mechanisms quasispecies, Thus, variants a an infected established HIV, within called primary typically rapidly although infection develop of virus, is individual. by founder numerous single since all and in common lentiviruses. to has to recognized This HIV first proved phenomenon be was

as resistance its drugs, mutants HIV variability, Tcell a rapidly much Section 1331). develops to (see As it of consequence develops evade high antiviral recognition escape that mutations resistance regained. confer variants levels previous administered, emerge multiply When virus until of is with that and are the drug viral requires and only Resistance few after mutation to appears inhibitors protease (Fig. days some only a viral a single time. 13.40); develops short reverse to transcriptase in similarly of resistance a some inhibitors transcriptase. as reverse to requires it resistance analog nucleoside four to develop, the or three months viral contrast, in zidovudine In mutations takes the where appearance typically resistance depended of rapid relatively Because of antiHIV the treatment successful on combination has drug therapy, drugs, to

Fig. 13.40 of Resistance to develops protease rapidly. inhibitors HIV HiV drug with of a the protease about Rna, a of plasma single days half-life a (top precipitous is patient after to administration levels with of in fall a viral panel). 2 there inhibitor rise the number by an (center cells initial is this t of in blood peripheral in CD4 panel). accompanied and blood Within be mutant plasma drug, panel) days (bottom of can in peripheral drug-resistant the lymphocytes. in starting detected variants as treatment, HiV levels levels, have levels Rna of the of returned plasma is after pre-drug lymphocyte only and present and mutant. their weeks 4 viral CD4 drug-resistant to original 100%

simultaneous the chance resistance of multiple nil. HIV mutations virtually in is proteins of treatment. newer low proven antiretroviral onset loads has viral Nevertheless, generation the effective monotherapy at agents patients with in with

attractive 13-37 is against many Vaccination but poses HIV an solution difficulties.

the effective safe natural remains HIV a ultimate of restraining Although the transmission infection HIV AIDS rates and replication vaccine history has goal. the effectiveness in and prevention of of the infection, altered profoundly and for HAART HIV to effective block responses, and Ideally, (that would neutralizing Tcell an prevent effective entry is, cytolytic both HIV respectively. and into that both antibodies target antigp120) vaccine elicit cells control viral infection, broadly attainment developed, yet in is not vaccine fraught and been However, of been the development faced difficulties have diseases. its such that against with has other no vaccines

and the adaptive undermines infection problem CD4 cell—and antibody that Tcell in itself, the virus sustained of featuring of infection nature the extremely main that component directly T the face to cytotoxic and responses. of rapidly cause a is immunity—the mutates strong The central proliferates progression prevent to immune infected, AIDS, would that be to initial The development that of have responses as been has already vaccines patients vaccines to considered, could and boost prevent infection. administered prophylactic difficult. would extremely those vaccination be already therapeutic The development in of infected that and cells. in selective proliferation the in recognition antibodies evolves by escape section, cytotoxic discussed HIV individual the patients As of T previous viruses mutant by a been from prevent provirus of invisible once an virus transcriptionally to infection silent in an person has clearing established. ability persist might even also The system to the latent the immune it form as immunized

been There more vaccination for prophylactic prevent to infection. new has hope of population—remain of HIV normal the human in lack But strains currently protection of thousands infected strains population—there the different are among diversity even immune sheer circulating scale in here, HIV challenges. and the significant of response the sequence the also simultaneously two infect one related strains, and where closely strains not seem superinfection, described. have do cell, resistant of virus infected cases of Patients the be to strain to been same with envelope broadly the intrinsic by antibodies This HIV compounded is (see 1331). Section neutralizing against generating glycoproteins in difficulty protective might Further, uncertainty immunity take. remains form to over what there HIV responses that which induction best will protective of provide to felt induce now antibody both immunity, required It remain is might Tcell undefined. epitopes although the and targets effective to them and achieve how be best design of failed. years, the conception of been and Finally, rate vaccines slowing trials date, clinical of major to vaccine trials against takes time to those the performance have have progress; to few HIV complete clinical from completed,

this yet hope and been However, made successful there might has pessimistic background, that remains progress developed. vaccines be against viral proteins, among an of delivery genes tried Section DNA to HIV, in 1630), HIV or of varying in strategies vaccination HIV with vectors, combinations thereof. plasmid against are HIV develop vaccines attempt Various genes delivery being (see recombinant virus, against an which live raises cause Many vaccines contain the (see diseases not but attenuated response does of a successful disease viral 1623). immune other Section strain and against lead development a There vaccine would attenuated least in between that of recombination strains reversion vaccines not live are viruses worry to HIV, difficulties wildtype the virulence. of substantial to the viruses, alternative such is against elicit adenovirus, to An vaccinia HIV HIV as use the that approach other Band responses antigens. genes and deliver Tcell express or of in already other trials. vectors safety demonstrated been initial human have for studies, Because these vaccination they choices obvious have viral recombinant with gp120. this been approach albeit Recently, encouraging, with type there of boosts has using success combination in limited, recipients. by of vaccine was followed Delivery reduce boosts a vector highrisk viral env to infection with and shown gp120 of but number the pol, of canarypox HIV HIV risk gag, significant in genes a via modest to degree a HIV any This trial the demonstration vaccine of in efficacy first represents large date. of of indicating important, antibodies example, the data might ADCC of provided isotype) protection. that provide from as that correlated insights (for the this that IgG3 elicit protection, response into non type with neutralizing immune study induction Perhaps elicit, have against this be antibodies to encouragement HIV neutralizing required. they difficult proven might not Because provides so that vector genes induced. a showed (CMV) responses rhesus CTL monkeys were that study SIV cytomegalovirus a to that potent to Further, used deliver about strain, result clearance its did in after not vaccinated responses infection virus SIV these the Although did half by of spread. of monkeys in pathogenic systemic CTL they a prevent effective achieved for an elicited, the case by alone. type that vaccination—might Tcell amplitude antigens antiviral the response that viral response after CD8 prolonged for Tcell unprecedented in the HIV be vector might a role suggests of periods delivery play protection important of this and This genes—in HIV and produces an result used vector in neutralizing vaccines the will even of whether might that Additional appropriate CD8 to elicit Tcell antibodies achieve non determine antibodies. studies and robust responses absence combination be the needed protection neutralizing

effective to the developing vaccines, issues. difficult there to HIV addition are In biological obstacles ethical same It conduct the population unethical at to the a trying minimize the trial time exposure to itself. to virus a without vaccinated would be of vaccine virus The to the whether a assess in can, vaccination to vaccine of however, effectiveness only rate be population high is against which in the a assessed protects enough infection. exposure spread means incidence the that conducted infection the This to might very and vaccine in be is public succeeded in not yet have where trials high reducing health have countries of of measures HIV. initial

13-38 the are AIDS. of HIV and important spread controlling in and education Prevention

The exposure. can infected risk HIV but be by already those who for if are are at prevented and taken precautions those spread of uninfected major a blocking body its viral to in advent The people represents advance due titers HIV the fluids. HAART infected from of transmission reduce greatly to ability in of HAART, requires it to are they of that are those as lifelong do have expensive and is unaware access infected infected carry HIV with not and However, treatment, virus. many who the most can the others. to those is so they avoid access screening HAART critical passing Even at unavailable, to measures risk take to virus those inform regular is for where to infected requires turn, mutual strict trust. This, and in confidentiality HIV individuals one test out the by especially to whether to a of is they control infected, of the reluctance stigmatization society. consequences as of of positive A HIV find barrier is are guidance can component an of becomes education the Here, the transmission to to how and remove the important of on virus both strategy, prevention be prevented. stigma provide

are from blood can be who Precautions that by or blood, to and semen, against relatively involve products, individuals people inexpensive contact such protect fluids, as measures body are with taken infected. uninfected milk, by as to that AIDS without this prevent has or is for It care healthcare sufficient exemplified signs patients for demonstrated infection. been who repeatedly periods of long infection, workers seroconversion The mothers transmission, greatly as reduces newborns. condoms risk from breastfeeding of infected the routine does by HIV of use restraint of major foreskin as Male also males. circumcision reduces site transmission uncircumcised the in viral of is a entry rates, in show that been the microbicidal have which products of recent promise that led suppositories, to or measures Additional have trials. considered use gels include improvements in example, herpes) transmission. of HIV risk that increase other reduce (for the these diseases genital also transmission agents of of the can Some sexually transmitted risk PrEP), prophylactic for administered is to are the contracting individuals which to there HIV. Finally, at orally interest in or use high prophylaxis, drugs topically either as of or preexposure increasing (referred antiretroviral combined date, reverse shown daily efficacy in drugs have To reduction inhibitors orally two HIV in both infection. of over the risk taken 90% use transcriptase of has and demonstrated trials, use hospital of of therapy by exposed example, in the immediately reduces antiretroviral risk workers HIV. Moreover, contaminated needlestick—substantially to blood accidental acquiring postexposure—for One resistance on developing who in risk in with adherence PrEP, concern regimen. dosing those individuals poor the of the HIV do this is while to with approach particularly contract drug Although an significance established, it risk of the yet issue. this be has to remains PrEP poor longacting promise. formulations testing the of additional risk reduce areas that strategies on Nevertheless, antiretrovirals of of considerable based or compliance represents new of

Summary.

virus (HIV) (AIDS). acquired immune of is the syndrome cause deficiency human the with immunodeficiency Infection HIV continues have in in spread, curbing the been countries. through epidemic of substantial of Although worldwide spread made, to lessdeveloped contact heterosexual this especially gains rate enveloped an of the retrovirus system. cells replicates that is immune in HIV on found Viral the transcription and the requires T activated in a entry particular receptor, factors chemokine cycle is cells. CD4 and viral of dependent presence rapidly not a responses HIV viremia an by CD4 is Tcell but acute cells immune develop, Infection causes T cytotoxic subsides infection and with HIV as eliminated of that loss response. this cells. establishes state a of which infected continually is in virus persistent newly replicating in HIV infection the a and virus a and increase consists in of cause drugs CD4 antiviral Current combinations treatment block that in slow of decrease replication viral counts. levels rapid Tcell of cytopathic effects is and main the effect HIV destruction the infection through of which The cells, T CD8 HIV by cells. of CD4 occurs cytotoxic through killing T infection direct wane, to As infection. progressively becomes susceptible more opportunistic the body counts CD4 Tcell Eventually, healthy many AIDS however, years die; and for most ill infection. individuals apparent socalled HIVinfected effects untreated longterm develop of nonprogressors, minority, with no a remain small infection able hope these HIV learn people We how controlled. to be from can to be with immunized gives against effective possible be vaccines others have these The hope infection, to develop that existence to seem HIV. naturally of will it and people, who been of against

Chapter 13. Summary to

persistent, cause sometimes immune Whereas elicit have partly successful resisting least can infections developed means protective some serious, at response the and pathogens disease. most of immunity, making infectious to different system, agents. inherited classes deficiencies of Some components the highly in individuals susceptible them of have immune certain host immunological innate adaptive present inherited and and immunodeficiency in research. and the challenges of illustrate defense, for ongoing immunity infections effective importance diseases Persistent of a the (AIDS), The patient. virus that leads persistent in with to is characteristics human which ability acquired immune the usually human host, lethal immunodeficiency immunodeficiency create a combines slowly combination the infectious deficiency (HIV), to to its agent syndrome and role properties understanding to combating new pathogens system infection. such the basic in HIV The of fighting our its is as immune key to increase the of

Questions.

gene Matching: 13.1 defects with the immunodeficiency. associated primary Match the following

(tH17) the tuberculosis True to the encoding M. as responses in individuals such or but are subunit 3 p40 13.2 il-12 False: that type tH1 with a only not response, genes are require pathogens affected. also susceptible mutations

that t defects genetic defect CD8+ one cells cells of leads Answer: of the Short preserved, cells that with t CD4+ cells to t to two with preserved. the and absence absence CD8+ t CD4+ lead genetic 13.3 name

deficiency. 13.4 impaired in aiD t-cell Both Answer: and aiD deficiency hyper-igM deficiency syndrome, but severely cause in CD40l Short deficiency preserved function CD40l is and Why?

(CViD) or variable impairs Common and False: True severely 13.5 both antibody immunodeficiency t-cell responses.

autoinflammatory disorders autoimmune not Which have 13.6 hereditary Multiple Choice: phenotype? an following immune or of does the

in (aPeCeD), autoimmune defects caused dystrophy by A. polyendocrinopathy-candidiasisectodermal

fever Mediterranean mutations B. Familial by caused (FMF), pyrin

mutations Ommen caused or hypomorphic C. RAG2 by RAG1 syndrome,

Wiskott–aldrich caused deficiency syndrome D. by WaS (WaS),

Stat3 Hyper-ige caused syndrome mutations called by or DOCK8 syndrome), Job’s E. (also

bacteria production are Multiple Pyogenic species of capsules macrophages by and disease reactive Choice: F. 13.7 (CGD), Chronic on in by recognition oxygen neutrophils. caused polysaccharide against by phagocytes receptors granulomatous protected bacteria. utilized to these antibody-dependent opsonization one and mechanisms is destroy phagocytes the of ingest by Which infection immune deficiencies of a or by controls directly which these affects diseases by the system following the mechanism pathogens?

deficiency A. p40 il-12

B. Defects in AIRE

deficiency C. WaSp

encodes Defects in gene to Defects defects ELA2, a Choice: similar C3 genes neutrophil D. which the Multiple of in the phenotype elastase? have in that 13.8 following

A. GFI1

C. DaF) B. CD55 CD59 (encodes

associated Which of by the Match system each 13.9 antigenic following Multiple the pathogens 13.10 XIAP evade(s) the protein variation? Choice: Matching: to D. primarily immune

a influenza A. virus

B. simplex Herpes virus-1

C. Cytomegalovirus

D. brucei Trypanosoma

falciparum Plasmodium E.

produces (HiV) virus F. immunoevasins. immunodeficiency Human various Hepatitis virus B 13.11 t-cell pleiotropic of these, One of and CD8+ is target responses. nef, exceptionally major a of following of the functions of Which nef? is the not one

A. factor SaMHD1 of the inhibition restriction

downregulation i B. class MHC

General references.

and Koszinowski, Alcami, A., U.H. : mechanisms Viral of evasion. immune Immunol. 21:447–455. 2000, Today

D., the public E.: continent: health Marum, on and Mbori-Ngacha, Africa De in Shadow K.M., century. 21st and HIV/AIDS in Cock, the 2002, Lancet 360:67–72.

of Anti-immunology: McFadden, bacterial and B.B., and G.: host Finlay, pathogens. evasion by system the viral immune 2006, 124:767–782. Cell

Hill, A.V. human The immunogenetics diseases. of infectious : Annu. Rev. Immunol. 1998, 16:593–617.

Lederberg, history. Infectious J.: 2000, Science 288:287–293.

L.D. Notarangelo, : immunodeficiencies. Primary J. Clin. Allergy Immunol. 2010, 125:S182–S194.

A.J. Xu, and McMichael, G.R., X.N., Screaton, counterattack. resistance, and : Virus escape, infections: Immunity 2001, 15:867–870.

Section references.

13-1 of repeated A a history immunodeficiency. of suggests infections diagnosis

A.: microbes: Immunity immunodeficiencies. to from primary Coutinho, Carneiro-Sampaio, lessons and M., Infect. Immun. 2007, 75:1545–1555.

Cunningham-Rundles, C., and P.P. Ponda, in Molecular defects Tand B-cell primary immunodeficiency : diseases. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2005, 5:880–892.

C. CD4 downregulation

D. ii class downregulation MHC

virus is classified as because activation contains is Fill-in-the-Blanks: it ____________ a that Human immunodeficiency t-cell (HiV) retrovirus E. such Sustaining a enzyme. 13.12 the infects host cells it or either receptor and envelope via to the co-receptor. _______ binding ________ its _______ __________. antibodies, infected, When becomes a anti-HiV an they production immune called response the that individual of an in mount process results evade are but acquire generated, t-cell by can CD8+ Ctls. responses these to ________ HiV that it allow recognition also

to following HiV not to Which Choice: susceptibility a is Multiple the variant protections infection reduces or aiDS? genetic that 13.13 of slows

CCR5 Mutant allele A.

CXCR4 allele B. Mutant

class C. alleles i Certain Hla

alleles are Hla-B Primary 13-2 by gene certain KiR3DS1 defects. immunodeficiency with caused inherited D. diseases Possessing

S.R., Trede, Mahlaoui, A., N., Byun, S., B., Turner, Ellis, al. M., A., N., Brebner, Itan, Patin, et Y., E., Bolze, Abhyankar, SA haploinsufficiency protein : in isolated congenital humans with asplenia. Ribosomal Science 340:976–978. 2013,

and Ponda, C., Cunningham-Rundles, P.P. Molecular Tand B-cell immunodeficiency : primary defects diseases. in Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2005, 5:880–892.

F.A., of for mouse knockouts. Oettgen, diseases: Bonilla, F.: involved Searching Kokron, from in Pandolfi, lessons Geha, and primary the N., immunodeficiency pathogenesis R.S., Ramesh, genes H.C., C.M., J. Clin. Immunol. 1997, 17:109–126.

M., Elliott, Bojilova, M., Koss, Saggese, Brendolan, Boisson, A., Solloway, D.A., T.D., E., O.W.J., Bolze, al. Prall, et Capellini, M., B., A., : in mice asplenia module. mutations Congenital a and Pbx/Nkx2-5/p15 with in humans Dev. Cell 2012, 22:913–926.

L.D. Notarangelo, Marodi, L., and : and new immunodeficiencies. of Immunological bases primary genetic Nat. Rev. Immunol. 7:851–861. 2007,

Defects development result in T-cell in immunodeficiencies. can combined 13-3 severe

Schiff, Harville, Puck, Roberts, S.E., Buckley, R.H., and M.L., Schiff, J.M. J.L., Markert, Williams, R.I., L.W., T.O., : immunodeficiency: genetic, infants. severe eight and phenotypic, diversity hundred functional one in combined Human J. Pediatr. 1997, 130:378–387.

W.J. Leonard, severe deficiency. combined development B-cell basis molecular of in The linked result immuno-13-8 Defects : antibody in deficiencies in X Annu. Rev. Med. 47:229–239. 1996,

Leonard, W.J. and diseases. : immunodeficiency Cytokines Nat. Rev. Immunol. 1:200–208. 2001,

Le V., Donadieu, clinical Deist, Saint-Basile, Stephan, outcome presentation retrospective F., and Blanche, of A.: Griscelli, single-center immunodeficiency: 117 Severe J., Durandy, De J.L., Fischer, patients. S., and in Vlekova, study G., a A., C., combined J. Pediatr. 1993, 123:564–572.

the be purine defects salvage due 13-4 pathway. to in SCID also can

Adenosine basis Hirschhorn, recent R.: deaminase molecular deficiency: and developments. Clin. Immunol. Immunopathol. 76:S219–S227. 1995,

SCID. Defects receptor 13-5 can antigen gene in in rearrangement result

SCID The and definition, and characterization, M.J., mutant: uses. A.M.: mouse Carroll, potential Bosma, Annu. Rev. Immunol. 9:323–350. 1991,

Fugmann, S.D. breaking the seal. DNA repair: : Nature 416:691–694. 2002,

P.A. Jeggo, A.J., Gennery, A.R., Cant, and Immunodeficiency : associated DNA with repair defects. Clin. Exp. Immunol. 121:1–7. 2000,

Y., de Callebaut, R., Corneo, D., O., F., Tezcan, I., Bertrand, Deist, N., Chasseval, Sanal, et Moshous, Cavazzana-Calvo, I., B., M., Philippe, al. Le break a : novel double-strand in combined recombination protein, is severe immune DNA mutated Artemis, deficiency. human repair/V(D)J 2001, Cell 105:177–186.

antigen from T-cell receptors can cause signaling 13-6 Defects in severe immunodeficiency.

R.S., Good, Chatila, R.A., and E., R., Pahwa, T.A. Geha, Castigli, lymphokine : severe of combined multiple a with immunodeficiency. Molecular basis deficiency patient a in Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 90:4728–4732. USA 1993,

L.I., Poyhonen, M., Varkila, T., K., J.T., Yoo, K., C., Uhari, Heikinheimo, Klemola, Pingel, M., M., Kung, Rogers, et al. Vuopala, M., in tyrosine CD45 a : gene with combined immunodeficiency child Mutations disease. the phosphatase in severe Nat. Med. 2000, 6:343–345.

interleukin-7R and N.: D., partial T-cell sufficient Zhang, α J., development severe immunodeficiency. A is abrogate to combined deficiency and Chitayat, Sharfe, Roifman, cause of C.M., 2000, 96:2803–2807. Blood

block development in that T-cell thymic Genetic result immunodeficiencies. 13-7 severe function in defects

and Coffer, P.J., B.M. Burgering, : role the Forkhead-box factors and in transcription their immune system. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 4:889–899. 2004,

in immunodeficiency production R.J., syndrome a 2 and interleukin C.A., J.P., disease combined Small,T.N., Nicols, of cells. O’Reilly, with N.: Flomenberg, Absence Keever, T severe G.L., DiSanto, J. Exp. Med. 1990, 171:1697–1704.

atypical cells. A., Basile, Varsat, γ Fischer, chain J.P., Dautry in X and F., G.: 2 interleukin with immunodeficiency A., chromosome-linked receptor Rieux human Laucat, Saint combined T de DiSanto, an Defective peripheral severe Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 1994, USA 91:9466–9470.

and Moins-Teisserenc, syndrome. TAP V.: H.T., Cerundolo, J., Gadola, deficiency Gross, W.L., Trowsdale, S.D., Clin. Exp. Immunol. 121:173–178. 2000,

T., Gaspar, Kinnon, Gilmour, and H., E.G., Cranston, Davies, H.B. Fujii, K.C., C., of β combined killer form leads subunit of expression : interleukin-2/interleukin-15 receptor severe a immunodeficiency. cell-deficient Defective to natural the Blood 98:877–879. 2001,

Glimcher, L.H. Grusby, and M.J., : mice. II-deficient Immune responses in MHC class Annu. Rev. Immunol. 1995, 13:417–435.

immunologic C., Gaetaniello, and the transplantation. mouse equivalent evaluation Masci, bone Human after Nude/SCID marrow phenotype: J., A., A.M., Racioppi, longterm reconstitution of of Christiano, L., Pignata, Frank, L.: E., Matrecano, 97:880–885. 2001, Blood

W., complex gene Steimle, histocompatibility regulation. Reith, Mach, and II class V., of Major a B.: disease deficiency: Adv. Immunol. 1996, 61:327–340.

that viruses. cause bacteria inability extracellular to and production clear an some

Bruton, O.C. Agammaglobulinemia. : Pediatrics 9:722–728. 1952,

Conley, M.E. do know? Genetics : what we hypogammaglobulinemia: of really Curr. Opin. Immunol. 2009, 21:466–471.

Yap, Gale, and R.P., M.L., P.L. Lee, deficiency. to : infections treat with Use of in immunoglobulin prevent or persons intravenous immune Annu. Rev. Med. 1997, 48:93–102.

L.D. Notarangelo, caused defects kinases. : genetic by in protein Immunodeficiencies Curr. Opin. Immunol. 8:448–453. 1996,

Hanson, and deficiency. Preud’homme, J.L., L.A.: IgG subclass Immunodefic. Rev. 1990, 2:129–149.

function to abnormal lead by deficiencies or 13-9 T-cell responses. B-cell in can that antibody be Immune and caused activation defects

P.D., and M.D. Cooper, Burrows, IgA : deficiency. Adv. Immunol. 1997, 65:245–276.

Smahi, Durandy, Doffinger, S., Feinberg, Bodemer, Kenwrick, et S., Dupuis-Girod, Geissmann, J., C., R., C., F., Bessia, S., A., A., Blanche, al. impaired by ectodermal caused : anhidrotic is NF-κB with immunodeficiency X-linked signaling. dysplasia Nat. Genet. 27:277–285. 2001,

Durandy, defects in genetic Honjo, class-switch syndromes). Human and recombination A., (hyper-IgM T.: Curr. Opin. Immunol. 2001, 13:543–548.

M.A., Badolato, R., M., Marconi, Ferrari, Insalaco, Giliani, et S., A., Loubser, M., Ugazio, Avanzini, al. Ghonaium, S., Al A., A.R., A.G., Soresina, of CD40 hyper with autosomal gene cause : recessive of form Mutations an immunodeficiency IgM. Proc. Acad. Natl Sci. USA 2001, 98:12614–12619.

Craig, M.H., Sheehy, Harris, Malim, Neuberger, R.S., M.S. and A.M., H.M., a defense just but : antibody trigger retroviruses. also mechanism for a deamination: against not DNA diversification for Nat. Immunol. 4:641–643. 2003,

Y.: Hyper-IgE Minegishi, syndrome. Curr. Opin. Immunol. 2009, 21:487–492.

J.T., and Park, J.B., R.S. Abraham, Li, Hagan, D.E., M.A., Maddox, new : a Common immunodeficiency: variable look an disease. old at 372:489–503. 2008, Lancet

Thrasher, Burns, S.O. and A.J., : immunological multitasker. key a WASP: Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2010, 10:182–192.

deficiency. Yel, L.: IgA Selective Clin. J. Immunol. 30:10–16. 2010,

role common antibody Grimbacher, The costimulation ICOS P.F., B.: of and and U., deficiencies: in Salzer, Yong, immunodeficiency. variable Immunol. Rev. 229:101–113. 2009,

pinpointed by of genetic 1/TH1 to type pathways type central 3/TH17 responses. cytokine and are deficiencies

S.K. Browne, autoantibody-associated Anticytokine immunodeficiency. : Annu. Rev. Immunol. 32:635–657. 2014,

to of model. Casanova, J.L., Genetic Abel, human L.: mycobacteria: and the dissection immunity Annu. Rev. Immunol. 20:581–620. 2002,

Casanova, R.D., Thomassin, S., C., and Holland, N., S., J.L. Dargemont, S.M., Schreiber, C., J., Fieschi, Dupuis, Harris, Rosenzweig, immunity of a mycobacterial but human viral not : mutation. germline by STAT1 Impairment 293:300–303. Science 2001,

Lammas, and Kumararatne, J.L., D.S. Casanova, D.A., the of in defects : consequences pathway. IL-12-dependent (IFN-γ) interferon-γ Clinical Clin. Exp. Immunol. 121:417–425. 2000,

J., A.: Cypowyj, J.-L., Primary immunodeficiencies Casanova, underlying infections. fungal Puel, O., S., F., Lortholary, Bustamante, C., and Lanternier, Picard, Curr. Opin. Pediatr. 25:736–747. 2013,

Liu, al. S., et C., Lanternier, Migaud, Stambouli, L., Vincent, M., A., L., Cypowyj, S., F., O., Boudghene Q.B., Ammar-Khodja, Pathan, Taibi, Prando, and : CARD9 Deep inherited deficiency. dermatophytosis N. Engl. Med. J. 369:1704–1714. 2013,

Levin, interferon-γ-receptor Oostra, in C.M., to C.M., mycobacterial Huxley, infection. B.A., the Huston, mutation gene Newport, M.J., Williamson, susceptibility and M.: Hawrylowicz, A and R., S., N. Engl. Med. J. 1996, 335:1941–1949.

A., Ouachée-Chardin, et R., Natividad, C., Puel, Cobat,A., Picard, al. G., Barcenas-Morales, Bustamante, Döffinger, M., M.,Toulon,A., J., A., Chrabieh, IL-17F, and autoimmune mucocutaneous IL-17A, with I. J. : syndrome candidiasis against Autoantibodies patients polyendocrine in type Exp. and chronic IL-22 Med. 207:291–297. 2010,

E., Van and Ottenhoff, T.H. M.A., de Hoeve, Vosse, genetics infectious molecular immunity Human against intracellular diseases: cellular of and : salmonellae. and mycobacteria Lancet Infect. Dis. 4:739–749. 2004,

to lymphocytes uncontrolled viral and cytolytic responses infections. Inherited inflammatory can in pathway 13-11 defects of the lymphoproliferation cause

exocytosis Fischer, Basile, Molecular granules. cytotoxic and Saint of G., and mechanisms biogenesis G., A.: de Ménasché, of Nat. Rev. Immunol. 10:568–579. 2010,

Basille, in and Saint The Fischer, G., A.: of cytotoxicity homeostasis. lymphocyte role de Curr. Opin. Immunol. 13:549–554. 2001,

virus X-linked lymphomas. with lymphoproliferative associated Epstein–Barr of fatal is and by infection development syndrome with the 13-12

transduction signal Latour, Veillette, and lymphoproliferative T., S., by C.D., Pawson, R.K., Regulation product. gene A.: Gish, SLAM-mediated of SAP, Humphries, G., Helgason, X-linked the Nat. Immunol. 2001, 2:681–690.

N., M.S., Wu, D., and Terhorst, immunodeficiency. P., Engel, C.: Sayos, Morra, J., progressive lymphoproliferative disease: Howie, a M., Grande, X-linked C., Wang, Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2001, 19:657–682.

M.C., al. P., V., B., Fondaneche, Mateo, P., Rieux-Laucat, Rigaud, L., Le et Pasquier, Revy, Deist, F., Soulas, S., F., Lambert, Galicier, N., lymphoproliferative : in syndrome. XIAP an causes deficiency X-linked humans Nature 444:110–114. 2006,

dendritic defects of caused in Immunodeficiency inherited is development cells. by 13-13 the

Haniffa, and Human S.: Hambleton, missing Bigley, ID? Collin, M., cell M., the dendritic V., deficiency: Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2011, 11:575–583.

Fortin, V., Boisson-Dupuis, C.M., Bigley, Azevedo, Salem, L., Haniffa, Bacon, al. J., M., Bustamante, Hambleton, S., S., J., Ceron-Gutierrez, A., S., et immunodeficiency. human and : mutations IRF8 dendritic-cell N. Engl. J. Med. 365:127–138. 2011,

damage.

H.R., F.S. Rosen, and Colten, Complement deficiencies. : Annu. Rev. Immunol. 1992, 10:809–834.

M., P., Dahl, and A., Schnohr, Nordestgaard, B.G. Tybjaerg-Hansen, A study : in morbidity lectin mortality population-based and mannose-binding deficiency. of Exp. J. Med. 199:1391–1399. 2004,

Complement. Walport, M.J.: of First parts. two N. Engl. J. Med. 2001, 344:1058–1066.

Walport, Complement. M.J.: two parts. Second of Engl. N. J. Med. 2001, 344:1140–1144.

Defects permit infections. bacterial cells 13-15 in phagocytic widespread

K.E. Andrews, T., and Sullivan, in inherited Infections defects : function. phagocytic in patients with Clin. Microbiol. Rev. 2003, 16:597–621.

leukocyte defects. A.: adhesion Genetic Etzioni, of etiologies Curr. Opin. Immunol. 2009, 21:481–486.

A., D.C., Springer, Fischer, B., Lisowska T.A. Anderson, and Grospierre, Leukocyte consequences. molecular and basis functional deficiency: adhesion : Immunodefic. Rev. 1988, 1:39–54.

A.J. Goldblatt, and D., Thrasher, disease. : Chronic granulomatous Clin. Exp. Immunol. 122:1–9. 2000,

neutropenia. into congenital Genetic Klein, insights Welte, and K.: C., Clin. Rev. Immunol. Allergy 2010, 38:68–74.

Wijmenga, and Netea, M.G., C., O’Neill, L.A.J. Toll-like in and susceptibility. variation disease : Genetic receptors Nat. Immunol. 2012, 13:535–542.

and defects in R.A.: mouse. the Spritz, Genetic Chediak–Higashi syndrome beige Clin. J. Immunol. 18:97–105. 1998,

A.: role H., signaling Toll-like of Etzioni, Suhir, human The in immunodeficiencies. and receptor Clin. Rev. Immunol. Allergy 38:11–19. 2010,

of regulators molecular cause 13-16 the Mutations disease.’ in inflammation can

G.: Delpech, fevers. recurrent Grateau, Genetically determined M., and Curr. Opin. Immunol. 2001, 13:539–542.

C.A. Dinarello, functions Immunological the inflammatory interleukin-1 of family. : and Annu. Rev. Immunol. 27:519–550. 2009,

J.P., Drenth, Meer, J.W. der and van : periodic Hereditary fever. Engl. N. J. Med. 345:1748–1757. 2001,

fever comes from D.L., the Kastner, A O’Shea, and J.J.: in gene cold. Nat. Genet. 2001, 29:241–242.

novel and C., The PYRIN immunity Stehlik, J.C.: Reed, connection: players in inflammation. and innate J. Exp. Med. 200:551–558. 2004,

therapy Hematopoietic genetic useful defects. cell or to can be gene correct 13-17 transplantation stem

M.: S., immunodeficiencies. and combined severe of therapy A., Cavazzana-Calvo, Fischer, Gene Hacein-Bey, Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2002, 2:615–621.

A., Hacein-Bey-Abina, Severe Deist, and F., Cavazzana-Calvo, Fischer, combined immunodeficiency. S., de Le Saint, J.P., I., Villartay, M.: Andre-Schmutz, B.G., de A molecular model disease for and immunology therapy. Immunol. Rev. 2005, 203:98–109.

F., J.P., Le A.J., R., Villartay, et Wulffraat, Hacein-Bey-Abina, Hue, S., S., Dupuis-Girod, Thrasher, Carlier, Sorensen, F., C., Deist, Bouneaud, C., al. De N., : therapy. gene by immunodeficiency correction combined of severe vivo X-linked Sustained ex N. Engl. Med. J. 346:1185–1193. 2002,

C.S., C., N., et S., M.P., Wulffraat, R., Schmidt, A., Von Pawliuk, McCormack, E., Lim, Morillon, Hacein-Bey-Abina, al. Kalle, P., Leboulch, M., Osborne, SCID-X1. LMO2associated patients for : two after T gene therapy proliferation cell in clonal Science 2003, 302:415–419.

F.S. Rosen, gene immunodeficiency. : severe combined Successful therapy for N. Engl. J. Med. 346:1241–1243. 2002,

of major 13-18 are infection Noninherited, immunodeficiencies death. predisposing secondary and causes

responses to basic application survival. Nutrition, immunity of from dietary R.K.: practical knowledge immune ameliorating suffering of improving manipulation and and infection: of Chandra, Proc. Acad. Natl Sci. 1996, 93:14304–14307. USA

response G., Howard, and Lechler, the immunosuppression. G.M., Leptin Lord, Baker, modulates J.K., reverses starvation-induced R.J., Matarese, immune S.R., Bloom, T-cell R.I.: and 394:897–901. 1998, Nature

pathogens different strategies peptides. have bacterial antibody, and evolved Extracellular antimicrobial 13-19 to complement,

J.A., and Guttman, Bhavsar, A.P., B.B. Finlay, : pathogens. Manipulation host-cell by bacterial pathways of 449:827–834. 2007, Nature

Sander, and J.M., Blander, L.E. the : for recognition: threat. five immune Beyond microbial checkpoints scaling pattern Nat. Rev. Immunol. 12:215–225. 2012,

Hajishengallis, and G., J.D. Lambris, receptor of manipulation : crosstalk Microbial in immunity. innate Nat. Rev. Immunol. 11:187–200. 2011,

adaptive S.: innate and immune and host strategies Wick, Rhen, Bacterial Hornef, Normark, M.W., M.J., M., responses. overcoming for Nat. Immunol. 3:1033–1040. 2002,

Lambris, B.V.: by Ricklin, pathogens. D., Geisbrecht, evasion J.D., Complement and human Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 6:132–142. 2008,

R.E. Phillips, Darwin. taught Immunology by : Nat. Immunol. 3:987–989. 2002,

G.: J.C., and Clements, Frankel, trafficking, by Young, Raymond, A., type M., secretion of Pallett, effectors. B., and Subversion Endres, apoptosis, innate R.G., immunity system III Microbiol. Trends 2013, 21:430–441.

R.E., Portnoy, Isberg, Vance, R.R., and D.A. pathogenesis: pathogenic innate nonpathogenic : discrimination of Patterns microbes and by the of system. immune 6:10–21. Cell Microbe Host 2009,

M.R., of and Yount, N.Y.: peptide Mechanisms action Yeaman, and antimicrobial resistance. Pharmacol. Rev. 55:27–55. 2003,

immune within shelter 13-20 Intracellular by evade phagocytes. seeking system pathogens bacterial can the

Hernandez, R.E., lipids. macrophage D.M., R.P., Urdahl, Mycobacteria Larson, manipulate L.: of membrane Ramakrishnan, K.K., and C.J., coordinated recruitment K.B., Cosma, Takaki, C.L., Tobin, Cambier, use through Nature 2014, 505:218–222.

Hancox, and S., Yeh, L.S., Clegg, K.S. phase FimA variation expression. and typhimurium fimbrial Salmonella : Bacteriol. J. 1996, 178:542–545.

Host/pathogen Cossart, interactions. P.: cytoskeleton by invasive of Subversion cell mammalian the bacteria. J. Clin. Invest. 1997, 99:2307–2311.

Young, guests. T., bacterial unwanted Chronic Dougan, Hussell, and D., living with infections: G.: Nat. Immunol. 2002, 3:1026–1032.

by protozoan parasites. 13-21 also is practiced Immune evasion

evasion Multiple of African by trypanosomes. K.L., and Donelson, mechanisms El-Sayed, N.M.: immune J.E., Hill, Mol. Biochem. Parasitol. 91:51–66. 1998,

Sher, A.: of innate Sacks, protozoa. by D., Evasion immunity parasitic and Nat. Immunol. 3:1041–1047. 2002,

different ahead immune keep a 13-22 viruses antigenic adaptive of step mechanisims the system. use of to RNA variation

of Bowie, receptor evasion and pattern-recognition A.G., Unterholzner, Viral signalling. L.: subversion and Nat. Rev. Immunol. 8:911–922. 2008,

and Brander, C., Walker, B.D. DNA clinically : Modulation by of host relevant viruses. and RNA immune human responses Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 2000, 3:379–386.

J.S., and A.J. Gibbs, Armstrong, M.J., Gibbs, the hemagglutinin in 293:1842–1845. the 2001, Science ‘Spanish Recombination of gene : 1918 flu.’

Halfmann, Y.: and P., influenza for M., basis viruses. P., virulence high Kawaoka, Hong A of H5N1 Molecular Gao, Kong Hatta, 293:1840–1842. Science 2001,

Hilleman, M.R. and and mechanisms infections. in survival persistent pathogen host Strategies : acute and viral for Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 101:14560–14566. 2004, USA

Laver, E.: and Virology. Garman, G., control of The and influenza. origin pandemic 293:1776–1777. 2001, Science

CTL subvert 13-23 and viruses use NK mechanisms responses. multiple to DNA cell

Alcami, chemokines mimicry their and receptors. A.: Viral cytokines, of Nat. Rev. Immunol. 3:36–50. 2003,

MHC viral T.H., M.: Bouvier, class I presentation: evasion Hansen, from antigen and strategies. learning Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2009, 9:503–513.

herpesviruses. Host-related and G., P.M.: encoded McFadden, Murphy, by immunomodulators poxviruses and Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 2000, 3:371–378.

K.A., Paludan, and K.A. S.R., Fitzgerald, Bowie, A.G., Horan, herpesviruses by immune Recognition of : the innate system. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 11:143–154. 2011,

A.B. Yewdell, J.W., Hill, and antigen with Viral : presentation. interference Nat. Immunol. 2002, 2:1019–1025.

by viruses wanes. latent until Some to replicate in persist vivo 13-24 ceasing immunity

J.I. Cohen, virus Epstein–Barr infection. : N. Engl. Med. J. 2000, 343:481–492.

R., Hahn, G., Mocarski, Jores, and E.S. : Cytomegalovirus dendritic precursor of cells. myeloid a latent in common and remains Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 1998, 95:3937–3942. USA

Ho, D.Y. Herpes aspects. molecular : virus latency: simplex Prog. Med. Virol. 1992, 39:76–115.

by Kuppers, B virus. the transformation under influence: cells B cells Epstein–Barr of R.: Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2003, 3:801–812.

B.D. Lauer, Walker, and G.M., : C infection. virus Hepatitis Engl. N. Med. J. 345:41–52. 2001,

Epstein–Barr Crawford, D.H.: K.F., advances. Macsween, and virus—recent Lancet Infect. Dis. 3:131–140. 2003,

herpes T reactivation. Nash, and A.A.: virus of simplex latency and the cells regulation J. Exp. Med. 191:1455–1458. 2000,

13-25 retrovirus is HIV slowly progresses infection chronic AIDS. that that establishes to a a

infection. enigma of Baltimore, The D.: HIV 82:175–176. 1995, Cell Barre-Sinoussi, of AIDS. F.: the HIV as cause Lancet 348:31–35. 1996, virus Campbell-Yesufu, Update O.T., Gandhi, (HIV)-2 infection. on immunodeficiency human R.T.: and Clin. Infect .Dis. 52:780–787. 2011,

and to Heeney, Weiss, R.A.: evolution J.L., Origins resistance of Dalgleish, AIDS. of the HIV and A.G., Science 313:462–466. 2006,

B.H. and Hahn, P.M., Sharp, AIDS of : pandemic. the and HIV Origins Spring Cold Harb. Perspect. Med. 2011, a006841. 1:

infects of 13-26 the replicates and cells HIV immune within system.

Grouard, Clark, E.A. and G., Role dendritic dendritic : infection in cells and of and follicular pathogenesis. HIV Curr. Opin. Immunol. 1997, 9:563–567.

A., J.P., Co-receptors Moore, HIV-1 entry. Trkola, Dragic, and T.: for Curr. Opin. Immunol. 1997, 9:551–562.

F., Pohlmann, and Doms, R.W. Baribaud, S., DC-SIGNR: HIV. for and hands : helping DC-SIGN Immunol. Trends 2001, 22:643–646.

Kim, M.J., P.S. and Root, Kay, M.S., Protein an inhibitor. of entry HIV-1 design : 2001, 291:884–888. Science

of Kooyk, Nef-induced lymphocyte dendritic in N., C., Sol-Foulon, Boccaccio, spread. Y., Schwartz, Heard, Nobile, promotes cells HIV-1 Abastado, clustering A., upregulation Moris, viral J.M., and DC-SIGN J.P., C., O.: A., Engering, and van 2002, 16:145–155. Immunity

D.R. and Littman, D., Unutmaz, pattern for Expression coreceptors HIV-1 implications homing. on cells: lymphocyte of and T : viral transmission Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 1997, USA 94:1615–1618.

Sodroski, HIV-1 The and and envelope fusogens, Wyatt, J.: R., immunogens. antigens, glycoproteins: 280:1884–1888. Science 1998,

source the CD4 major T 13-27 HIV cells replication. are of Activated

T Y.L., infection W.C.: W., K., Cellular Greene, V.B., Kreisberg, Yonemoto, J.F., and HIV-1 Soros, APOBEC3G restricts Chiu, Stopak, CD4+ in resting cells. 435:108–114. 2005, Nature

Cullen, B.R. in connections making auxiliary a dying cell. HIV-1 proteins: : Cell 93:685–692. 1998,

B.R. Cullen, export and an Connections for processing license? export nuclear mRNA: : between of evidence the Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 2000, USA 97:4–6.

M.H. M., and Emerman, Malim, unraveling host viral to HIV-1 regulatory/accessory cell genes: : keys and biology. 280:1880–1884. Science 1998,

Wang, J.D., J., S.B., Shan, Y.-C., Siliciano, D.I.S., L., and J., Hosmane, Ho, Lai, Laskey, N.N., Siliciano, Rosenbloom, J.N., Blankson, R.F. : HIV-1 noninduced increase proviruses cure. to latent reservoir in the Replication-competent barrier 155:540–551. Cell 2013,

Nolan, L.A., Kinoshita, Amano, H., and S., L., Timmerman, Kaneshima, G.P. M., Su, positively in replication The gene T-cell T HIV-1 cells. and NF-ATc expression regulates : factor activation 6:235–244. 1997, Immunity

P.D. Bieniasz, Malim, M.H., and mechanisms and HIV factors : of evasion. restriction Perspect Harb 2:a006940. Cold Spring Med 2012,

cast. the leading D.: proteins: for roles accessory HIV supporting Trono, 1995, Cell 82:189–192.

routes 13-28 infection. several and by are There establishes which transmitted is HIV

HIV M., viruses gatekeepers: selecting early and for Bomsel, David, infection. V.: Mucosal Nat. Med. 2002, 8:114–116.

G., D.R. D.S., N., Kwon, Hendrickson, Bitton, and W.A., Gregorio, Littman, cell of infection. : DC-SIGN-mediated T of internalization for HIV required is trans-enhancement Immunity 2002, 16:135–144.

Peckham, D.: Pantaleo, D., G., Mother-to-child and C., S., Cohen, Gibb, C., immunodeficiency the human of Demarest, O.J., Montefiori, virus. transmission M., Menzo, Graziosi, Orenstein, J.F., Vaccarezza, N. Engl. J. Med. 1995, 333:298–302.

and Jr, M.S. Sena, R.A., Cohen, Cates, A., W., Royce, : transmission of HIV. Sexual N. Engl. Med. J. 336:1072–1078. 1997,

transmission for roles co-receptors with disease. 13-29 and tropism HIV progression different variants different of play in

Farber, Berger, Murphy, P.M., and E.A., J.M. and viral as receptors HIV-1 Chemokine tropism, : disease. coreceptors: roles in entry, Annu. Rev. Immunol. 1999, 17:657–700.

K.E., Landau, Sheridan, S., and Choe, D., N.R. Ceradini, R.I., Connor, disease : in HIV-1—infected individuals. in correlates progression coreceptor Change with use Exp. J. Med. 185:621–628. 1997,

D.R. Littman, keys AIDS pathogenesis? to receptors: Chemokine : 93:677–680. Cell 1998,

CCR5 to of 13-30 deficiency resistance infection. A HIV genetic the confers co-receptor

al. B.I., Catano, G., H., R.J., R., Quinones, H., Gonzalez, M.J., Mangano, E., M.P., Nibbs, Bamshad, Sanchez, Freedman, et Bolivar, A., Kulkarni, duplications influence CCL3L1 The gene-containing segmental on : HIV-1/AIDS of susceptibility. 2005, 307:1434–1440. Science

H., S., Koup, Liu, R., S.R., M.E., N.R. and Macdonald, Paxton, R., Horuk, Choe, Stuhlmann, Martin, D., W.A., Landau, R.A., Ceradini, of Homozygous coreceptor to HIV some HIV-1 : individuals exposed defect in resistance accounts multiply 1 infection. for 1996, 86:367–377. Cell

C., Lapoumeroulie, Liesnard, F., B.J., C.M., J., J., M., C., Rucker, al. Doranz, S., C., Farber, Cognaux, Samson, Libert, Forceille, Saragosti, et Caucasian receptor to HIV-1 Resistance bearing infection gene. chemokine individuals 5 CCR mutant : of the in alleles 382:722–725. 1996, Nature

An eliminate immune response controls HIV. not 13-31 does but

with people HIV Baltimore, nonprogressive D.: infection. Lessons from N. Engl. J. Med. 1995, 332:259–260.

Letvin, N.L. D.H., and Barouch, herpesviruses. lymphocyte : lentiviruses cytotoxic responses and CD8+ T to Curr. Opin. Immunol. 2001, 13:479–482.

infection to prevent early A.T.: mucosal transmission. Targeting HIV-1 Haase, 464:217–223. 2010, Nature

Perelson, W., J.M., A.U., D.D., A.S., Chen, Leonard, Ho, Neumann, and

infection. Rapid in Markowitz, CD4 and plasma virions turnover lymphocytes HIV-1 of M.: Nature 373:123–126. 1995,

R., Lynch, Zhang, Liao, S.D., A.Z., F., T., al. Alam, Fire, S.M., K.M., C.A., Gao, Boyd, Zhou, et Schramm, Z., Roskin, H.-X., Co-evolution : of neutralizing founder a and broadly antibody HIV-1 virus. 2013, Nature 496:469–476.

Desrosiers, R.C. Johnson, W.E., and HIV’s : evasion. strategies immune of Viral system persistance: Annu. Rev. Med. 2002, 53:499–518.

immune B.F.: Tomaras, during development. Haynes, McMichael, N., and response G.D., infection: A.J., for Borrow, clues P., The acute vaccine HIV-1 Goonetilleke, Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2010, 10:11–23.

Price, Easterbrook, Klenerman, Bangham, P., Phillips, M., and P.J., C.R., Goulder, D.A., A.K., Sewell, R.E. P.J., Troop, : infection. T selection escape primary of variants lymphocyte during HIV-1 Positive cytotoxic Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 94:1890–1895. 1997,

M.A., Dalesandro, M.J., al. Simon, Kuroda, J.E., Scallon, P., Racz, et K., B.J., Lifton, Sasseville, Tenner-Racz, M.A., S., Schmitz, Santra, M., V.G., of in lymphocytes. by CD8+ immunodeficiency simian infection virus viremia : Control 283:857–860. 1999, Science

HIV latency. W.C.: Greene, Siliciano, and R.F., Spring Cold Harb. Perspect. Med. 1:a007096. 2011,

Cohen, D, J.M., Montefiori, Graziosi, L.K., Demarest, al. Menzo, S., M., G., Schrager, Pantaleo, Vaccarezza, Fox, O.J., Orenstein, et C., C., JF, Studies nonprogressive with in subjects virus : infection. human long-term immunodeficiency Engl. N. J. Med. 1995, 332:209–216.

reservoir infection. HIV of the Lymphoid 13-32 major is tissue

S.L., G.F., Masuda, Heath, A., Burton, Tew, Szakal, B.A., and J.G., A.K. Smith, retroviral in : infection: (FDC) host/pathogen Follicular dendritic perspectives. cells Immunol. Rev. 1997, 156:185–197.

et D., L., Taylor, DiGiuseppe, J.A., H., Quinn, Chun, Hermankova, Shen, al. K., Carruth, Finzi, T.W., T.C., J., X., Margolick, Chadwick, M., viral : load reservoirs HIV-1 of Quantification in infection. tissue body latent total and Nature 387:183–188. 1997,

infection: demographics T of Haase, cell tissues. HIV-1 Population dynamics CD4+ biology and viral and lymphatic in A.T.: Annu. Rev. Immunol. 17:625–656. 1999,

Siliciano, T., and McArthur, Pierson, R.F. J., immune : viral persistence mechanisms and for HIV-1: Reservoirs the in for responses therapy. antiretroviral of antiviral presence Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2000, 18:665–708.

rate the progression. in of can host variation alter disease the Genetic 13-33

A., Bream, Zhang, X., J.H., and Young, C., Winkler, Ping, H.A. in IFN-gamma : A transcription. control gene alters polymorphism single proximal nucleotide the promoter of Immun. Genes 2002, 3:165–169.

J.J., G.W., J.H., Gao, Lee, Trowsdale, Vlahov, Martin, Hoots, D., Goedert, al. Detels, et S., R., M.P., X., Nelson, J., Buchbinder, K., the to HLA-B between KIR3DS1 : and progression interaction delays AIDS. Epistatic Nat. Genet. 2002, 31:429–434.

al. D., H.D., Young, Giorgi, H., Vlahov, Stephens, et T.R., Goedert, Bream, O’Brien, J., J., Buchbinder, Shin, C., S., J.C., J.J., Winkler, IL10. by to HIV-1 alleles restriction AIDS pathogenesis of of Genetic promoter : Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 2000, 97:14467–14472.

B.D., Walker, and Yu, X.G. durable Unravelling mechanisms the of HIV-1. of : control Nat. Rev. Immunol. 13:487–498. 2013,

HIV result as and 13-34 leads a infection destruction The of immune to to increased susceptibility death. of opportunistic to eventually function infection

D.H., Operskalski, J., D.R. Ganem, Kedes, Flood, Kohn, and R., E., Busch, M., infection sarcoma for of and in of : sexual herpesvirus): distribution associated groups (Kaposi’s human seroepidemiology 8 transmission. herpesvirus KS evidence The risk Nat. Med. 2:918–924. 1996,

diseases. respiratory R.: Miller, HIV-associated Lancet 1996, 348:307–312.

Herndier, and W.D., Wang, Ganem, D.R. H., B., Zhong, sarcoma. sarcoma Restricted Kaposi genes Kaposi associated (human in herpesvirus expression : herpesvirus of 8) Proc. Acad. Natl Sci. 1996, 93:6641–6646. USA

and in replication Drugs HIV to that titer CD4 of virus infectious T an block decrease in rapid lead increase a 13-35 cells.

Schneider, of T.: Thiel, K., Hütter, Loddenkemper, by E., G., stem infection cure transplantation. C., cell and the Hofmann, K., HIV Allers, for J., Evidence Rieger, CCR5Δ32/Δ32 2011, Blood 117:2791–2799.

S.G.: strategies remission Barouch, D.H., and HIV-1 and for Deeks, Immunologic eradication. 2014, 345:169–174. Science long-term The a Reiss, Boyd, review. and M., P.: of consequences therapy: antiretroviral HIV Ther. J. 2006, 11:26–35. The Cammack, N.: HIV fusion inhibition. potential for Curr. Opin. Infect. Dis. 2001, 14:13–16.

T of in HIV-infected Carcelain, following lymphocytes and CD4+ Debre, antiretroviral individuals therapy. Autran, Reconstitution B.: G., P., Curr. Opin. Immunol. 13:483–488. 2001,

and Farber, E.A. Berger, J.M., CCR5 inhibitor: response tighten a : rather HIV’s to than switch! I’d Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 2002, USA 99:1749–1751.

Ho, D.D. series: host/pathogen interactions. : Perspectives Dynamics in vivo. of replication HIV-1 Clin. J. Invest. 99:2565–2567. 1997,

Shift with of mutation. Delta32 S.: Esser, Kordelas, transplantation in and HIV CCR5 J., L.,Verheyen, stem-cell tropism N. Engl. J. Med. 371:880–882. 2014,

A.: survival. on of and and Mocroft, antiretroviral impact AIDS J.D., Lundgren, therapy The HIV J. Ther. 11:36–38. 2006,

K., Perelson, Cao, P., A.S., A., Saksela, and Markowitz, Hurley, M., M., Vesanen, Y.Z., Ho, D.D. Essunger, combination HIV-1-infected : during characteristics compartments Decay therapy. of 1997, 387:188–191. Nature

Wei, P., B.H., M.A., Johnson, Hahn, al. E.A., M.E., Ghosh, Nowak, S.K., Deutsch, et J.D., X., V.A., Taylor, S., Emini, Bonhoeffer, Lifson, : type immunodeficiency in dynamics Viral 1 infection. human virus Nature 1995, 373:117–122.

HIV mutations, in which many of variants. drug-resistant the 13-36 course accumulates can the of result outgrowth infection In

al. J.H., A., J.C., L.J., E., Quintero, D.J., et Schleif, Rhodes, Graham, W.A., M., O.M., Gabryelski, Blahy, Robbins, Roth, H.L., Condra, Shivaprakash, vivo protease to resistant : inhibitors. In emergence multiple HIV-1 of variants 374:569–571. Nature 1995,

D., Siliciano, R.F. and Finzi, infection. Viral in : HIV-1 dynamics Cell 1998, 93:665–671.

drug genomic for and HIV Katzenstein, therapies D.: resistance. Combination infection Lancet 1997, 350:970–971.

L., D.D. and J., Richman, Corbeil, Moutouh, dually of pressure. Recombination leads HIV emergence resistant mutants under to the 1 drug rapid selective : Proc. Acad. Natl Sci. USA 93:6106–6111. 1996,

many solution an Vaccination but attractive against poses difficulties. HIV 13-37 is

Baba, Posner, J., W., Hofmann-Lehmann, M.R., Ayehunie, Vlasak, S., Liska, H., Xu, Katinger, al. R., L.A., Cavacini, et V., T.W., G., Stiegler, protect mucosal of simian– virus : subtype neutralizing immunodeficiency antibodies human IgG1 the against infection. Human monoclonal Nat. Med. 6:200–206. 2000,

quest The Barouch, for vaccine--moving an D.H.: forward. HIV-1 N. Engl. Med. J. 2013, 369:2073–2076.

Barouch, M.J., J., Lifton, Krivulka, Peyerl, F.W., Santra, K., Schmitz, D.H., G.R., Beaudry, D.A., et al. Kunstman, J.E., Gorgone, Kuroda, M.A., S., viral vaccine T by : escape a rhesus Eventual AIDS in from cytotoxic failure lymphocytes. monkey 2002, 415:335–339. Nature

G., Stratov, and I., Kent, S.J. Isitman, cell-driven for cytotoxicity Nk development. Implications HIV and in Infection: : HIV Antibody-dependent escape immune cellular vaccine Adv. Virol. 2012, 212:637208.

N.L. Letvin, obstacles and in Progress vaccine. : AIDS of the development an Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2006, 6:930–939.

A.J., Vaccines McMichael, W.C.: step. next that to immunity T and HIV-1: stimulate Koff, cell the Nat. Immunol. 2014, 15:319–322.

controlling 13-38 of Prevention spread and the are education and AIDS. HIV in important

Kippax, Schechter, T.J., Des-Jarlais, Aggleton, Kihara, van-den-Hoek, P., D., M., and F., M., S., Coates, J.A. Gutzwiller, : in HIV developed countries. prevention 348:1143–1148. 1996, Lancet

Kane, Wagner, F., Sodji, J., Anarfi, Decosas, K.D., and H.U. J.K., : Migration and AIDS. Lancet 346:826–828. 1995,

Dowsett, G.W. and social practices, context. Sustaining sexual : safe sex: HIV Suppl. AIDS 7 1993, 1:S257–S262.

rights Human M.: Kirby, HIV paradox. and the Lancet 348:1217–1218. 1996,

Changes S., decline a S., behavior Beyrer, Nelson, among men and Eiumtrakol, C.: Kuntolbutra, HIV in S., infection Khamboonruang, Thailand. sexual Celentano, and young C., in D.D., in Hoover, D.R., Suprasert, K.E., N. Engl. J. Med. 1996, 335:297–303.

B.G., through Asia. and T.: march AIDS Brown, The of Weniger, N. Engl. Med. J. 335:343–345. 1996,

response is defense against a component immune infection adaptive essential and The of host normal critical is for health. sometimes this disease. can agents responses, infectious cause elicit with not immune associated and adaptive Antigens to hypersensitivity in food, in drugs. as which harmless pollen, mediated when antigens response happens generally immunologically One known circumstance such harmful as inherently this reactions reactions and ‘environmental’ allergic is occur

immediate-type reactions by classified of due four hypersensitivity mechanism. with activation type hypersensitivity final mediated Gell IgE Historically, and into I by major Coombs reactions to responses allergic antibodies, the types, immunological which mast-cell broad reactions were effector represented complement cellular responses (type and Type effector the FcR-bearing were III that final III). antibodies, antigen-specific those defined or were effectors by as IgG hypersensitivity driven mechanism II) being (type II variety of Finally, including depicted a as myeloid were and responses cell type effectors, lymphocytes by cellular driven being hypersensitivity types. IV allergic system, clear understanding immune host response (see provide context understanding While pathogenesis, responses for some and that an and becoming immunologic mechanistic humoral 3 and definitions framework more 2, the system both most arms classification Chapter modules and now reactions, a prototypic it types immune thorough provided underlying Gell in disease the including mechanisms for and responses 11 that the normal for cellular provides involve is the the immune of 11.5). Fig. effective pathologic Coombs 1, to allergic to antibodies innocuous occur reactions, In food, IgE such reactions allergen—by or pollen, it. has anti-gen—the dust, individual those the as become house producing because sensitized an against most the a of type 2 of usually immune the allergen. to unwanted an This is result response formation IgE-binding series basophils, Subsequent characteristic to activation cells responses the triggers allergen a leading the this of tissue, are of mast the that exposed exposure of allergic type and reaction. cells, of chiefly in to of or contact when grains grass leached occur hay membrane weed example, (allergic eyes. fever symptoms for proteins of come with pollen mucous the allergenic In out rhinoconjunctivitis), nose into and the other IgG are immune and/or responses. not sickness, antibodies antibodies hypersensitivity In disease, immune represent on such responses celiac disorders, dermatitis, or contrast, cellular serum contact by driven and unwanted as IgE allergic dependent

to common agents cause are all some in allergic that individuals. regularly can exposed We environmental reactions in clinically does response the one majority surveys in the While of not substance of potential allergens, environment. the develop to most reactions at over population to allergic the significant shows allergic half an least of some population individuals responses antigens. manifest common to Some allergic multiple contribute may this A is called chapter we to in that environmental— the discuss to various IgE-sensitized predisposition. allergens later and the atopy, genetic predisposition and become to factors—both environmental IgE-mediated predisposing a individual Genetic clearly allergic in role disease. an factors to play lower, whereas the if chance If has of the both is of neither a much developing order is atopic, a 10%, are child IgE-mediated on allergy, parents risk atopic. 40–60% parent an

and IgE-mediated IgE allergic diseases.

IgE-mediated allergic Effector in reactions. mechanisms

diseases. Non-IgE-mediated allergic

Fig. to extrinsic antigens. 14.1 IgE-mediated reactions patient the on but can degranulation, comes whether ocular eaten, for experienced the different involve directly into allergen be example, All respiratory the mast-cell of bloodstream, by symptoms the IgE-mediated contact into mucosa is is or responses the depending, tract. or very with injected the

in especially the helminths is against extracellular IgE parasitic defense (see Section prominent and organisms, protozoa 11-9). but against sometimes IgE in symptoms organisms developed prevalent serum most parasitic is directed allergic (Fig. are nations, innocuous These developing in antigens, nations causing 14.1). environmental diseases and sensitized much and lost common of Almost one and cause or is although a distress school from the and, Europe can time to specific allergen initiated America rarely allergic antigens, population life-threatening, with half work. North more by contact of having doubled the world more considerable, The Western is past with than in burden prevalence their in years. 20 diseases allergic the rather in its scientific IgE most directed roles and paid pathologic toward been clinical Consequently, has attention disease protective than its capacity. to allergic modernization. of reported Middle this result last allergy; changing, a East Western-style probably situation the low the in of relatively however, developing Africa rapidly decade, is countries Until a as prevalence and

we antigen-specific individual that production the mechanisms allergen, in sensitization an consider an resulting of IgE. first favor this In the the of to chapter Fcε allergic We the receptor allergen cells between IgE mast the pathological basophils. and reaction of to and bound then on consequences the the itself—the describe IgE-mediated high-affinity interaction the immunological reaction. we other hypersensitivity and consider causes Finally, of consequences of types

IgE and allergic IgE-mediated diseases.

those to caused cell and reactions bound reactions basophils activation multivalent mast are their hypersensitivity of by IgE bridging allergic by cells Immediate antigen surfaces. other to the tightly antibody in bound where is localized in isotypes differs IgE it being tissues, from surfaces the predominantly

allergic IgE-mediated and IgE diseases.

Fig. inhaled Sensitization allergen. to 14.2 an Der that 1 the becomes submucosal panel), to this a common (third cells. mast respiratory fecal on p is pellets bound Fc receptors of and found resident IgE is in allergen dust house mite. a with encounter subsequent On the IgE, ingest mast-cell encounters subepithelial to to dendritic TH2 cells individual contents, which 1, atopic where When mast-cell of cell-bound symptoms 1 panel). for Der reaction the mast lymph specific node, the and 1, an are p allergen protein allergic activation p draining granule the cells (last of the first release Der binds the and the traffic p Der allergenic cause triggering produced (first panels). second and p occludin, production protein producing B mucosal cells Interaction it p tissues cells 1-specific that a the maintain through Der the cleaves p in of helps a cells Der enzymatic 1 leads T of class-switched 1-specific help is pass to epithelium. tight of protease epithelial junctions; plasma to these IgE thought to activity Der p with Der 1 that the the is

and high-affinity IgE other the some cells of through FcεRI types receptor mast cell (see Section 10-24). the causing from the the lead to mast of cross-links release (Fig. high-affinity disease cells allergic Binding antigen IgE of that receptors, mediators IgE can chemical to 14.2). dominated in be out. still being environmental individuals worked How atopic initial response by production to antibody comes IgE to antigens is an factors process. of In the the this that understanding chapter part describe we to this current contribute the of

to allergen. Sensitization IgE involves switching an with contact on 14-1 production class first

of IgE must result the antibodies. antigen, in first against produce an the antigen exposed an be reaction conditions a allergic that individual production given under to To has sensitized subsequent Allergic has in to when been an the fashion symptoms individual occur who this antigen. exposure symptoms, different clusters are that most characterized of the by Exposure affected. prominently lead can tissues to airways forms response and are The symptoms of most allergic lower airborne conjunctivitis), or (allergic nasal developed countries the to lungs passages allergens, affect common eyes (asthma). causing the the predominantly (allergic that in rhinitis), gastrointestinal allergens sometimes locations example, but can to Ingested lead only eosinophilic esophagitis), from the distant allergy, tract involving food (for not site infrequently antigen the of entry. affecting thought challenging are the to that site antigen and reactions, the of considered of from body distant the systemic antigen occur Reactions blood circulation. at via occur locations because to the throughout of are entry the of spread be (or reactions the the hives causing wheezing the called bronchospasms) vascular skin, target and to limited when (also they the Systemic they organ, system. be can when they pressure target life-threatening distant urticaria) single a blood lowering involve lungs, of when by are Serious designated reactions systemic the anaphylaxis. term why a not with known individual. with at time allergen It particular individual leads the sensitization whereas allergen same reactions yield to in in sensitization is another allergen the challenge, can one of anaphylaxis local a followed a local can reaction yields only by individual, single challenge that mild reaction. fact, a In of even usually challenge systemic at a the another time be severe in

response to forms sensitization quantity which is individuals of allergic symptoms, and develop rhinitis many antigens, asthma allergic route eczema sizable multiple develops allergens. atopic airborne childhood in food developing that those Atopic to followed and/or and the express to in example, can response individuals sensitization a antigens to different proportion of on in of depend often allergen—for in in asthma progression been eczema atopic some in in eventually life termed rhinitis and later from responses This allergic has atopic march. childhood of allergic to to individuals the can reactions any or are a contrast, Allergic specific at such and one to venom penicillin, as bee to in predominantly life. people, of sensitization non-atopic drug such time develop in due allergen, as symptomatic It that all all to is in atopic encounters remember, to a response, potential to sensitization, not with even individuals. will and sensitizations lead will allergen lead a important not allergic however,

The in of 2 to response immune typical reactions. signals main are driven two response IgE leading immune groups that type of antigen to production by together is consists signals a phenotype. favor that to first TH2 cells naive T differentiation of of The the cells that switch and the The to stimulate to second co-stimulatory cytokines IgE. production signals comprises TH2 B of the this exposed of 9-21, it by Section is an described T determined the to As a peptide fate the the presentation. by responding and the before CD4 during dendritic antigen route in dose, and is intrinsic and a of presented response, cytokines properties by naive to the cell of antigenic antigen, cell IL-13 favors IL-27) cells, Exposure whereas and IFN-γ IL-9, the IL-4, development. TH1-cell its TH2 and to IL-12 of relative to (and favors development exposure IL-5,

gut. defenses the multicellular tissues the the sites mucosal parasites the and namely, Immune mainly entry, at in against of found of parasite airways the are and under skin of type the infection. response immune secrete 2 promote cytokines are and that to sites these adaptive a innate parasitic at systems specialized Cells to to effector of to invading tend tissues antigen-specific naive up antigens In dendritic an TH2 they become lymph to presence CD4 migrate taking parasite, regional the in T where nodes, drive cells cells. these cells IL-9, cells further which IL-5, TH2 and IL-13, in maintaining IL-4, differentiation of themselves environment TH2 favored. cells an thus is secrete IL-33, be TH2 also and activated amplification cells, of damaged response. the by epithelial which can injured mast cells produced by or to contributes The cytokine receptors directly these via that can cells the on TH2 IL-33 act express. IL-33 cells are signals common T antigens (T cells because those CD4 that as normally Allergic cells naive T such encounter environmental antigen-specific the dendritic responses avoided differentiate regulatory into mucosal generally against absence provoked danger in cells). by induce to antigen cells of microbial infection allergic a T of of or allowing T-cell the the to production support cells antigen helper effector state than tolerance that Section of the to suppress responses cells and (see The might contribute an production response. rather 12-8)

IgE amplify and activated cells the cells and the class response produced of TH2 switching production. TH2 stimulate B cytokines both by The to chemokines saw signal IL-13 that provides in the cells production. to we Chapter 10, As IgE IL-4 switches first B or activate leading kinases the ultimately Section 7-20), STAT6. the (see on IL-4 phosphorylation Jak3 and Janus-family B of (and thereby activation) lymphocytes IL-13 T tyrosine to acting and regulator transcriptional and Jak1 response. and cytokines IgE, IL-4, ability STAT6 or impaired their of production in impaired demonstrating importance TH2 responses to the to the IL-13, IgE key these pathways functional lacking have Mice signaling of an and switch ligand CD40 the The the co-stimulatory B-cell signal on between production CD40 interaction surface. and for a IgE second on is surface T-cell essential all antibody switching. interaction This class for is a genetic phenotype hyper-IgM of IgE, 13-9). Section produce Patients display deficiency syndrome with and CD40 ligand no IgA, (see IgG, a or

produce by can mast cells. and also the Murine signals that basophils drive IgE cells B production cell-surface express basophils and by and ligand FcεRI-bound secrete they express they IL-4. cells activated and when Mast CD40 IgE, antigen their cross-linking are FcεRI, human basophils inflammatory stimuli exist that by have (Fig. Similar been for primed also data 14.3). cells. by can B IgE TH2 production Like cells, they switching and class induce (also of in inducible tissues to and lymph antigen Generally, or switching lymphoid lymphoid in organs) inflammation. follicles sites entry the tertiary mucosal IgE persistent of nodes form in tissues) at other that that (secondary occurs drain called site lymphoid class have cells IgE The tertiary mast in that B-cell cells means amplify the to response centers of site formation close lymphoid or basophils that allergic containing tissues follicles to of production potential with B of mucosal for germinal switched can the the reaction. process reactions amplification self-sustaining. and allergies thus is prevent for allergic from therapy One of this block goal becoming to

by capture IgE dendritic be amplified by can also cells. receptors of on In once humans, Fcε the IgE response, the initiated, to once the the in been of of Some immature example, populations skin— bind surface produced, and human they IgE FcεRI inflammatory cells—for can setting, an cells Langerhans have anti-allergen receptors. express antibodies these dendritic maintaining presentation TH2 allergen, response to dendritic thus is IgE trap the by for effective a cells, the and The the allergen. highly processed for cell to which forms bound efficiently reinforcing T then naive have to been IgE still reported but this receptors, express also is controversial. Eosinophils activated dendritic occurs where molecules; T act eosinophil naive co-stimulatory in however, by T cells upregulation fashion this may are probably rather of in cells Eosinophils cells. standard T cells antigen-presenting to tissues in lymph a nodes where after primed migrated cells have class and II than as MHC

14-2 sensitization, of cause agents. types are allergic Although many can proteases antigens sensitizing common

(Fig. Most grains allergens such dry carried highly that or particles mite as small, feces on airborne proteins pollen relatively are soluble are 14.4). mucosa, where be eyes, can into from by of Fig. with contact mucus-covered the the diffuses dendritic is (see up or On sensitization provoke and cells the the allergen it airways, picked particle eluted and the epithelia nose, soluble 14.2). allergens concentrations. surfaces, to at the low presented system At typically immune are mucosal It not exposure to has that person the (Ambrosia ragweed exceed a the does species) per maximum year. common been μg pollen in of 1 allergens estimated It TH2 response. sensitization of that favors is formation strong a thought low-dose even responses doses irritating individuals. life-threatening these in can allergen and provoke TH2-driven Consequently, minute of IgE atopic antibody

exposures always antigen, responses sites. at Antigen tissue other not low such that doses do of to lead especially allergic involve 2 is into bee more 20–75 total cause the inhaled into injection to and (1 allergic the example, is μg of For stings magnitude frequent skin venom that of a antigen bee bee sensitization, airways). of the the orders dose of individual of venom ragweed in than result an of over grams many of food sensitization. tract In prolonged to gastrointestinal allergy, case can into of ingestion the periods allergenic food time of the lead antigens. response or of can occur large in small injected to also Sensitization doses For of introduction the recombinant before example,

IgE and the basophils cells high-affinity mast IgE plasma on here) (illustrated cells. to by receptor Top secreted binds panel: antigen, to secrete surface-bound IL-4 IL-4, turn and the (CD40L) activated on CD40 receptors Bottom binds panel: which cell. cross-linked in express (IL-4R) ligand the IgE cells by when these is B cell IgE. Together the basophil with B of this by the CD40L, more class CD40 B-cell ligation production and by activates of switching in vivo interactions can for of at the These bronchus-associated in lymphoid tissue. inflammation, allergen-triggered site example, occur

milligrams to in insulin, develop allergy injection. usually with could of per diabetes administered individuals human 1–2 insulin, porcine doses 1to sensitization range. contrast, that antibiotics) intramuscular intravenous the cephalosporins (including to when per in 2-gram can In injection other β-lactam-containing drugs lead usually injection administered penicillin-type of by are or doses and

allergens, of or identifying that for common but no common be emerged. toward been have effort physical, allergens directed all all has might chemical, characteristics characteristics functional Considerable elicit can Thus, antigenic molecule host, an response. any appears susceptible essentially in allergic a that it

an able common appears proteases. While search demonstrated significant the has are that clinically of some of features molecule any type allergic allergens response, be to for allergenic molecules to elicit of protease p the pteronyssinus. 1, cysteine which protease is in feces allergen ubiquitous Dermatophagoides the Der house mite dust One present is the North provokes American p 20% population. about in Der allergic 1 of the reactions This intercellular a airway cleave the junctions occludin, protein enzyme found has mucosa. in of tight to been component This the reason reveals enzymes. for certain allergenicity of one possible to cells destroying the (see p cells, subepithelial 1 junctions epithelial By Der of Fig. may gain access antigen-presenting tight abnormal integrity between the 14.2). individuals Netherton’s tendency is proteases by highlighted IgE syndrome of The with induce production (Fig. to and high which is of levels IgE characterized 14.5), by allergies. multiple protease This caused protease (serine which 5), type-related inhibitor). in encodes by Kazaltype Kazal mutation LEKTI is serine the inhibitor (lymphoepithelial SPINK5 a inhibitor disease is most the (the the layer), of layer viable to just cell skin cornified differentiated expressed in the layer internal of cell epidermis. the granular LEKTI the function. disturbed barrier leading that shedding active in syndrome kallikreins, skin results epidermal overly in and can skin, desmosomes cleave LEKTI Absence keratinocyte proteases in Netherton’s of to 5 skin of the lymphopoietin and IL-8, in active thymic stromal leads to kallikrein Overly overexpression (TSLP). ICAM-1, TNF-α, of lesions agonist TSLP the development is both skin for the and manifestations food and (including seen of allergic major allergy) manifestations in a essential Netherton’s allergic the the syndrome. eczematous in is skin, bacteria to inhibit released proteases LEKTI aureus. by is Staphylococcus thought the as such Additionally, of in of and with be with facilitated the since of individuals a response. by the aureus eczematous of to may addition in inflammatory of S. fraction very resolution large elimination significance is Staphylococcus, colonization persistent the suppression chronic process, eczema This eczema special the show

protease development inhibitors targets provides in inhibitor syndrome observation that in allergies in possibility multiple for of might support novel The the a the mutations that some therapeutic be protease disorders. led allergic loss-of-function additional Netherton’s to protease the papain, is cysteine fruit, papaya Furthermore, meat. the from used derived as a Papain can

Fig. syndrome the with high allergy. of Netherton’s and of the illustrates of 14.5 proteases IgE development association levels by high This IgE other syndrome, skin), Netherton’s associated the levels. erythroderma man food a of tissues, protease the deficiency and had with skin multiple infections the (redness recurrent SPINK5, persistent serum caused inhibitor of with and 26-year-old in allergies scales photograph, erosions large In visible trunk. with the the top upper plaques covered and over are erythematous skin a the The through lower same the shows section patient. panel of Note epidermis. the psoriasis-like the hyperplasia of also epidermis. in are present Neutrophils the the perivascular infiltrate a In evident. is dermis, not at mononuclear magnification, discernible contains and Although both cells infiltrate this the neutrophils. E., Source: al. et Sprecher, Clin. : Exp. Dermatol. 29:513–517. 2004,

reactions the workers preparing enzyme. allergic cause in present allergens allergies. by environmental called caused Allergies the in occupational workplace are enzymes. all potent allergens, p are Although 1 not papain allergens and are Der enzyme In and, inhibitors, proteins identified filarial from in allergens pollen-derived activity. to allergenic fact, general, most worms enzymatic seem do are possess not two

important of and of tale. to illustrated by public allergenic significance, can the Knowledge cautionary identity have can be health following proteins economic as the nuts, methionine was intended rich protein animal that ago, is transferred and for albumin Brazil feed. Some into cysteine, genetic in for by from soybeans a the engineering gene years 2S to of in these intrinsically acids. amino soybeans, are value sulfur-containing the done poor which This improve nutritional was led albumin to 2S major is allergen. This that the experiment Brazil nut discovery the Injection the the triggered response allergic genetically nuts. soybeans extracts epidermis an people to into modified skin Brazil in of of allergic was the kept genetically out the development scale, be food no there they were chain of modified a produced on be soybeans guarantee As this could human modified of that food if large abandoned. could

disease. IgE-mediated contribute allergic to the Genetic factors of 14-3 development

genetic development to components. environmental of allergic both disease has Susceptibility and up tendency exaggerated countries, to allergens. common wide industrialized an mount In to test the population variety IgE to responses studies performed 40% Western of a shows of in environmental two more Atopic allergic develop eczema. rhinoconjunctivitis, allergic asthma, such as or allergic or often individuals diseases allergic triad. of to said are all these the who atopic disorders manifest express Individuals three

association for eczema uncovered genes than allergic and Genome-wide studies 40 for as known have condition skin the (Fig. susceptibility allergic (also dermatitis) (GWASs) atopic more atopic asthma 14.6). of the the genetic are is, factors of allergic of regardless organs targets are the are common suggesting asthma, governed aspects of both some (that atopic atopic that the diathesis response. Some that to allergic predisposition) genes similar the by susceptibility and eczema For atopic IL-13 asthma allergic association and both and eczema. specific IL-33 show example, alleles with strong loci receptor at the with that genetic sharing allergic both. family finding may by family atopic in allergic commonly disorders, and manifest some is these or both consistent together eczema are not asthma but families, two risk asthma, of disorders atopic the alleles manifesting while only atopic other found This with members eczema members to other (especially genetic the without of eczema responsiveness allergic skin-barrier of for that genes show function) that may however, that linkage factors many to There individual indicating asthma regulate phenotype enhancing the alleles contribute are, risk allergic or any allergic express. atopic rhinoconjunctivitis, importantly genes allergic are there differences in given the susceptibility many disease. addition, for ethnic a genes In exacerbating contain asthma chromosome inflammation. associated autoimmune regions with allergy and diseases, suggesting of the involved inflammatory also or in that loci with psoriasis the are with associated disease these Several that are genes

and the and encodes for subunit the receptor asthma both atopic of β FcεRI. at IgE high-affinity gene chromosome susceptibility resides One 11q12–13 candidate allergic eczema region at contains 5q31–33, disease, increased allergic of susceptibility. for associated types least of might be that with responsible genes genome Another candidate the four is eosinophil IgE First, that tightly switching, of genes cytokines linked there for class enhance a cluster

Fig. Susceptibility for loci 14.6 asthma. of GWAS functions. cells and targeted are genes regulate or that the analysis differentiation on gene function airways, unknown basis with T have miscellaneous into CD4 the of genes cells that listed, other linkage or that the in Loci and shown epithelial genes expressed ILC2s, and/or of are separated

which to an proliferation, allergic of and help all maintain response. mast-cell IgE-mediated survival, and produce the cluster for IL-4, genes IL-9, IL-5, This IL-3, IL-13, (GM-CSF). includes factor and granulocyte–macrophage colony-stimulating in genetic has raised associated with IgE the IL-4 been encoding of the atopic in variation promoter particular, individuals. region levels In gene promoter IL-4 vivo. and thus gene of variant The directs expression experimental might reporter increased produce increased systems in a in receptor. the gain-of-function mutation ligation also the associated the IL-4 of signaling been Atopy with of of increased after subunit mutation the α a with has receptor, causing

5 TIM domain). cell, set mucin and second A belongs region genes to chromosome (for the T this domain, of immunoglobulin of family in and (Tim-4). -2, and (Tim-1, T-cell-surface expressed one in primarily cells encode genes on three antigen-presenting -3) proteins protein this set The negatively cells regulates Tim-3 expressed a TH1 extent responses, and negatively (and whereas TH1 Tim-1) lesser mice, to regulates specifically Tim-2 cells protein in In TH2 is is on and expressed preferentially them. both IL-4 of IL-13 of different genes to allergic strains differ the carry the by susceptibility inflammation and Tim that in and their airways their Mouse T cells. variants the production in of homolog hyperresponsiveness. TIM variation of has humans, human hyperreactivity gene correlated airway with the three no found the Although has inherited been genes been Tim-2 in in or mouse contact irritants with nonspecific allergen seen in only In with causes breathlessness asthma. wheezy condition, that airway narrowing with also to but (bronchoconstriction), not similar this The of of and in candidate susceptibility the IL-12 one the subunits gene third genome encodes of p40, IL-23. this part two cytokines and asthma. found and IL-23 could with production was to associated more IL-12 responses, genetic expression p40 cause be that of reduced and promote TH17 severe variation These in TH1 the in is this fourth susceptibility gene also located β-adrenergic region. which candidate A receptor encodes alteration with endogenous might Variation to responsiveness muscle receptor ligands. in pharmacological associated in and this be smooth

illustrates complex the susceptibility The detection disease challenge basis a multiple common of identifying genetic genes traits. in potential of small of good by identified Relatively judging physiological as may contain many susceptibility, for genome, containing candidates, disease their known altered regions activities. the genes genes, of large studies very expression of to require disease may the of several patients controls. populations gene, that Identifying or lead truly and the early it atopy. For chromosome too different is how important the in know complex genetics example, is to polymorphisms for still 5q31–33, each of of the

general variation allergens, the it A to responses (the second inherited affects rather in atopy. is region class of type susceptibility responses class HLA and human a linked than to region), II to MHC specific II IgE allergens for production IgE particular are pollen particular might example, II DRB1*1501. ragweed the response; HLA implying in several II certain is haplotypes IgE containing alleles, allele that strong with associated favor to associated response HLA a TH2 combinations class with allergens peptide:MHC class responses to others. make allergens people predisposed TH2 and Many than to to some are respond specifically generally responses therefore to predisposed are more drugs class such II or presence as absence penicillin to no thought the originally atopy. Allergic were HLA with show or association to of responses with of peptide HLA altered can HLA the autoimmune-type Recent an the that a alleles interact bound have shown elicit so that in evidence however, structure drugs changes groove reaction. peptides of that the with molecule in antigens way specific studies, some these of this medication HLA-B15:02 bound with allele. in and binding peptide An HLA-B seizure of the this example carbamazepine the is of in severe skin leaving which loss necrosis, occurs necrolysis, complex development reaction toxic scalded. due to skin immune-mediated the response The carbamazepine:peptide:HLA-B a looking this widespread can to skin lead epidermal immune to

affect of to that likely aspects There genes are also disease. allergic particular only be and production, for response, that affect there evidence inflammatory clinical different of responses at three least to is disease—IgE treatments. asthma, example, particular the aspects In the genes lung polymorphism a expressed hyperreactivity. gene with metalloproteinase the smooth associated been bronchial encoding 20, fibroblasts, chromosome and by and ADAM33, asthma cells bronchial has On muscle of an of the inflammatory example and is in changes likely genetic the that the airways variation in pulmonary This be in occur to (airway anatomical remodeling). response pathological barrier skin, the lipid molecules skin function normal envelope contributes of keratinocytes. keratin In cornifying binding the filaggrin by importantly into to the to filaggrin encoding mutations in eczema. development Loss-of-function the lead of gene contribute to filaggrin the mutations development also unknown of can Through mechanisms, asthma. Almost the mutated people half eczema least one in United who allele. have from filaggrin States of at suffer severe and this and in in mutation considerably the of mutation is a 7 of carry frequency filaggrin, Between loss-of-function asthma. individuals 10% higher Caucasians with

cause 14-4 disease. genetic with Environmental may factors allergic to interact susceptibility

susceptibility 50% variation of Studies factors of the atopy. account that about of developing each for and environmental risk genetic suggest this on increasing that backgrounds of in and certain in impact of changes economically The advanced allergic due world, diseases, the and of the genetic asthma with them particular, toward of atopic likely prevalence to individuals in atopy. predispose factors regions is environmental is asthma increased although of African lower frequency of ancestry. not underdeveloped economically Americans asthma of Africa, African with is and show severity compared the of Americans ancestry Interestingly, incidence in regions on impact environment influences. of genetic the This shows a expressivity of clear

The prevalence atopy developed of allergic past years. for in been especially has 50–60 and steadily asthma the world the increasing as this diseases for rural hypothesis childhood moved increasingly infectious has steady our environments. in to early One is increase exposure changes from into urban in population animals microorganisms shift This in meant and microorganisms to exposure with associated less soil. has farm early-life the in alterations is an in lead to 12). exposure This important which to intestinal microbiota, function change performs thought in immunomodulatory Chapter (discussed the cause ubiquitous giving exposure a 1989, in of suggested was as in ultimately microorganisms increased hygiene possible hypothesis first Changes atopy the rise to to (Fig. 14.7). infections to hygienic to settings, which environments, in help rural against that those childhood, protect and predispose of developed The early proposition asthma. particularly less encountered original was the allergic less development atopy in TH1 of immune toward away production) associated IgE be cytokines, cells. effect (and dispose mechanisms due production originally to of protective TH2 the which cells It might and their toward responses production from the the skew proposed that was that suppress that to responses and IgE. would production of This favor responses promote the IgE that switching class impede

that between correlation the helminths this was as Suggesting was by strong simplistic and infection allergic disease. interpretation of hookworms the overly (such and schistosomes) negative development for children with Venezuela that period study showed treated a prolonged A antihelminthic had agents in

Fig. environment, 14.7 the allergic atopic and diseases. Genes, developing of are and likelihood Both disease. determinants of allergic important the inherited environmental factors Fig. (see known Many development influence asthma to genes the of are 14.6). some toward to childhood general and and infections environmental immune system a infancy ‘hygiene drives common in microorganisms postulate is of that the state the of The hypothesis’ exposure non-atopy. to of low courses environmental have or an childhood, and allergic to children atopy who infancy microorganisms, of exposure in who who be not susceptible mechanisms to multiple and contrast, thought with live antibiotics are received immunoregulatory atopic and In early a environment development develop the genetic most in and susceptibility to to disease. infectious disease efficient to

of higher untreated atopy children. parasitized a did prevalence heavily and than strong hypothesis. provoke this hygiene As a IgE helminths seemed inconsistent with TH2-mediated the response,

responses the might for of IL-10 and inconsistency perhaps infection the that this because occur as the of homeostatic explanation include they types infection TGF-β, the production apparent as protect responses One that possible such atopy elicit of as development cytokines against of is being host the suggests all controlled. part TH2 9-23). IL-10 responses suppress and TH17 suppresses the and of and and formation 9-21 both (see responses, TH1 IL-10 TGF-β Sections A intestinal or antigens enter the proportion as mucosal large of epithelium. are allergic by reactions that such respiratory surfaces though initiated antigens has the evolved environmental immune antigens) cells. As of and of mechanisms described food Treg (such the regulating flora responses that human as commensal mucosal IL-10/TGF-βproducing system in Chapter generation 12, to involve antigen. of the commensals body Treg The allergic and the decreased less some to underlying early of hypothesis that producing response cells, at efficient the makes the pathogens version current environmental way idea a in exposure risk an increasing common thus microbial hygiene making these is to common

role childhood the below, susceptibility to exposure exception is to to infection, the protect of certain with in of some respiratory for disturbed important types support consider asthma that immunoregulatory development against of In disease. that pathways allergic evidence we infections a of helps exposure in siblings be situations 6 or than more and other months against facilities— daycare three protected to linked atopy asthma. from infections—appear older and who children children greater with to partially a are to children aged to less families Younger exposed because a to against Additionally, a asthma, early-life of or presumably to are somewhat and farmor atopy microbes. ones dog children also their exposure protected having farm pet-associated development exposure of with allergic of with associated or gut infection reduced disease. colonization commensal such bacteria of such or gut prevalence and bifidobacteria, pylori, lactobacilli Furthermore, gondii by a Helicobacter by the is early as as Toxoplasma pathogens repeated to risk life also is conversely, exposure emerging early developing the evidence of in that, antibiotics increases There asthma.

atopy. A negative of hepatitis with virus history seems also infection have association A to with a for Tim-1 virus (see association Section A this A protein is hepatitis human receptor possible 14-3) counterpart the that for the HAVCR1). murine cellular explanation of is the (designated directly cells hepatitis The by the virus cytokine and could differentiation response. influence limiting infection T of production, of A IgE-generating an development thus their

these the to and bronchiolitis respiratory developing contrast virus In had more evidence associations syncytial have later prone with development are to asthma infection asthma childhood and who is on. associated of negative infection of atopy between that children (RSV) attacks skewed production hospitalized their and presumably production increased infection developing TH2 cytokine IFN-γ of IL-4, of increasing a toward responses away have ratio IgE. from with RSV of Children likelihood on first This to at appears infection. RSV effect age of depend age. experimental received or at neonatal mice weeks infection mice Experimental RSV with that in the lower production followed 8 IFN-γcompared by of infection 4 RSV increases of of was with inflammation lung primarily neonates or been that weeks as mice infected had were severe RSV weeks had of first at of at animals 8 the 12 age infected animals infection, more rechallenged When 4 with than age.

that allergen Other the changes might atopic exposure, diet, environmental tobacco factors smoke. pollution, disease and to are contribute atmospheric in increase in has Pollution allergic such of diseases nonallergic chronic to cardiopulmonary bronchitis, difficult demonstrate. an for association has blamed in the an disease as with prevalence increase been more but been and pollution, is, in increasing susceptible allergens however, individuals. for an evidence particularly genetically There between interaction IgE they when particles production. Diesel combined in shift context; allergen, 50-fold with TH2 accompanying 20to pollutant to the exhaust are best-studied an production this with cytokine increase less such risk Reactive as pollution, this oxidant may disease. to be and result a chemicals as of at with onslaught are deal increased of individuals such allergic generated able ozone

the be stress. that members oxidant GSTP1 aspect and preventing are susceptibility are of might GSTM1, in this superfamily governing that Genes of glutathione-S-transferase important pollen carried these allergic particular genes were the particles, alone. allergen-plus-diesel an challenged ragweed and with alleles airway Individuals who of variant the to when hyperreactivity increased who showed allergen compared exhaust with were to noncarriers children the to ozone. GSTM1 that effects asthma found than the airway allergic of the study City given allele children in on with atmospheric levels ozone on hyperreactivity more carrying susceptible null Mexico also A when atopic levels of exposed of Underscoring worsen species to studies potential reactive airway asthma ozone antigen-induced and superoxide to myeloid of exacerbation, that for such airway produce cells mice contribute high that the using as oxygen levels indicate hyperreactivity. super-oxide hyperresponsiveness. exacerbation mice sensitized antigen-induced of animals, production airways whereas of Inhibitors adoptive marked for sensitized of reduce of myeloid superoxide, the required superoxide-producing cells NADPH oxidase, of transfer the in challenged and causes hyperreactivity airway challenged into and

control T responses. allergic can Regulatory 14-5 cells

individuals them leukocytes production of atopic responses. that programs atopic primarily blood in cells similar of cytokines, treatment from and suggests that anti-CD28 and type mononuclear generate circulating 2 to individuals cells non-atopic from not, individuals stimulated quantities treatment of fashion have stimulates TH2 in does of The (consisting substantial lymphocytes peripheral that of previously monocytes) with observation been whereas a anti-CD3 increasing number atopy. 2 subjects also abnormal suggest type aggressive responses normally that are to suppress An studies of regulatory serve mechanisms in overly with that at and TH2 Treg pollen activated they even cells non-atopic compared are co-cultured peripheral with atopic the from with pronounced from are more season. during CD4+CD25+ defect Treg CD4+ individuals cytokine effective production similar cells is this polyclonally individuals, T blood less When suppressing cells, master a natural in mice Treg role More induced of from FoxP3, evidence transcription switch for cells for Treg factor the comes for and cells. (thymus-derived) types in deficient both producing the atopy some and several of inflammation. well blood develop of spontaneous manifestations of These numbers airway eosinophils as increased circulating as allergic increased including levels IgE, atopy, mice can asthmatic Treg mice. in the experimental ameliorate pathway of inflammation Manipulation of indoleamine by DNA the Increasing the 2,3-dioxygenase CpG generation induce IFN-γ by Treg cells. anti-inflammatory with expression of enzyme treatment or activation can (IDO) or unmethylated dendritic enhances the lung and mice. in IDO by in cells CpG activity Treg of with ameliorates stimulation Induction DNA asthma activity experimental resident in that function enhance other to and asthma be disorders. findings Treg beneficial aiming therapies These could in atopic suggest responses. like molecules IL-35 of serve might immunoregulatory asthma treatment immunotherapeutic cytokines the TH2 that as IL-27, which, can Other for inhibit and agents include IL-10, therapeutically cytokine Alternatively, blockade IL-31 the to IL-31 be inflammation. beneficial since is promotes TH2-driven of anticipated

Summary.

commonly susceptible antigens individuals. Allergens in an antibody innocuous that are provoke IgE response generally Such normally mucosal across antigens at and body type enter 2 diffusion trigger doses surfaces by immune the response. very low a T differentiation into IL-13. cells cells TH2 of by naive IL-4 favored as cytokines and is The allergen-specific such IL-13 IL-4 allergen-specific to and drive Allergen-specific cells IgE. cells producing TH2 B produce allergen and receptor the to specific The produced in binds high-affinity for IgE basophils. cells mast on response to IgE the because, they cells these CD40 production amplified IL-4 and express ligand. activation, can produce upon by IgE be to IgE The factors. is genetic environmental by overproduction tendency and influenced both an the response allergen produced Once in triggers to to been an reexposure IgE response. allergic has allergen, pathology of in chapter. next We mechanism of the describe allergic themselves the responses part and the the

mechanisms IgE-mediated allergic Effector reactions. in

FcεRI mast on high-affinity are cells. allergens the Allergic IgE when to preformed triggered reactions receptor bound cross-link to cells to and the mucosal immune infection. Mast line surfaces serve system external local alert by they platelet-activating granules from stored pharmacological and in preformed such membrane. mediators inflammatory Once and as histamine secreting plasma the induce leukotrienes, synthesizing reactions prostaglandins, factor by activated, activation. chemokines cytokines release various after also They and need unpleasant to with to be case the are reaction, In innocuous pathogens an provoke that invading allergic not antigens that associated expelled. of they reactions its entry; occurs life-threatening the on contact and of of of rhinitis with the the nasal and anaphylaxis the pollen and epithelium, eyes IgE-mediated activation of collapse circulatory conjunctiva of antigen depend associated from in swollen route eye that consequences mast-cell dose (Fig. the symptoms the The to range with 14.8). of other caused on is leukocytes, The greater eosinophils, mast-cell is disease, extent more basophils. depending notably sustained lesser reaction or the recruitment lymphocytes, effector degranulation a due by which to followed, by the to TH2 a immediate inflammation, and

Fig. has different 14.8 on tissues. Mast-cell activation different effects

activation Mast-cell tissues, Ocular from Decreased the vessels granule Most gastrointestinal ˜uid protein response vomiting) blockage and increased cell-bound engages blood Sneezing Increased (diarrhea, permeability ˜uid mechanisms in to Swelling and itching of Congestion anaphylactic in Gastrointestinal and other effector coughing, those by release system 14-6 Hypotension airway in nasal increased secretion tissues (wheezing, antibody contents Eyes, increased in secretion Increased and lymph and Increased causing Expulsion lymph passages nodes, to of mucus increased and of airways tract diameter, is nasal leading of mucus tract airways IgE pathways phlegm) ˜ow, Blood isotypes. ˜ow secretion, tissues peristalsis different shock potentially passages, increased increased cells of immune effector

such Antibodies specific cells for cells engage by mast binding as to constant effector regions. their receptors Fc antibodies of sites after their antigen-binding only receptors bound antibody. Most an forming engage Fc immune specific and antigen antigen, complex have of Fcε captured it antigen. the an high-affinity IgE the absence by is (FcεRI) is exception, receptor in because bound antibodies, of the that, other sites in found is inflammation. and at are carry on this in receptor—mast cells cells and circulation body fixed that in found mostly mainly means This unlike fluids, which basophils tissues, IgE triggers into by of cell-bound antigen specific multivalent the at activation antibody the these entry sites antigen the IgE cells ligation The of tissues. the of The chemokines response. release IgE-triggered mediators, mast these eosinophils inflammatory of augment recruits cytokines, at and lipid the sites allergic cells to basophils of reactions activated and from also can TH2 then local recruits cells, 2 mount It which type cellular a response.

Fc of two are types IgE-binding There receptors. The basophils, receptor first, on immunoglobulin of Section and expressed is superfamily the a 10-24). FcεRI, cells mast (see high-affinity the receptor is this of specific it phosphorylates through which intracellular an antigen, When receptor. transduces signal receptor-bound domain on Lyn kinase, ITAMs activating bound tyrosine cross-linked by the IgE the to phosphorylates of Syk, tyrosine downstream broad which activates effector activates This kinase and a amplifying and pathways. recruits range the on can infections, marked IgE, to of a release activation enhanced antigen, such IgE-dependent and increased, an of allergic surface cells cells, mediators people exist concentrations such levels mast of cytokines. FcεRI with in a markedly those in as chemical result low of in parasite High by or diseases specific that increase sensitivity of and the

IgE lectin as structurally receptor, C-type usually unrelated low it IgE is a is second affinity. and with CD23, FcεRII, known to FcεRI; binds The on B many platelets, including cell epithelial follicular eosinophils, types, CD23 dendritic is cells, present monocytes, activated thymic cells, and cells. some T cells, strains gene of inactivated but for for been IgE levels, regulation has responses. normal receptor develop polyclonal CD23 be in thought which the the to still relatively crucial mouse IgE was This IgE antibody involved does CD23 to be Nevertheless, some levels enhancing seem in in situations. to specific increased IgE, are the known mice occur lack complexed Responses be antigen in in of fails CD23. enhancement gene such antigen but the presence the with for against a to that has has antigen This role in to a that complexed on with is IgE. of antigen-presenting capture CD23 the been indicate that interpreted cells

tissues orchestrate in allergic cells reactions. 14-7 reside Mast and

of he Ehrlich (‘fattened cells mast Paul found the called in Mastzellen rabbits, mesentery described them cells’). When granules take mast contain rich basophils, dyes. in cells Like that proteoglycans up basic acidic cells hematopoietic pathogens often vessels. near the surrounding tissues are locally, allergens, tissues residing derived stem blood but such exposed mature mucosal and from surfaces to cells as and connective Mast cells, allergic in mast mast reactions. cells submucosal tissue but in connective involved properties some or be Mucosal of from their both can differ

Fig. mast 14.9 activated Molecules cells. by released cells chemical active wide of Mast mediators. proteins variety a biologically release and other released and mediators granules. preformed two from enzymes in rows the the first are toxic The listed mostly after chemokines, and activation. mediators lipid synthesized cytokines, are The

kinase IL-9. for IL-3, factors for such mast-cell TH2-associated major The and (the and receptor tyrosine Kit), stem-cell cytokines the include development factor and growth IL-4 as ligand and IgE-mediated Kit differentiated with IgE, they Mice cannot cells, responses. although inflammatory produce lack mast defective make they cells. shows exclusively almost This on that responses such mast depend (PI activation shown has protect Kit, activation 3-kinase the to Mast-cell of against phosphatidylinositol mast PI 3-kinase) and p110δ in isoform by responses. 3-kinase of of depends been inactivation allergic pharmacological cells mice the on are promise mast-cell also blockers of Syk as the IgE-dependent of tyrosine kinase responses. amplifying Inhibitors showing

are on receptors activated cross-link constitutively antigens Mast IgE cells Fig. these when (see bound to FcεRI and express surface their 10.43). A low sufficient relatively of to degranulation. trigger allergen is level allergic mast-cell rapidly mature and thus the in aiding mast differentiate response. allergic precursors can many of There into in conditions continuation tissues, cells of inflammation, the they are antigen begins within releasing generated an (Fig. array inflammatory seconds Mast-cell degranulation preformed of mediators newly and of binding, 14.9). as serine vasoactive esterases, the such proteases amine contents include chymase short-lived and histamine, and Granule tryptase.

through G-protein-coupled known Histamine through each receptors which four it H4, a receptor. has acts—H1 flow and to immediate acts increase Histamine local H1 cause vessel via on vessels an permeability. in blood receptor blood local the edema to local leads inflammation. and This neural also and its of receptors. itching for sneezing, is virtue stimulus major activation Histamine a by of capacity the Acting it the dendritic can cells, H1 and increase through priming; can H1 receptor proliferation TH1 T through TH1 IFN-γproduction. cells, on on cell histamine acting receptor and cell antigen-presenting enhance and in By chronic dermatitis, disorders. histamine variety several H2, atopic H4 acting on and H3, participates of leukocytes urticaria, a tissue through autoimmune and cells, receptors

the Human into basis of are cells tissue and their subtypes mast protease on content classified location. epithelia protease. primary as their Mast mucosal cells tryptase in serine express designated are MCT. These cells predominantly tissues designated G in the cathepsin express carboxypeptidase cells MCCT. chymase, submucosa Mast tryptase, other and A, are and and connective and proteases break by cells damage. extracellular matrix the which The released causing matrix mast proteins, tissue down disintegration metalloproteinases, activate such venoms, beneficial thus agents. proteases to can exert helping suppress these as allergic to degrading These and effects responses snake bee

thromboxanes synthesize Following activation mediators—prostaglandins, histamine are as (collectively cells factor. de release addition granules, mast and also to and such in leukotrienes, and that stored mediators called chemokines, platelet-activating FcεRI, and novo through eicosanoids), cytokines, their in lipid proteases releasing intracellular preformed serine example, 2 immune produce MCCT MCT cytokine helps type cells, responses. the which mast perpetuate for and IL-4, both acute and secreted chronic to products contribute inflammation. These particular, cause muscle influx induce as vascular to persistently contraction, smooth the increased can allergic lipid leukocytes, activation to mediators, both inflammation. well of and The in rapidly secretion the permeability, and act which contribute as mucus, of and

arachidonic fatty membrane-associated Eicosanoids acid. acid the derive mainly from the a cell is This plasma phospholipids membrane phospholipase cleaved is by at from A2, of activation. result which as activated membrane to by pathways modified be give lipid rise can either of to acid two mediators. Arachidonic are cyclooxygenase via produces thromboxanes, pathway lipoxygenase Modification the the leukotrienes via produced whereas pathway. prostaglandins and the express cells, major mast produced prostaglandin basophils, which receptor (PTGDR). cells D2 its all Prostaglandin by TH2 is and recruits eosinophils, the of and PTGDR linked have of to critical diseases the Prostaglandin increased development the been allergic is such as polymorphisms of an risk D2 asthma. gene to and developing asthma, in C4, especially in and The important leukotrienes, E4, sustaining also are tissues. D4, in inflammatory responses prostaglandin anti-inflammatory their drugs preventing aspirin Nonsteroidal such exert as ibuprofen effects by production. and present arachidonic act that the inhibit prostaglandins. ring cyclooxygenases in acid on the They structure to form

mast released cells tumor also necrosis by amounts (TNF)-α factor the cytokine of after Large activation. are comes granules; in is activated Some mast by newly cells. synthesized the some stores the from pro-inflammatory promotes of of resulting (see increased expression tissue in Chapter leukocytes lymphocytes turn the molecules, cells, the activates affected which into influx TNF-α 3). and adhesion in endothelial of tissues. mast-cell nodes in TNF-α response peripheral of infection contributes to microbial regional importantly leukocytes into Additionally, influx lymph the to

TH2 types IgE-mediated recruitment of basophils, these mediators, eosinophils, mast-cell of cells. a that inflammatory the including amplified of lymphocytes, all B the by leukocytes Through several and of activation orchestrates is cascade broad action reaction of immunity The role host defense (see 10-25). Section is biological in infection normal parasite against a this as activation an responses allergic mast-cell important consequences, reaction, seen antigens. in the reactions associated triggered allergic the and environmental however, inflammatory have with chronic acute diseases In by as to pathophysiological mast responses. limited role not, is however, of pro-inflammatory cells IgE-driven to The cells role a to immunoregulation. are considered also mast have in Increasingly, stimulated by TLR as can ligands. by P substance be and such They neuropeptides to secrete In cytokine response suppressing they stimuli, multiple IL-10, the immunosuppressive can

Fig. range other mediators. highly Eosinophils a secrete granule of proteins and 14.10 toxic inflammatory for cells As Fig. mast (see enzymes by released granules. toxic and stored mediators preformed eosinophils largely in are 14.9), eosinophil are activation. after lipid mediators chemokines, cytokines, synthesized contrast, largely In and

responses. T-cell and regulatory T prevent cells cells between mast mast-cell degranulation. can Conversely, interactions

cause and basophils damage inflammation reactions. 14-8 in and Eosinophils tissue allergic

leukocytes in that are bone marrow. Eosinophils granulocytic originate are because so proteins, basic their are contain by the orange arginine-rich They stain eosin. acidic bright which colored granules, called of circulation; against healthy urogenital tissues, leukocytes humans, immediately cells role defense for the less gut, connective In represent sites. are implying found eosinophils the invading most in these these and in especially cells at the in tissue respiratory, in than likely underneath 6% a epithelium, these organisms receptors, they be as which Fcα (such numerous CR3, degranulate. and including CR1 complement cytokines activated They the receptors possess for cell-surface through receptors, Fcγ IL-5), stimulated and can and to receptors and degranulation. eosinophil or C3b, example, IgG, with cause coated IgA For parasites can contribute large of present are the reactions, tissue allergic IL-3, to that likely to In concentrations and IL-5, degranulation. are GM-CSF typically

eosinophils effector express two function. When kinds of activated, highly (Fig. First, toxic and they host can tissues granule can kill also which release and damage microorganisms cause can allergic reactions proteins significant parasites free radicals, but to in 14.10). Second, they cytokines. including can mediators, and leukotrienes, synthesize prostaglandins, chemical and the and cells eosinophils and amplify recruiting by These leukocytes. epithelial activating by activating response inflammatory more chronic eosinophils inflammatory responses, remodeling. airway to contribute can tissue In

of respond as 19th in and asthma to these still the observed but eosinophils that treatment in episode severe century of in role and later were generally is first the failure asthmaticus (an not status pathological respiratory defined does be fatal the to disease cells of death), leads to allergic were precise unclear. description What lead reactions, numbers for to that activation asthma, In to eosinophils example, become activated. chronic those and allergic mast-cell tissue degranulation, and large TH2 to in accumulate cause Among secrete cytokines vitro the production of in of TH1 cells. kynurenine, acts promote TH2-type of and IDO their apoptosis can and things, TH1 eosinophils cells the which consequent by other expression on promotion may TH2cell expansion reduction thus in due to partly Their TH1-cell a of apparent relative numbers. be thought contributors major continued presence damage. be allergic inflammation, eosinophils of are of to and chronic eosinophils tissue to is The characteristic of restoring that types bolsters cell consensus play accumulate eosinophils after However, observation tissue tissue eosinophils and stem-cell damage. considerable sites of that infection are other important homeostasis turnover there where growing in role high the and activity at local an a levels

The because of to and harmful is degranulation host. regulated, strictly is their the inappropriate activation activation eosinophils on eosinophils of of bone by the control the The level acts production marrow. first eosinophils are infection stimulation. or immune in Few produced the absence other of IL-5 TH2 the such the produce they of GM-CSF But into production increase bone cells circulation. and are their the when marrow cytokines as and in activated, release eosinophils by eosinophils animals tissues, transgenic controls. have the indicating separately, but a that circulation of not set into migration in IL-5 the (eosinophilia) increased of regulated numbers from circulation eosinophils of is tissues overexpressing second the However, their in the named molecules for have because (eotaxin chemokines CCL26 that CC eosinophils: specificity of in this been case 3). 1), The 2), eotaxins CCL24 (eotaxin (eotaxin and are CCL11 key their

induce chemokines, quite eotaxin chemotaxis and eosinophils, CCL13, CC activation. and on promiscuous CCL5, and CCR3, is which binds CCL7, eosinophil also other receptor including The chemokines stimulate basophils. and cells Identical or mast similar example, degranulation. cause basophils their and attract eotaxins For eotaxins. receptor CCR3 also migrate carry cells TH2 toward and the

factors GM-CSF. an basophils to similar site reaction, and they include IL-3, also IL-5, for those very eosinophils; and the inflammatory of present at growth Basophils for are are population the or There maturation is basophils stem-cell of evidence of reciprocal the control into eosinophils. for eosinophil enhances presence and of that in IL-3 differentiation the TGF-β of basophils. example, suppresses For and circulation the seem very normally have in against numbers to a in are Basophils similar role of low present to defense eosinophils in pathogens. that are to reactions. recruited sites allergic eosinophils, Like the of they IgE-mediated cell so surfaces their bound. on high-affinity Basophils IgE and express have FcεRI from by histamine or cytokines, On IL-4 granules activation also they their release and produce and IL-13. antigen IgE binding by to

cells, can interact mast each other. with Eosinophils, and basophils major (see basic Fig. protein releases Eosinophil degranulation 14.10), basophils. cells and of causes which degranulation mast in the turn that such as growth, This of is cytokines augmented IL-5, IL-3, effect and differentiation, and eosinophil by affect the GM-CSF. basophil and any activation,

rapid IgE-mediated have chronic a can onset reactions lead also but to 14-9 responses. allergic

challenge reaction’ a and inhalation a an be allergen allergen response by into sensitized clinical Under of can laboratory ‘late-phase intradermal individual the or (Fig. divided to of ‘immediate conditions, reaction’ 14.11). The immediate

Fig. antigens 14.11 response be test into Allergic late-phase a and divided to response reactions can an response. in immediate

Left to antigen response late be the an and into inhaled panel: can early responses. divided the the measured constriction flow response with rate of the muscle asthmatic of edema smooth development can a airways narrowing by the expiratory and caused lungs in of fall as An bronchial be (PEFR). in peak and subsides, response baseline returning then within peaks antigen inhalation minutes immediate PEFR. near The after to also late-phase the in be eight to there a can after antigen fall Six a challenge, results that response in PEFR. hours direct muscle is released the effects as smooth such on blood mediators nerves, The caused mediators and lipid by of cells. by histamine immediate response and metabolized mast rapidly vessels, lymphocytes and caused myeloid of recruitment to by of the by lead production dilate compounds and of the vasoactive cells, by mediators, late-phase continued edema. is production these blood which production the vessels, of response that together The within two for of Right lasts wheal-and-flare and to antigen or allergic panel: minute up a injection minutes. of reaction intradermal develops a 30–60 phase the hours for 6 or 2 of and The can more days. characteristic late 3 develops to response widespread edematous approximately up persist later after late-phase skin allergen an challenge (left) 6 and a intradermal resulting occurring allergen 15 (right). with The shows challenge hours after reaction in wheal-and-flare challenge minutes observed reaction (early-phase) photograph a The extract. grass allergen pollen was courtesy S.R. of Photograph Durham.

and of within is seconds IgE-mediated reaction mast-cell due allergen exposure. activation starts to of the the by is preformed result or It mast actions of and synthesized other cells. rapidly histamine, mediators released prostaglandins, (in and visible These response) an permeability, of and (in response). a edema smooth edema reddening increase of narrowing cause the muscle resulting in airway the in rapid as skin and airway vascular constriction result mediators a skin of edema. to which on and the increase permeability, leads on local blood vessels in receptors of extravasation immediate an vascular In acting fluid skin, causes H1 histamine cutaneous leading local nerve also reddening acts vasodilation reflex the skin. and local on Histamine of H1 blood to of endings, receptors on vessels skin a is wheal-andflare (see resulting The called Fig. lesion reaction right panel). 14.11,

a on the late-phase occurs allergen cellular reaction aspects depends on activation difficult are of and quantify. that immune Whether to dose 50% with Fig. allergic administered late individuals (see intradermally that of deemed doses of response in about subjects safe for of allergen skin asthma, occurs who a immediate are At for example, an testing show reaction 14.11, right panel). and edema area in The of as late increased between hours a 9 (see becomes obvious degree skin after and and antigen Fig. peaks much 3 reaction tests challenge, or 24 can that hours panel) 14.11, right longer. persist for the vasoactive (CGRP) and (VEGF), and and by factor edema recruitment and vascular mast mediators vascular which vasodilation monocytes, gene-related is peptide in basophils, of caused reaction release result cause leakage calcitonin such that cells, continued the The synthesis by late-phase endothelial eosinophils, as inflammatory of lymphocytes. growth especially mediators and block through this ability inhibition glucocorticoids glucocorticoid shown their immediate cell response. block do to is of medications of whereas cellular the influx The response importance recruitment, the of not by late-phase the peribronchial into with a A cellular by after airway late-phase spaces also aerosol Fig. edema characterized sustained narrowing occur phase infiltration of (see can second and to reaction and exposure is the allergen, panel). left 14.11,

allergens to In determine disease, clinical to response help which sensitization, are allergists assess allergic and immediate patients with and confirm the of history use responsible. a skin a within the the site sensitive minutes the for are occur (see few tested, wheal-and-flare of at individual reaction a if each prick—one by is site to into will of skin amounts allergen—and Minute introduced allergens a Fig. allergens any potential the 14.11, panel). right of Although small administration is there a inducing allergen the is reaction amounts localized, such risk small of after the anaphylaxis. usually of very I, for a IgE Appendix of Section allergy allergen (see A-4). standard concentration is specific circulating the for in antibody measure Another ELISA sandwich to a test particular

to late-phase reaction relatively all under occurs so reflect of conditions The allergen not long-term above the a and of dose high natural does exposure. experimental described single, controlled effects inflammation, which response long-term allergen 2 consists IgE-mediated cellular and basophils, TH2 can lymphocytes, diseases, a with persistent eosinophils, of chronic quality dominant In is driven be allergic of a exposure immune consequence that macrophages. type allergic by a chronic chronic such These reactions serious long-term contribute as illnesses, importantly to asthma. result vascular and long-standing persistent for example, in factor narrowing and growth results as edema, in the persistent calcitonin cytokines such the endothelial which of by mediators airways. vasoactive gene-related asthma, In released TH2 cells peptide to the airway and of often via hyperplasia the hypertrophy cells), smooth cell can the tissue (an changes increase cells) in which remodeling, increase number and muscle (an the They size subepithelial deposition goblet tissue collagen, bronchial of also in muscle hyperplasia. lead of IFN-γ) of IL-21, as cytokines this and phase in predominate TH2 also cytokines (IL-17, and Although IL-22) asthma, participate. TH17 chronic cytokines (such can TH1 to appear

several function allergen-specific and probably defect allergic an route which in by most symptoms the some IgE-mediated situation, or the the the of the In affected. tissue the dose of by IgE underlying clinical allergen, critically depend barrier amount organ variables: reaction in particular allergen produced the on is present, introduced, natural 14.12. are allergen produced of dose of different The combinations in summarized entry and outcomes route by Fig. and the involve individual occurs site are reaction, chronic degranulation the at to a both cellular which allergen exposure components mast-cell they on the pathways. of sensitized When in of focused effector soluble and an the triggers many recruitment allergic and effects immediate

Allergen can 14-10 cause the introduced bloodstream into anaphylaxis.

is mediators sensitized a that reaction wasp into become called histamine bee by the systemic throughout with release the a in can the resulting for the or activated, bloodstream absorbed anaphylaxis. If individual, in gut sting, into widespread allergen other directly associated example, immediately and blood introduced body connective-tissue is cells from mast rapidly a of the vessels causes bloodstream, or (see to shock range in mild of fatal can urticaria symptoms anaphylaxis anaphylactic from The (hives) severity Fig. and last panels). first 14.12, response allergens that delivered blood via foreign Acute circulation. the skin are urticaria the to a is systemic to red turn which swellings causes release histamine, body—a wheal-and-flare itchy, over reaction. in version cells of of mast the to the all allergen Activation them in disseminated by skin causes the incompletely reaction persists allergen, Although recurs in rash IgE-mediated urticaria, commonly of defined. which urticaria the over periods, or remain urticarial caused by long the against an acute chronic causes an is chronic of Some by are caused autoantibodies urticaria cases

of Mucosal Route (MCC) Inhalation cells Connective cells Intravenous (MCCT) entry allergen tissue mast Ingestion Subcutaneous mast

causes Widespread Local wheal-and-fare of release to on release blood histamine of vessels acts which histamine, reaction.

permeability, grams) milligrams Airborne cause atopic also less) can allergens topical a anaphylactic or eczema increase ˜g dose, to high or leading dose, hives penetrating (low of to be (medium or skin to shock

Fig. results. IgE-mediated allergen administration of type reaction determines allergic that of route of the 14.12The cells mast mast mast connective tract cells (MCCT), two gut the called cells: with found and (MCC). distributions and mucosal anatomical tissue and tissues of in of connective respiratory associated main those those submucosal called layers and There vascularized are an receptors mast directed In coated these cells with of allergic allergens. specific IgE Fcε their through against cell-surface all are individual, which activated. The are then on allergen an cells mast to response depends the and connective mast histamine in bloodstream the mediators. tissue the systemic other throughout Allergen resulting activates cells body, of in (intravenous) release to inflammatory local activates tissue connective skin a the through of allergen mast local Entry leading reaction. cells, After an skin experimental

rhinitis induces (upper muscle of by Allergic increased smooth vomiting. caused mucus Contraction intestinal airway), fuid Outfow nasal production and irritation. of into diarrhea. causes gut diffuses Antigen

wheal-and-flare is the from blood widely a with atopic to smooth mucus (hives), or airway) or reaction. insect into of which is sensitized, Asthma as due eczema bite individual disseminated, manifests this and secretion muscle anaphylaxis, bronchial contraction vessels to and causing increased prick an urticaria allergen (lower allergens skin or airborne atopic that to eczema. may atopic individuals, applied the topically lead In penetrate mast by mucosal if asthma respiratory mucosal to rhinitis—or mainly epithelia allergic in leading Inhaled to in smooth occurs. the the penetrates the airways of of cells, allergen mucus nasal mucosal increased activates causing lower constriction and irritation mucosa, secretion that epithelium muscle allergen the intestinal smooth to the to fluid outflow Ingested gut and of muscle epithelium. penetrates gut causing across due epithelium, contraction diarrhea vomiting due allergens the reaches Food may can be in skin, widespread they also disseminated allergen cause bloodstream, when causing the the urticaria (hives) or eczema.

and can either considered IgE the of itself, against be form a against thus autoimmunity. or of α FcεRI chain triggers Interaction resulting receptor urticaria. autoantibody mast-cell the with the with of degranulation, patients, demonstrating in these with leads In IgE anti-IgE therapeutic to hives, for antigen that often the be though treatment (a the IgE omalizumab even antibody) elicited cannot some monoclonal role a identified. of individuals, resolution

a such histamine muscle shock, massive basophil-derived results in In and widespread as anaphylactic smooth contraction permeability vascular mediators celland release a increase from and mast other of leukotrienes.

to blood to culminating catastrophic low a blood to The of condition reduction death), which culminating failure. in are in in (a airways, supply hypotensive pressure respiratory vital pressure, and organs, consequences blood of leads often inadequate leading shock, constriction the of The to anaphylaxis foods wasp reactions ingested common to causes are medications, allergic individuals. most injected responses or sensitized of or allergic stings, and in bee relatively common. example, to allergic peanuts is in For individuals anaphylaxis life-threatening by but usually via cardiovascular causes anaphylactic smooth can shock and Severe which be of muscles, reverses receptors injection airway be of fatal the untreated, β-adrenergic α-adrenergic if the can rapidly via relaxation immediate receptors stimulation of epinephrine, of stimulation effects. controlled

can classes occur reactions treatment repeated allergic with many following of drugs. Systemic is reaction allergic aspects that immunological and IgE-mediated reactivity. relatively other its and inducer of common share penicillin structure A drugs of the death. people cause In IgE who can and antibodies have against even of penicillin, anaphylaxis developed injection drug individual very to are administration and of cause severe oral symptoms rarely an death. less result in While penicillin ingestion the after allergic usually oral can anaphylaxis, also a Section ring is highly acts it reactive A-1); with antibacterial reactions crucial prone it is of (see a to that is that reasons particularly a for inducing activity. as β-lactam is hapten Appendix I, allergic molecule One small the its that penicillin reacts This conjugates. host form on amino covalent ring with proteins groups to host and proteins, penicillin-modified or recognized as immune self the is with elicit peptides penicillin ingested injected, self forms a response. it foreign and conjugates When are antibodies the no are cause symptoms. proportion of with these intravenous A against who treated but individuals IgG large usually develop penicillin drug, some against conjugated provoke self activates with produce the antibody penicillin-binding response IgE a penicillin penicillin that TH2 to individuals, cells In proteins hapten. B modifying T-cell antigen B-cell as acts antigen. both penicillin the peptides, the by Thus, as self and, allergic cells penicillin-modified injected an basophils IgE can individual, circulating mast and is penicillin cross-link molecules thus on anaphylaxis. When intravenously and proteins into cause the tissue or to that be structural drug giving drug relative. taken a should Great past to with history a of avoid to patients allergy close care a

penicillin patients with β-lactam sensitivity to inhalant allergens, other with antibiotics As skin-prick individuals for or anaphylactic-type be a by of reactions testing. evaluated to history is can past true anaphylactic formation the treated a site a by associated doses of reaction with substantial the of reaction wheal-and-flare at A therapeutic of risk the test, manifested when skin test, of with drug. is developing the positive an

asthma. 14-11 the rhinitis development Allergen is associated of with inhalation and

Fig. allergen The entry respiratory an important route of is tract (see third panels). 14.12, allergic with rhinitis. as IgEmediated reaction allergens an known airborne Many people to atopic allergic react which mast as the nasal their the when release then from of epithelium, soluble beneath of cells pollens activation contact the membranes results they by contents, such that, diffuse mucosal across the protein This nasal the passages. allergens mucous epithelium of intense a leading histamine characterized in a discharge, irritation by passages; itching is Allergic to typically edema blocked nasal mucosa which local eosinophils; is release. and as nasal and the of sneezing; rich result rhinitis nasal deposited to of similar the eye conjunctiva allergens the A is reaction called allergic on conjunctivitis. airborne by year. of commonly allergens are seasons Allergic during are environmental present conjunctivitis only rhinitis that caused and certain the (known For hay example, fever

Fig. inflammation asthmatic of in Histologic of an the evidence airways 14.13 patient. chronic who patient by of total mucus a bronchus shows the section almost there a asthma; airway a died plug. through a Panel occlusion a is of of bronchial wall the In injury shows a by close-up dense panel the inflammatory view of a epithelium b, accompanied infiltrate. bronchus, to the lining Although neutrophils, discernable and infiltrate eosinophils, not this lymphocytes. magnification, includes at the T. Photographs courtesy Krausz. of

of as rhinoconjunctivitis) by pollens. grass variety allergens, tree clinically is a allergic and caused seasonal certain including Alternaria. late the summer are caused by of autumn the as pollen, as or or commonly in fungi weed such of that such Symptoms spores ragweed, 1 as and mites, d such 1 allergic Ubiquitous or year-round, a rhinoconjunctivitis. Der in can allergens cockroach feces cause cat in house 1 p be the perennial, dust g in of dander, of Fel Bla

submucosal IgE-mediated more respiratory airways. is disease triggered cells which allergen-induced lower allergic asthma, A mast of activation the in serious by is difficult seconds making an lungs. secretion the breathing can the more mucus, of This and bronchial airways by constriction within into inhaled trapping in air fluid to and increased lead treatment, threatening. asthmatic and can with usually need be Patients severe asthma attacks life allergic and rhinitis that asthma conjunctivitis cause The allergic allergens same commonly cause attacks. For severe asthma summer with has attacks spores. or arrest been of inhalation autumn associated by example, Alternaria in the of the respiratory caused

namely, Chronic by lymphocytes, and the of increased leads allergen airways, (Fig. of other inflammation characterized numbers of continued pathologic eosinophils, which an the is important asthma, chronic neutrophils, exposure presence basophils, leukocytes of to feature 14.13). smooth of thickening the hyperplasia to cells hypertrophy and cause fibrosis. eventual walls development due with concerted of remodeling—a muscle these of actions the The airway of the airway and layer, hyperreactivity leads chronic of of responsible Fibrotic to clinical of remodeling permanent manifestations asthma. the a and allergic many the airways, for is narrowing airways to develops. hyperreactivity of chronic irritants a asthmatics, stimuli general perfumes as such or often also In the volatile nonimmunological

that become are apparent there of It many phenotypic different has subtypes asthma. nature can in are infiltrates airways. the therapies, and of These subtypes present that cell the patients because of to recognized inflammatory the recovered responsiveness in signature molecular differ the in their airways, that being be are widely in different inflammatory mediators from therapy refer therapeutic differences as underlying molecular of by asthma outcomes these to The in leading investigators and Many that is disease be is the underlying by to elucidate their asthmas improve to ‘endotypes.’ of their permitting will symptoms. subtypes to the pathophysiology will matched endotype patients’ that expectation classification disorder opposed endotypes of asthma. asthma, steroid-resistant eosinophil-predominant) most the common severe exercise-induced to asthma, Some (as asthma, allergic include and neutrophil-predominant common the allergic thought prominent and infiltrates eosinophils in lungs. The to TH2 basophils are is pathologically the inflammatory in of driver fundamental cells, in and response the be activated asthma allergic infiltrates. asthma, cells larger TH17 role, in the prominent to inflammatory severe, a are neutrophils steroid-resistant appear play In and asthmatic aspergillosis to bronchopulmonary cells inducers be (ABPA). the appear allergic of major TH17 syndrome also different endotypes and Other are participation additional populations. characterized subsets by leukocyte effector-cell the of predisposition endotype to specific individual determined be the thought and the of conditions result of and inherited environmentally factors. individual The which the epigenetic of is any based sensitized the the asthma patient to individual specific was allergen under on genetic factors of

following allergic focus For common endotype, the will asthma, common of we mechanisms most the of asthma. discussion on cause cells fashion, challenge release. allergic antigen-specific, in mast-cell IgE-dependent patients leading activation mediator In can asthma, allergen mast of an with to TLRs also can IL-33. other receptors, Allergens release to and airway through epithelium damage stimulate IL-25 directly, and the activation cytokines cells lymphoid can them IL-4, and lead 2 to IL-5, submucosal These IL-13. release inducing the IL-9, type to (ILC2s), of innate receptor bind can on epithelial eosinophils, two time, at and the produce chemokine least basophils. same expressed the CCR3 of ligands—CCL5 macrophages, bronchial the cells, TH2 to cells CCL11—that At and chemokines, enhance by with the TH2 ILC2s, more 2 these together response the eosinophils the activated cells of and to lungs. Thus, products type damaged attracting and and ILC2and cells of airway fibroblasts the on and lead airway chemokines apoptosis TH2 smooth remodeling. direct effects epithelial cytokines of cell-derived muscle to cells The inducing in has which The apoptosis cell remodeling proliferation. part effects of to the the numerous induced stimulating on TGF-β, by from is epithelium, ranging production also a direct have in increased the IL-13 of a The chronic additional secretion. dominant such feature TH2-type allergic cells the of metaplasia, cells major and mucus in and which as another of goblet-cell consequent increase action may role epithelial differentiation on into epithelial asthma, IL-9 is airway cytokines of induction goblet cells, type or seem lymphocyte; see innate-like and in CD1d-restricted cooperation 8-26) an nonspecific, enhanced hyperreactivity, also (iNKTs, allergen-induced ILC2s. important 3-27, the be this role can have of to NKT the a whether Sections function and airway of of invariant by 6-18, cells development of have that asthma models hyperreactivity cells. exacerbated of the Animal airway shown iNKT by is presence lineage in mouse myeloid the of cells airway hyperreactivity. in roles establishment to regulatory Additionally, superoxide-producing play appear pathological models, also

disease but transcription resembling T-bet. develop naturally asthma lack develops in human the a Mice factor not asthma, that mice do This differentiation (see 9-21). factor Section TH1 is required transcription for T-cell are absent, TH2 skewed toward When phenotype. is responses the T-bet eosinophils mice increased and (Fig. T-bet-deficient and of develop IL-4, IL-13, airway the inflammation have cytokines lymphocytes TH2 and involving levels IL-5, 14.14).

increased around remodeling T-bet–/– biopsy with Airway eosinophils in˜ammation T-bet+/+ with Normal lymphocytes Normal Airway collagen and deposited airway airway lung

Fig. the T-cell allergic airway TH2. polarized factor Mice 14.14 inflammation responses develop transcription T-bet lacking and toward

in the the is to but TH1 and of present encoding not gene cells. binds promoter IL-2 TH2 T-bet impaired gene-targeted show asthma-like differentiation and and with manifest (T-bet–/–) an a in cells T-bet phenotype the of TH2 of lungs. development Mice spontaneous TH1 responses, deletion of in panels: lung and Left-hand airways mice. normal lymphocytes blood Right-hand with the airway (bottom). and and mice (top) vessels airway inflammation, T-betdeficient panels: lung around remodeling show with collagen airway eosinophils and around increased the courtesy L. of Glimcher. Photographs

nonspecific nonimmunological stimuli, hyperreactivity airway in They develop is similar to to human also seen what asthma. changes genetic circumstances, any in a that, TH2 cause inflammatory imbalance stimulus exogenous of absence These toward extreme the disease. in occur and responses show allergic can deficient are of large providing now strains being genetically availability cytokines in asthma. that hypotheses many inflammatory of in tested the a testing number human experimental of permitted has and roles of this cells effector mouse The model,

allergen, to a exposure perpetuated of by asthma seems the in initially even is to apparent chronic subsequent allergen. response inflammation Although the driven ongoing a be absence allergic specific to characteristically airways become factors can hyperreactive, trigger antigen than and attacks. asthma other The smoke environmental cigarette hyperresponsiveness irritants dioxide. such and Asthmatics chemical as characteristically show to sulfur respiratory to bacterial the can especially Viral extent, exacerbate also infections agents, rhinovirus, smaller tract or, disease. a release can Both exacerbation cells, IL-25 and IL-33 the infectious irritant airway and epithelial induce agents of of asthmatic the from leading to agents ILC2s activation and chronic inflammation. causes the the The of asthmatic main the for from the rhinovirus fact significance augmentation one deaths of of from asthma majority of with asthma. viral hospitalizations associated that and evident response of is is is infection

systemic reactions the to limited gut. as 14-12 causes as Allergy foods symptoms well to particular

immune to but foods reaction. are only reactions particular due Adverse to common, an some are into idiosyncrasies, in IgE-mediated food discussed classified 14-17), allergy allergic be reactions, can ‘Food and (celiac disease, intolerance. food allergy’ Section non-IgE-mediated to Idiosyncrasies abnormal resembling is which but responses unknown foods allergic particular response. cause those can whose an of provoke symptoms are metabolic of are deficits, milk mainly intolerances digest due adverse inability the due such intolerance Food nonimmune reactions to cow’s to to as lactose.

more adults of frequent slightly children American are in IgE-mediated European affect and 5%). 1–4% and allergies food about (around in due About peanuts, is incidence. allergy 25% is and in of allergy food peanut increasing to children 14.15 developing factors Figure for lists allergy. IgE-mediated food risk the with manifest to or lips the a food of IgE-mediated allergen, in from gastrointestinal itself of contact vomiting. on cramping, ways, ranging tissue diarrhea, variety a allergy and oral swelling can mucosal mast contractions. muscle fluid of cells, are due to activation symptoms transepithelial smooth to loss gastrointestinal leading Local and most can (see that bloodstream the cardiovascular allergens reach lead anaphylaxis Section and, collapse cases, asthma, Food lead can the to systemic severe urticaria, 14-10). subsequently in to that anaphylaxis. with most shellfish, tree particularly Certain foods, importantly are and severe nuts, associated peanuts, tree occur the food, allergies nut of the 150 result to reaction with in a and most of peanut allergic each accounting as Around deaths. United for year severe deaths a States peanuts, especially problem, many is may schools, Peanut exposed allergy foods. be public in which where present significant unwittingly are in health to a children the hope Recent allergy. for food studies reducing of offer severe incidence for regularly, were who a be 5 randomly 4 at high severe peanut assigned for to or on to ages with either years. diet study, peanut-avoidance between In peanuts developing risk eczema and infants months, allergy one fed starting 11 were be consumed 5, than had reduction decreased At of production who with the a threefold IgE. the in the age associated allergy; frequency of was showed peanut the reduction children peanut-specific peanuts more of food at allergen of the time This may that diet the individuals of development deliberate suppress at-risk introduction appropriate suggests allergy. into to the

characteristic of by the degree one high is food digestion allergens the Of to resistance of in pepsin a that interest features of stomach. is intact to allows small as the allergens. mucosal of the intestine them surface reach This acidic who to have Cases antacids numbers food less reflux these unaffected small or impaired conditions medications. been for potential of acid be the arising produced IgE-mediated taking digestion allergens were in by ulcers to stomach allergies of adults due previously or proposed of inhibitors proton-pump in

the by or that 14-13 symptoms desensitization restoring techniques lead can be treated at to the effector inhibiting disease tolerance to that by allergen. pathways allergic IgE-mediated biological aim

the general are drugs as treat of and of symptoms—examples are allergic used the immunosuppressive anti-inflammatory only β-agonists—or such drugs Most (Fig. corticosteroids either current such treat to drugs the are or disease that antihistamines 14.16). be to throughout life. need largely drugs palliative, Treatment the than taken and rather curative, often is treated with endothelial Anaphylactic are of epinephrine, the re-formation stimulates which reactions

Fig. of Approaches to the allergic treatment 14.16 disease. listed are reactions table, current under the allergic for listed in in Examples top of investigation the half clinical of with use treatments approaches below.

the smooth and heart. tight the bronchial of muscle, stimulates relaxation promotes constricted junctions, receptor from allergic reduce IgE-triggered release mast Antihistamines the cells symptoms urticaria. rhinoconjunctivitis and that H1 target the that histamine in follow of the unmyelinated H1 and for example, on blood the receptors nerve vessels include in urticaria, skin. the those In relevant fibers respiratory airways reduce and drugs bronchodilate constricted Anticholinergic secretions. and endothelial Antileukotriene leukotriene allergic and cells, used relieve of antagonists of to also on the act are cells, drugs mucous-gland as symptoms muscle, asthma. rhinoconjunctivitis smooth receptors and constricted asthma on β-adrenergic muscle that relieve act acute to bronchodilators receptors relax attacks. Inhaled inflammation. inflammatory use inhaled of and and corticosteroids chronic it asthma regular to to suppress allergic disease injury help important chronic now treat is the persistent tissues, in to In is prevent extremely recommended are eczema. changes Topical to inflammatory seen corticosteroids used in chronic suppress the

therapy that suppressive blockade to use IgE beginning function type an of omalizumab is allergy monoclonal is example. by A with anti-IgE being new of treatment antibodies, significant gain at the the antibody This cells. Fc same portion the and IgE FcεRI of binds on that site binds basophils mast different that IgE omalizumab portion as the from low-affinity the to of expressed FcεRI. leukocytes steric of other on receptor of mast and binds well high-affinity IgE variety basophils that (FcεRII) domain to cells domain a binding the blocks by hindrance the of FcεRI; is than receptor is to IgE Fc low-affinity as binds The that the receptors basophils binding to less of allergens. on Prevention receptors activated its of easily downregulation making IgE exposure these results in them cells, of on these to by activation dendritic IgE-mediated by and new TH2 cells. appears allergic trapping the presentation also thus asthma of in act Omalizumab preventing to to antigen chronic allergen-specific reduce cells, challenge the to to 14-9). of lead Altogether, (see these suppression response Section late-phase actions allergen by 4 weeks. administered The subcutaneous to every injections antibody is once 2 to for be This severe asthma. patients effective appears has with treatment urticaria to effective also chronic highly in be been chronic shown with individuals and therapy in studies most anti-IgE the to without years any modified Of for symptom interest the of with anti-asthma asthma treatment, disease. moderate omalizumab, is with children special treated of that severe suggesting natural who that were free remained history the 4

is eliminate used aims approach allergic to more routinely the that desensitization. Another, allergen response permanently immunotherapy of This patient’s tolerate aims to the ability to the exposure restore allergen. to form by are Patients allergen, with escalating injection desensitized tiny with starting of amounts. doses one mechanism subclass. the but in definitively is a change is desensitized one established, IgE which in procedure occurs desensitization most antibody patients, dominated an by The by results successfully IgG the that predominant to from for response not desensitization of on appears induction Section 14-4). secreting and/or response IgE from skew which depend production Treg Successful the (see cells away TGF-β, IL-10 the to exposed naturally often beekeepers stings a (paralleling that through the therapeutic example, are severe such involves allergic desensitization process) protected to mechanism repeated as reactions anaphylaxis For IL-10-secreting T cells. from well IL-10. production allergen airborne IgG the IgG4, sensitivity isotypes, selectively particularly and of increased an some cases Similarly, induces of for in the isotype allergens to TGF-β, specific as as immunotherapy insect and by IL-10 venom promoted production reaction. the with of evidence in cells reduction numbers the Recent shows associated a inflammatory at that allergic the is also site desensitization of potential experience an extremely of with patients some bronchospasms. small desensitization doses of IgE-mediated A of can the complication is approach starting in allergic response, spite allergen, including that sometimes severe many asthma. feel that immunotherapy is Thus, physicians patients contraindicated allergen in with allergy is continued of or other who For then their immunotherapy, for resolution allergen weekly symptoms 3 experience every week years, are discontinued. patients and the injections during therapy following this patients do symptoms not approximately In injections. fashion, of half treated the recur cessation of in the patients allergen experience to tolerate These without ability symptoms. durable route via of more the or of by immunotherapy effective the injection, suggest sublingual studies Recent that in less future. administration expensive perhaps more possibility and equally subcutaneous immunotherapy the than administration is offering effective

every treatment possible a patient dose agent), by symptoms progressively desensitization drug, the the starting it insulin, antibiotic, increasing individual doses causes with often drug and achieve an a is that is increasing until of at is disease a state the the as hour half allergic no dose (such is a or dose temporary acute chemotherapeutic a of for very When reached. allergic low of a to that to treating essential therapeutic drug It mild some urticaria, during desensitization (itching, mild individuals manifest undergoing time to procedure. common for to moderate allergic wheezing) at symptoms is the If the tolerated previous to and again. physician dose the the then advances dose occurs, reduces the dose this cell-bound their leaving an at that severe not is subsequent thought drug, lead does administered. process, by symptoms; allergic to is sensitized doses cause mediators all inducing procedure the them to mast when cause basophils IgE are this the that rate gradually cells IgE been subclinical have intracellular to consumed eventually against and reaction of activation of available release therapeutic IgE This insufficient to a with to state, In patient the order of therapeutic the drug. must daily the receive doses maintain desensitized can and formed anaphylactic be then and drug-specific can treatment newly yield at accumulate with levels sufficient basophils is a to IgE charged If mast newly reaction. secreted interrupted, cells new

still vaccination is immunotherapy unmethylated An alternative, in experimental, and strategy to using CpG. a rich allergen oligodeoxynucleotides coupled approach in responses. mimics DNA oligonucleotide TH2 responses promotes CpG bacterial suppressing strongly and while The TH1 motifs the but response, This treatment to appears for desensitization. for not of antigen-specific effective be chronic an useful acute allergic is

of may be allergic of allergic sites the A further of the inflammation. recruitment to eosinophils to block approach treatment to disease in potential is The CCR3 receptor target context. a eotaxin this animals, eosinophils experimental bone exit their the marrow circulation reduced In of into production is by IL-5 the and in action. blocking Anti-IL-5 chronic eosinophils organ which with syndrome, the overproduction hypereosinophilic is of treating patients causes of in in human damage. antibody severe benefit (mepolizumab) asthma seems patients, IL-5 to is blockade the to beneficial of patients practice, in of eosinophilic attacks subset is effect asthma; dose prednisone-dependent reduced. of show corticosteroid likely to trials however, asthma, anti-IL-5 Clinical of number the asthma a with be reduce treatment when limited that, small any these in

Summary.

to pathophysiological physiological to is reflects defensive protect role response aspects against the antigens immune a response whose The parasites. innocuous allergic helminth of antigen the IgE FcεRI binding and It cells the of to high-affinity mast bound triggered receptor IgE to basophils. by is on antibodies are body strategically beneath Mast in connective surfaces the of distributed the and cells tissue. mucosal amounts the of mediators. on surface large causes cross-linking release cells them inflammatory of mast Antigen IgE the to into divided leukocytes. resulting activate be later can The mediators events are early and that that eosinophils, which such inflammation as events involve and basophils, histamine, short-lived characterized other leukotrienes, by cytokines, and chemokines, recruit and response cells clearly eosinophils, most effector and is and by chronic presence the which seen evolve characterized asthma. inflammation, can This into allergic is T chronic in of

allergic Non-IgE-mediated diseases.

we or type T TH17 or involving immune or the TH1 focus chapter responses and type cells cells. part hypersensitivity 1 CD8 of responses In IgG immunological 3 involve antigen-specific that on this antibodies effector immune produce of chronic reactions. or acute allergic with response to arms noninfectious react These the antigens occasionally to pathology the same the the forms the initiating hypersensitivity Although of is mechanisms. much due immunological different, effector are mechanisms various of

occur the blood susceptible to individuals binding surface by in of cells. of circulating the drug

antibiotics by platelets β-lactam caused anemia) (thrombocytopenia) cephalosporin. or drugs, destruction cells be the and can of Antibody-mediated including (hemolytic penicillin red blood some of the anti-drug binds these antibodies cause In that IgG for surface to is drug cell. and covalently cell destruction the a reactions, target the not minority are make and these anti-drug is made antibodies a individuals why only in The clear it them. of people, circulation, the receptors. clearance macrophages spleen, tissue triggers in predominantly Fcγ which of cell cell-bound The from the the bear antibody the by

of catabolized quantities poorly administration the can large of follow antigens.

soluble antigens with following as arise such antisera. animal treatment Hypersensitivity can reactions immune the or The tissues in aggregates, deposition antigen:antibody pathology sites. by complexes, is and caused particular of and are is complexes all isotype by size pathogenic antibody responding of in potential affinity, the but part, amount, by responses, determined, antibody. their generated their the in and Immune fix are by system. aggregates mononuclear the cleared phagocyte readily circulation complement and the from Larger small walls. be blood in vessel antigen in is the excess tend However, form deposited that to when complexes they There leukocyte leading activation on leukocytes, Fc and can to tissue receptors ligate injury.

reaction called A (Fig. reaction hypersensitivity an local Arthus sensitizing antibodies triggered the IgG individuals skin of antigen. be the possess against who sensitized in 14.17) can injected the skin antigen locally. that forms IgG has into the into immune is When circulating antibody diffused skin, complexes leukocytes, immune receptors a cells complexes as and mast permeability. increased such local response FcγRIII The other on vascular Fc generating bind inflammatory and then Fluid inflammation enter especially leukocytes, blood site local of vessels. polymorphonuclear cells, and the from also immune activate The complexes complement, to leading production the

activates in immune on protein 1–2 phagocytosis, mast immune-complex and occlusion antibody antigen injected of Local in˜ammation, degranulation Local and IgG individual vessel C5a release, Fc˜RIII their increased induces blood Activation cells complement. formation Locally ˜uid with hours to C5a immune and binds to cell to the complexes respond sensitizes mast

Fig. to component 14.17 activation complexes immune as Arthus The C5a tissues known reaction. respond inflammatory mast immune complement response a to local causes and an cell of in deposition complement, to the the of sensitizing contributes individuals against IgG have made antibody who In complexes. already result has and antigen, mast-cell activation, injected the a vessel are inflammatory the complexes capillaries. an that and forms invade As the blood immune same of IgG flow site, out into cells with of antibody antigen the blood permeability diffused skin increased. ultimately Platelets the complexes dose occlusion. antigen Because at to is of low, inside accumulate vessel vessel the leading also site, the are the immune can only these is they necrosis. reaction injection, all the to of tissue the formed to where site severe, lead close mast changes If activate cells bearing receptors Fcγ (FcγRIII). C5a. complement of immune induces The complex the fragment on C5a inflammatory interacts the and the receptors reaction activate it attract site these them 2-5). inflammation to leukocytes This key because a to of cells Section in with is participant (see have synovial and probably same in and in linings joints. C5a of mast induction they induced the skin reaction required cells macrophages FcγRIII alveoli, lung to and the walls for the for in the are experimental an the by the by Both Arthus been of reaction of the shown required be Recruitment leads to activation receptor-bearing resulting and frank tissue leukocytes necrosis. sometimes C5a of injury, in

systemic as from of can of foreign known antigen. result sickness poorly quantities catabolized the a reaction injection serum A large was of frequently it This followed administration because the named horse illness therapeutic antiserum. so the often pneumococcal to specific clear the antiserum by made infection. anti-pneumococcal used horses In treat era, immunizing in pneumoniae help Streptococcus would patient the antibodies was to serum pre-antibiotic pneumonia; horse the the with of bites is snake snakes. poisonous antivenin suffering venoms) In to neutralizing still way, today used immunized from the with source much as same horses (serum of the treat people from antibodies a

the after days of injection occurs inter an Serum serum, 7–10 sickness horse

Drug-induced the required an mount Serum IgG-switched primary corresponds to val time to that

serum foreign immune antigens. the Sickness against response horse (inflammation rash, fever, sometimes sickness the kidneys). The features are the clinical of glomerulonephritis arthritis, glomeruli of and of chills, serum mast-cell histamine degranulation. is a rash, from the prominent implying Urticaria derived role for feature of a anaphylatoxins immune released IgG-containing by to case, ligation C5a by activation mast-cell the of complexes the complement due complexes. is and C3a cell-surface In by degranulation this these triggered the by FcγRIII and

antigen:antibody foreign serum serum nephritisforeign complexes proteins serum vasculitis, (days) against antibody arthritis, proteins fever, foreign injectionLevelinplasmaTime

Fig. example classic immune syndrome. a complex-mediated Serum sickness transient a is of 14.18 serum antibody antitoxin, protein, An of leads anti-horse response. to as injection horse such an a foreign These circulating the form immune complexes foreign antibodies proteins. with (vasculitis), kidney in skin fever and lesions the and inflammatory small The vessels are (nephritis), blood and vessels and in deposited the connective and inducing (arthritis). in tissues in activate in phagocytes, complexes blood complement joints transient and cleared. when resolve these the effects is All are protein foreign

serum The in Fig. sickness of course is illustrated 14.18. of coincides the complexes proteins throughout form with development body. these The of the antibodies soluble in the abundant foreign antibodies with against antigens immune serum; their onset the disease turn these complexes leukocytes can widespread Fc leukocytes complement damage. The to immune bearing receptors; cause and tissue in and and fix activate complement bind is of foreign the a disease. of sickness self-limiting so immune formation The usually serum complexes antigen, causes clearance (see typically antibody second two. secondary dose within appearing day a 10-14), Serum a after response of or Section symptoms follows a antigen of sickness kinetics the with

produce are because observed, clinical arthritis), Ig use antibody they humanize the for in not anti-TNF-α of sickness fortunately patients antibodies the rheumatoid for allotypes. With treatment where cases selected as serum settings (such attempt of was humanized the successful increasing used uncommon monoclonal rarely, of to monoclonal the the therapeutic of In symptoms to rapid clearance are anti-monoclonal more features response antibody of is the most these antibody mild, of and reduction significant circulation, the effects. generally of from individuals, its one leading the

in persists. situations antigen deposition is other in which immune-complex Pathological seen hepatitis. is as an occurs clear or subacute when bacterial viral chronic to response endocarditis antibody pathogen, adaptive in fails infecting the One a the of situations, complexes. immune replicating abundant antibody formation continuously with In generating presence pathogen persistent new of the in consequent antigen the is these response, are skin, within in vessels deposited and These tissues kidneys, the nerves. and and blood result injury many in including small organs,

rather levels they in IgE are disease when present allergens Immune-complex than provoke high perhaps relatively at the inhaled responses, also occurs IgG antibody air. because alveoli to person complexes allergens, the the of reexposed immune walls lungs. in in is doses of such high When a form cells and CO2, exchange wall, fluid, compromising blood:air of lung and in leads slowing This to alveolar accumulation function. O2 the of the protein, type spores, occur as the is farmer’s which to of likely in to resulting is repeated more dust such reaction and or known hay in there as is farming, mold disease This occupations lung. exposure is antigen If to lining permanently the can of sustained, damaged. the lungs exposure be

14-16 cells mediated T TH1 cells. can CD8 by reactions Hypersensitivity be cytotoxic and

antibodies, immediate mediated cellular effector which Unlike hypersensitivity delayed-type T such reactions antigen-specific are by hypersensitivity as the cells. are reactions hypersensitivity reactions, by mediated have response of the the they effector chronic of produce We involvement IgE-initiated seen allergic already in TH2 cells reactions. and the cytokines CD8 T TH1 by consider hypersensitivity caused diseases cytotoxic (Fig. Here the we cells and 14.19). the cloned pathogen essentially in or and 9), responses can a (described experimental respond transferred to These between the they function lines. Chapter T cells by in cells as hypersensitivity when way T-cell same in animals purified be hypersensitivity concert acting seen TH2 of earlier is by some of allergic the antigen-specific inflammation TH1 in chronic cells. described due reactions to Much mediated cellular the cells with diseases in

individual is Mantoux The used reaction that tuberculin test infected previously has with test— tuberculosis. the delayed-type hypersensitivity determine to Mycobacterium prototypic standard been whether the an is intradermally. Mantoux extract carbohydrates of derived small peptides injected In M. tuberculin—a complex the from of test, amounts tuberculosis—are and have inflammatory the with form by of hours. 24–72 immunization BCG bacterium, evolves either the been exposed to tuberculosis), reaction attenuated infection by or T-cell-mediated over a M. who vaccine In people local (an as of cells, lymphotoxin. enter of inflammatory peptide:MHC caused and by class and The the cytokines antigen-presenting II release is TH1 recognize injection, such on site IFN-γ, TNF-α, cells, antigen molecules response which complexes allowing cells causing adhesion plasma molecules swelling permeability, to expression These local (Fig. on stimulate vessel site, thus the a increase accessory endothelium and blood the of enter and visible 14.20). and the hours response several fully these challenge. hours Each appears only phases so takes of 24–48 developed after the actions activated The by and Fig. shown cells in TH1 are cytokines produced their 14.21.

antigens. in contact contact dermatitis in caused contact by an observed certain local skin hypersensitivity), with reaction inflammatory allergic similar skin Very reactions is are direct the (also immune-mediated which called damage all note immune-mediated is direct or is chemicals. caused toxic in be not by irritant can It that nature; to important to contact the also skin allergic it dermatitis by and

antigen into which causes TH1 is A injection cells processed subcutaneous vascular effector act lesion phagocytes cytokines, plasma site endothelium to injected of Recruitment and antigen hours by antigen-presenting cell Antigen recognizes local of releases on and and 24–72 tissue visible

Fig. Cellular hypersensitivity reactions. 14.19 and These responses T cells 3–5 days to or develop. by are mediated require more three which the can the be syndromes, route They by passes body. according into antigen grouped into to delayed-type contact and In absorbed enteropathy gut. is into it gluten-sensitive the skin; it is by antigen in the injected hypersensitivity the hypersensitivity skin; into is the absorbed in commonly hypersensitivity, form. contact vesicles In of accumulations at blister-like the the lesions and between level They membrane small epidermis. of basement represent in dermis fluid the basement the with response inducing this inflammatory result antigen the edema at membrane, the Their at formation fluid. local and epidermis, a location probably is accumulating of penetrating a is sensitizing can contact that agent hypersensitivity. (dinitrofluorobenzene) DNFB cause

14.1 MOVIE

Fig. of reaction. 14.20 delayed-type The stages hypersensitivity a presentation involves the first phase by and The local processing, uptake, cells. antigen of antigen-presenting the by and cells the site of phase, migrate In become into TH1 second previous injection exposure that primed a been activated. to antigen have the these specific T cells for and arrive. because Because of inflammation to into several is there it hours cells take can cell correct a the to rare, the are little specificity attract site, serum endothelial proteins, leukocytes, an activate fluid, cause cells mediators a accumulation and which the inflammatory local of producing These and more visible that lesion. recruit thus cell by macrophages infiltrate dominated release cells,

on by presented and tissues and the is MHC cells in antigen-presenting Antigen class processed local internalized molecules. II site. that leukocytes injection that to locally recruit release antigen cells of macrophages site and recognize at and the Antigen-specific cytokines the antigen:MHC other TH1 chemokines complexes the the macrophages the newly recruited Antigen then by presentation response. amplifies release of macrophages stimulate blood cells production lymphotoxin IL-3 release GM-CSF. the through also T (LT), of local through and the affect TNF-α of vessels can and the and kill ligand. macrophages Fas cell-surface of TH1 release IFN-γ sensitive the expression through activate the other and and TNF-α, cells through the and cells of macrophages

Poison Contact to Sensitivity Ivy

Fig. delayed-type by The antigen-stimulated hypersensitivity cytokines and is response 14.21 TH1 chemokines released directed by cells.

antigen monocyte macrophages leukocytes by Induces deposition expression bone of Recruit adhesion Stimulate cells LT and of to TNF-˜ molecules. Chemokines site and lL-3/GM-CSFIFN-˛ stem vascular other production marrow local Activates macrophages, Cause increasing tissue mediators infammatory of release destruction. tissue vessels molecules Antigen local and processed expression cytotoxins TH1 on cells Cooperate stimulates TH1 blood chemokines cytokines with increase of IFN-˜to macrophages is adhesion by

contact be the by cells, by is Allergic activation on the the or T of processed. antigen depending which can CD4 caused pathway dermatitis CD8 are Typical antigens easily if allergic injury molecules its small highly and to itching that skin, can to barrier. dermatitis reactive penetrate the intact that skin especially cause that leads contact cause consequent they scratching by peptides cells that chemicals then MHC molecules creating capable proteolytically These of to can haptenated in foreign proteins with be cells processed react T antigens. as recognized self and proteins, antigen-presenting being presented haptenated by allergic phases responses, sensitization there cutaneous a other and two to with elicitation. As allergic are response: up process epidermis lymph (see the phase, where dermis in During cells sensitization T cells and Fig. migrate antigen, cells and the to nodes, Langerhans regional they activate in take dendritic and the with of dermis. memory the T 9.13) production cells, which consequent in the localize phase, T-cell IFN-γ the a the to elicitation to memory such leads T to as the chemical presentation dermis, of and subsequent cells In in with the exposure antigen sensitizing IL-17. release cytokines (IP-9), the of and and CXCL8, the IL-6, CXCL9 (Mig, IFN-γ). chemokines IL-1, monokine to a interferon-inducible (IP-10), epidermis stimulates the CXCL10 This TNF-α, GM-CSF, chemokine induced the keratinocytes CXCL11 by release cells the and the inducing by migration into enhance into inflammatory more of T response their macrophages, by attracting lesion and maturation and chemokines monocytes These (Fig. cytokines the 14.22).

by (Fig. rash poison The plant produced the ivy contact with example mixture the States allergic a (a is United response common and of pentadecacatechols) of the plant. CD8 caused contact is to oil by in dermatitis 14.23) a urushiol in T-cell cell so cross can and to and the are proteins. membrane These attach chemicals intracellular lipid-soluble endoplasmic molecules. cleavage, are immunoproteasome, by they cell the are and the I class modified following bound MHC recognized to into proteins delivered translocated surface and the The to reticulum CD8 the by recognizing T cell cause or either eliciting as peptides secreting IFN-γ. damage cells cytokines such killing the by

Fig. 14.22 lymph nodes response of were as cells a delayed-type agent. to of a Elicitation in prior a TH1 primed result hypersensitivity (which contact-sensitizing A exposure). contact-sensitizing antigen IFN-γ skin. such reactive is penetrate as cytokines intact to then a molecule keratinocytes additional secrete that small, The that stimulate secrete can TH1 cells activated agent highly as chemokines, antigenic. variety altering turn attract proteins, and structures to in covalently which of their they a and a binds hapten so become It endogenous cytokines monocytes tissue lesions macrophages, internalized, contributing processed to cells presented further antigen-presenting activated modified caused major These like Langerhans by induce their (the poison inflammatory and of (see Fig. are effector proteins maturation into those by to cells skin), ivy 14.23). nitric oxide. NO,

exposure established chloride. The strong ability T to to hypersensitivity responses chemical cells contact the experimental CD4 is of mediate by sensitizing picryl by modifies haptenation. chloride extracellular proteins Picryl self that proteolytically by APCs, yielding These class II haptenated self-MHC can cells. by be bind processed to TH1 then are proteins molecules haptenated and recognized peptides by activating cells inflammation macrophages produce When TH1 they sensitized Fig. these (see recognize extensive complexes, 14.22). skin; are and of erythema scant contact monocytes, of mast clinical of (blisterlike epidermal and Common and consisting allergic epidermis). formation of and vesicles dermis of of fluid intraepidermal infiltrate between the neutrophils, affected dermal a collections abscesses; features development the cells; lymphocytes, edema macrophages, responses hypersensitivity

Some proteins hypersensitivity response. also delayed-type a insect elicit of bites. is this severe mosquito One example a in to skin reaction the rarely, much saliva hypersensitivity urticaria mosquito in itchy and reaction Instead people shock can allergic a 14-10). small develop swelling to anaphylactic such of as immediate or, Section proteins (see bump, an more include response) that can can individuals late-phase allergic reaction (consisting profound involve subsequently a a limb. delayed that an entire Some develop of swelling

divalent hypersensitivity been such cations to also nickel responses as have observed. Contact of a class molecules, binding MHC can or the alter conformation cations divalent provoke T-cell These response. the peptide II thus and to also nickel the can TLR-4 pro-inflammatory produce and receptor bind In a humans, signal. now prevalence those have and buttons, nickel of with specify to standards such nickel but some allergy Sensitization countries in is widespread such countries. items result must non-nickel this a nickel-containing that prolonged products is and of have as as the coatings, contact fasteners, jewelry, reducing that clothing

cells on Finally, hypersensitivity focused cytotoxic evidence also TH1 has role. of this role the section might a is antibody in and that and complement have cellular although reactions, there inducing T B cells, impaired reactions. in contact deficient Mice antibody, show or hypersensitivity complement of (produced initiation facilitate which by these particular, antibodies in part In cells), cascade, IgM reactions. activate complement B1 the the

Fig. 14.23 patient lesions a contact the with of ivy. skin dermatitis poison by Blistering allergic on hand caused

of R. Photograph courtesy Geha.

Fig. of 14.24 celiac The disease. features pathological small folded villi, for nutrient fingerlike surface of surface which intestine Left: into extensive an normal the is the absorption. provide leukocytes, immune propria CD4 plasma the destruction and with of the the protein villi. deeper, wheat, inner component infiltration macrophages, prominent to cells, to the and ultimately α-gliadin, response against oat, gluten, (in of portion barley leads massive smaller of local of other of cells, the leading a the numbers T lamina food Right: villi) are there underlying In parallel, the where increased activity lengthening in mitotic and cells epithelial crypts, is produced. new foodstuffs, the result digest Because absorb and malabsorption that epithelial loss can cells and the villi contain mature all their life-threatening diarrhea. in Allan Photographs Mowat. courtesy of

has features of autoimmunity. disease and Celiac allergic an 14-17 response both

the of a an chronic intestine small of proteins by in is condition present gluten, barley. at and directed oats, disease a caused complex Celiac wheat, immune upper response has function, the gluten must diet gluten be avoided date desensitization for approach but gut restores been from throughout Elimination to to gluten life. no developed, ingestion so of normal epithelial with formed villous of fingerlike renewed of is (crypt epithelium the by by sites the in in of atrophy), characterized the (a pathology an termed (Fig. condition intestinal celiac cells disease The size loss hyperplasia) the increase are together villi slender, the which 14.24). in cells, result macrophages, pathological that propria, absorb increased epithelial lamina in normally the of cover inflammation mature lymphocytes the as and by loss in villi as are layer. cells T These cells the food, wall, intestinal changes severe the the and well increased the with plasma accompanied epithelial of of numbers numbers digest and and of the individuals. ability provokes innate that in responses seems this specific both to inflammation reflects way, susceptible component intestinal that gluten’s stimulate a only genetically immune property Gluten be and in food to to of the time with dough of correlating past increased the rise fourfold texture. required 60 for practice decrease incidence celiac amounts large years, dough changes disease in The to include that gluten the baking to improve adding extra has in the and to

MHC 95% strong genetic the patients II Celiac than class more expressing allele. shows with HLA-DQ2 an extremely disease predisposition, of a an probability if observed that twins. dizygotic is 80% but is In concordance one it, other mono-zygotic twins, develops 10% there in twin only the will, of most Western diet. the gluten the almost celiac do individuals not Nevertheless, despite disease in HLA-DQ2 develop expressing presence universal to susceptibility. must factors contributions Thus, genetic or environmental other important make

epithelial binding The now modiÿes activated activates peptide produced peptides MHC bind FasIFN-˜An T molecules T naturally to can MHC cells II molecules FasLtTGThe gluten-speciÿc and class the class from tissue by mucosal transglutaminase enzyme, processed the (tTG), so not to II they Fas. cells can bound be gluten CD4 cells do kill bind Peptides produce that activates other epithelial to cell recruit the secrete IFN-˜, cytokines chemokines in°ammatory also and They which cells

Fig. of Molecular in 14.25 disease. recognition celiac gluten of basis immune leading ultimately epitopes of readily binding cells, by After enzymes, the transglutaminase tissue being its local digestion to HLA-DQ by the molecules susceptible of system. of gluten digestive deamidation antigen-presenting by processed immune gut the priming renders gluten to to more and

celiac Most peptides of present of α-gliadin, indicates in disease proteins cells CD4 the major in gluten. aberrant evidence requires T IFN-γ-producing one that antigenic priming by the leading only provoke number that generally peptides an to response disease. accepted can limited celiac a of It is immune of unique due structure groove of peptide-binding molecule. likely the to This the is the HLA-DQ2 transglutaminase step which deamidation (tTG), key charged immune enzyme in α-gliadin the peptides of by converts selected glutamic glutamine its the to acid. negatively recognition The residues is tissue of the Only positions complexes, and the containing in peptides charged which thus the formation (Fig. antigen-specific can T reaction strongly CD4 promotes certain to transamination bind cells peptide:HLA-DQ2 HLA-DQ2, negatively activate of residues 14.25). T intestinal in cells Activated the when IFN-γ, that to location propria, gliadin-specific lamina producing accumulate present leads inflammation. in CD4 this cytokine a

is entirely foreign dependent Celiac presence the gluten. the on of disease antigen, specific damaged immune response not with self a associated epithelium—that against It response. is the tissue—the the during in is antigens immune intestinal Thus, disease. is a disease not autoimmune celiac classical some have features of does autoimmunity. But it Autoantibodies antibodies disease; indeed, patients specific IgA as a with test for against used the serum sensitive enzyme tissue is in all are found presence transglutaminase of disease. and against this the celiac that that tTG-specific cells reactive cells no Interestingly, has are and it gluten-reactive proposed T T provide to found, transglutaminase. have tissue to been B cells help been tTG-reactive gluten cells this can and In could up hypothesis, be (Fig. taken complex with of by therefore and presented B the enzyme support 14.26). evidence, tissue to that however, no these directly autoantibodies There contribute damage. is

Fig. for patients. the tissue antibody T specific to production (tTG) explain in transglutaminase against in cells of absence tTG hypothesis A celiac 14.26 T to cells. gluten–tTG peptides cells tTG-reactive gluten-specific present and the B endocytose gluten complexes The autoantibodies can cells T produce these tTG. which stimulated now against B to help provide cells,

cell Gluten lymphocytes kill molecules (IELs) to (IEL) express the peptides epithelial MIC epithelial which mucosal T NKG2D and activates the Intraepithelial NKG2D, IL1 to cells binds MIC IL1R express CD8 cell IELs to molecules activate MIC

Fig. system cells cytotoxic the T The in of 14.27 by activation innate disease. immune celiac of peptides MIC-B the of synthesis expression Gluten cells. class on from Ib epithelial and the cells and induce the gut release IL-1 molecules these MIC-A MHC and can gut T destruction the the recognize the of NKG2D, MIC IL-1, are cytotoxic (IELs), of receptor cells, activates IELs together to leading with epithelium. which kill to which, the lymphocytes MIC-bearing cells, Intraepithelial proteins many CD8 via co-stimulator the the

tolerance 12-18). are Section of T-cell food prevented the proteins (see normally responses by development Chronic against oral patients breaks is celiac disease in Why unknown. with this down of factors indicate but disease, molecule the be must additional role HLA-DQ2-positive celiac do properties for genetic and there because monozygotic not in rates provide individuals high partial factors. a a concordance develop the additional most explanation, HLA-DQ2 The twins of approximately the population, factors normal the of on celiac incidence impact higher syndrome), individuals prevalence. than sixfold with disease in The 21 high in disease genetic is especially (Down trisomy underscoring be suggested or CTLA-4 in associated Polymorphisms susceptibility. been the other in immunoregulatory genes with have for to gene intestine, digest how and differences deamidation in could to cells. the There that so gliadin T be also amounts individuals in for survive presentation differing

pathogenesis. also seems The contribute several gluten have protein properties to to that by the IL-15 intestinal the stimulate well release there digestion, of as innate cells. evidence inducing immune system epithelial relative that some is by mounting gliadin-derived peptides its As resistance to This peptides recognized bound antigen-nonspecific involves molecules be and cells. HLA-DQ2 by T or cannot process CD4 that is by release the in activation the cells. to as by MIC-A of expression propria, cells leads lamina of upregulation epithelial the IL-15 as dendritic well MIC-A-expressing CD8 mucosal MIC-A, (Fig. kill activated cells 14.27). the T epithelium epithelial receptors cells via these which same NKG2D be in can receptors, NKG2D and via can they recognize their by necessary to the damage its co-stimulatory responses some intestinal T-cell initiating other of response of α-gliadin on and α-gliadin an molecule. induce Triggering antigen-specific of CD4 immune may events some create also innate own these the for parts responses adaptive ability to and innate both ability stimulate disease. gluten of may celiac unique explain its The to thus induce immune

Summary.

stimuli. mechanisms immunological normal directed against innocuous immune Non-IgE-mediated or antigens inflammatory reflects hypersensitivity that are inappropriately immediate-type both It delayed-type reactions. comprises and sickness. to antibodies antibodies Immediate-type catabolized in poorly or serum are drug-induced reactions in complexes due the cell the of IgG bound antigens, formation immune surfaces, binding of anemia, occurs to allergen-modified specific of as as to to hemolytic Cellular develop T immediate-type reactions. TH1 cytotoxic hypersensitivity more than mediated reactions cells cells slowly by and tuberculin by to exposure is tuberculosis. hypersensitivity to reaction provoked used mycobacterial the skin diagnose previous Mycobacterium TH1-mediated The in T ivy to modified cytotoxic T-cell is molecule, and recognition cytotoxic to cells cells and destruction plant allergic by poison skin The of by to due reaction the cytokines. a over of 1–10 induced effector These develop days. synthesis the require and molecules responses T-cell-mediated

Chapter 14. Summary to

to susceptible reactions to same In immune reexposure otherwise produce the innocuous can antigens responses allergic upon individuals, antigen. against Most of reactions involve the antibody common allergens. production IgE environmental allergic are against prone antibodies Some making atopic. said intrinsically IgE such people are and people be to allergens, many to toward that at driven pathways, IgE antigen cells; sites is entry. chemokines specific cells an tissues by of activate submucosal signals the skewed in signaling production by array ILC2 engage that is response including TH2 and cytokines of TH2 antigen-specific and FcεRI on receptor mast The produced the high-affinity cells basophils. IgE binds IgE to the chemokines, allergic of eosinophils, inflammation, is cytokines asthma. chronic with morbidity the of T and and cells, orchestrate combination major mast chronic and Specific in TH1 which TH2 cause effector cells, regulate T system, to regulatory these occur at in defects of the responses many cells. Failure can levels including immune developed, suppressing and of disorders. reducing to are raising sensitizing the of Increasingly being hope ability the reestablishing allergic the successful processes prevalence allergic antigen the for responses tolerate antigens. isotypes other hypersensitivity of Antibodies T certain allergic to to contribute cells effector various and antigen-specific

Questions.

IgE. initiate to or False: induce class-switch can of cells 14.1 True signals to chain the cells B needed to Only TH2

susceptibility following not of the associated genetic allergic Which eczema? Choice: Multiple 14.2 has asthma atopic with and been both to

β FcεRI of A. subunit

IL-4 GM-CSF IL-3 C. B. D.

allergic our diseases. IFN-γ Different to E. 14.3 affect factors susceptibility false statement? the Which of following a is

A. to disease. of factors rarely the allergic Environmental contribute development

B. The the steadily developed in prevalence atopy has of increasing been world.

variant airway and Individuals hyperactivity. higher to susceptibility have of C. GSTP1 GSTM1 with increased alleles

less partially day old to than protected 6 are exposed Children against to months care D. in be asthma. who children other appear

IgE body or other antibodies, in is Like False: fluids. 14.4 mainly found True

options true? with Matching: 14.6 the Match Which statements is 14.5 the following the following of best

the cells participate A. reaction. Connective of not do anaphylactic in an mast initiation tissue

worsen the avoided shock as should patients condition. may Epinephrine B. from suffering patient’s anaphylactic in be it

lose leads pressure blood and C. vessels blood high to shock, permeability, anaphylactic death. During

with IgE proteins, Penicillin drug. an causing D. in anaphylaxis lead can that production the self immune response to some can re-encountering upon modify individuals

Hypersensitivity cause 14.7 Multiple of deposition can through the Choice: pathology complexes. immune reactions is pathogenic? mechanism be by which can complexes the immune Which a following of apply.) than may (More one ___ A. Immune in complexes vessel walls. blood deposit

cross-linked the activation. cells and mast basophils, on B. of is IgE leading ___ surface to ___ leukocyte Fc activation injury. receptor C. ligation and leads tissue to

is system C5a. to ___ complement D. the The anaphylatoxin of leading production activated, to T stimulated E. secrete IL-4. are CD8+ cells ___

cutaneous a to are Fill-in-the-Blanks: phases and 14.8 response: allergic ______ There ______. two antigen second _________, by __________ release upon called by of subsequent first by invokes cells the activation cytokines exposure. phase is phase chemokines The skin of antigen-presenting and cells T while characterized

process. allergic Match the corresponding Matching: reaction with immune each 14.9

___ i. reaction Arthus A. against by of antibodies Formation complexes sensitized local acting an individuals in caused antigen previously ___ immune IgG B. ii. ivy rash Poison statement? Systemic to a foreign injection of primarily false Choice: reaction antigen, the quantities Which following large IgG-mediated of of Multiple is 14.10

A. The prototypic test hypersensitivity the reaction. tuberculin illustrates delayed-type

directly reactions. not hypersensitivity in B. are delayed-type TH1 involved cells

references. General

J.V. Fahy, 2 asthma absent many. in present inflammation Type in in : – most, Nat. Rev. Immunol. 15:57–65. 2015,

S.T. Holgate, adaptive and Innate in : immune asthma. responses Nat. Med. 2012, 18:673–683.

Johansson, Martell, B.Q., Dahl, Lanier, T., et Ortega J.A., Lockey, Friedmann, S.G., R.F., Ring, Bieber, R., Platts-Mills, P.S., C., J., T.A., Motala, al. global Nomenclature Committee nomenclature World October Review : Allergy Revised the the use: for allergy Organization, for report 2003. of of J. Clin. Allergy Immunol. 113:832–836. 2004,

A.B. Kay, allergic Allergy : diseases. and two of First parts. N. Engl. Med. J. 344:30–37. 2001,

Kay, A.B. : Allergy allergic and diseases. two Second parts. of Engl. N. J. Med. 2001, 344:109–113.

Pahr, R., the Allergies: B., Food Valenta, S.: H., and basics. Linhart, Hochwallner, 148:1120-1131. Gastroenterology 2015,

Section references.

on IgE production contact involves Sensitization allergen. an first 14-1 to with switching class

Akuthota, P., Weller, and Wang, P.F. H., airway Eosinophils as cells disease. upper in allergic antigen-presenting : Curr. Opin. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 10:14–19. 2010,

Zelm, van van Burg, M.A., Dongen, Boon, and J.J., Gahen, M.C. J.J.M, Orfao, M., van van A., Berkowska, Thio, L., H.B., Heeringa, P.M., Hajdarbegovic, E., der cells from pathways. cell-independent : IgE+B derived T T are cell-dependent and Human J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 134:688–697. 2014,

The IgE (FcεRI). the cells properties receptor Bieber of expressing affinity high pro-and anti-inflammatory T: human for antigen-presenting Immunobiology 212:499–503. 2007,

Antignano, J.A., Zaph, Blanchet, Halim, F., K.M. T.Y.F., Takei, C., and Hirota, M.-R., F., M.J., McNagny, Gold, allergen Group systemic, sensitization innate cells to 2 facilitate but exposures. local, not : lymphoid TH2-inducing J. Clin. Allergy Immunol. 2014, 133:1142–1148.

M.A. Narayanan, J.J., Lafaille, Ho, Subramaniam, Curotto de He, Lafaille, W.Q., S., S., and J.S., differentiation memory of IgE production: cell IgE responses. the Biology IgE and : of Curr. Opin. Microbiol. Immunol. 388:1–19. 2015,

Innate of lymphoid new Kumar, in immunology paradigm V.: inflammation. cells: Immunol. Lett. 157:23–37. 2014,

mediated CD8 be dermatitis or can T Allergic by cells. contact C. CD4

deficient reactions. complement impaired hypersensitivity Mice or in contact B D. have cells

perceived the need 14.11 Describe Answer: endotyping Short for system for the asthma.

other Allergic factors can True by initial be asthma allergen. the 14.12 specific or False: than triggered

responses. Mikhak, The antigen-presenting inflammatory basophils cells emergence Luster, Th2 in A.D.: of and as Z., Mol. J. Biol. Cell 2009, 1:69–71.

A.S., Liew, R.J., F.Y. Mirchandani, Salmond, and and : function Interleukin-33 innate cells. of the lymphoid Trends Immunol. 2012, 33:389–396.

W.S., Lexmond, S. O., K., al. M.P., Vera, Platzer, D., D., Panduro, Maurer, Singer, et Baker, Kinet, K., J.-P., M., B., Vargas, Turner, allergic : functions restrain cell-bound sites. at to Dendritic IgE mucosal inflammation Mucosal Immunol. 8:516–532. 2015,

L.A., Spencer, P.F. Weller, and insights. : contemporary immunity: Eosinophils Th2 and Immunol. Biol. Cell 88:250–256. 2010,

IgE L.C., system. and the by Wu, The and production of regulation immune A.A.: Zarrin, Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2014, 14:247-259.

of antigens proteases cause sensitization, Although many common sensitizing 14-2 can are types agents. allergic

mucosal lymph and T., differentiation influences immune-inflammatory of Arkinson, in J.L., Sun, TH2 nodes R., distinct Alvarez, Walker, responses. M.: site Jordana, Fattouh, TH2 J., the D., J. Immunol. 2007, 179:3287–3296.

Brown, S.J., W.H.I. and McLean, : Filaggrin. molecule: One remarkable J. Invest. Dermatol. 2012, 132:751–762.

mechanisms J.S., Veler, and Grunstein, mite dust airway X., of of smooth J., action Larson, in M.M., Chuang, effects Grunstein, 1, p the Shan, muscle. Der and H., S.: allergen, Proasthmatic J. Clin. Allergy Immunol. 2005, 116:94–101.

sensitization. and response: Lambrecht, epithelium the allergic airway Allergens gateway Hammad, H.: B.N., to and J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 134:499–507. 2014,

Taylor, of Brazil-nut Identification Thomas, Nordlee, J.A., L.A., Townsend, R.K.: transgenic Bush, soybeans. a in S.L., J.A., and allergen Engl. N. Med. J. 1996, 334:688–692.

S., Wagtmann, V.R., Papzian, D., and Wurtzen, P.A. Hansen, recall vitro. epithelial cells and inhibits and responses contact towards allergen between pollen cell T bronchial Direct dendritic : mite cells extracts in Clin. Exp. Immunol. 2015, 181:207–218.

A., Potential rhinitis roles N., A.: Woodcock, and and enzymatic allergens. protease activities Sehgal, in of for other Custovic, Curr. 5:221–226. Rep. 2005, Asthma Allergy

for helpful with P., in molecular mutations ichthyosiform E., congenital erythroderma: syndrome. A., G.: SPINK5 Ratajczak, R., diagnostic in a testing patient a Netherton Bergman, Tesfaye-Kedjela, tool as Sprecher, Richard, and Deleterious Clin. Exp. Dermatol. 29:513–517. 2004,

H., Tovey, et E.R., Soeller, H.L., P.J., G.W., Stewart, C., al. Taylor, Garrod, Winton, D.R., Gruenert, Cannell, Thompson, Wan, M.B., G.A., D.C., disruption tight transepithelial of Der p 1 facilitates by delivery junctions. : allergen Clin. J. Invest. 1999, 104:123–133.

IgE-mediated to contribute development factors the of Genetic allergic disease. 14-3

asthma and The of focus epithelium. immunogenetics eczema: on Cookson, a W.: the new Nat. Rev. Immunol. 4:978–988. 2004,

and Purcell, McCluskey Illing, antigen-associated J.: P.R., J., drug A.W., Rossjohn, hypersensitivity. leukocyte Vivian, Human J.P., Curr. Opin. Immunol. 2013, 25:81–89.

Boushey Z., E.J., W.C., T.D., et H.A., Ampleford, Howard, G.A., Calhoun, Moore, Li, Hawkins, W.W., H., A.T., Busse, Li, Hastie, al. W.J., function in association pathway genes study identifies associated patients. lung TH1 : with Genome-wide asthmatic J. Clin. Allergy Immunol. 132:313–320. 2013,

allergic inflammation dermatitis. cells skin Peiser, of Role of contact TH17 M.: in Clin. Dev. Immunol. 2013, doi:10.1155/2013/261037.

A., and Nielsen, Szecsi, P.B., M., Menné, B.C., Thyssen, S., Stender, T., Johansen, Carlsen, J.D. Linneberg, N.H., Meldgaard, J.P., and results in population Filaggrin hand from general dermatitis: eczema with increase : risk a persistence study. null-mutations of subjects the atopic Br. J. Dermatol. 163:115–120. 2010,

defects gene and risk R.A.H.M., and of sensitisation review Sheikh, meta-analysis. and Filaggrin Oord, Van allergic A.: developing allergic den and disorders: systematic BMJ 339:b2433. 2009,

Torrey, Little, Braunschweiger, Falls, R.G., Van K., P., J., R.D., K., McKenny, et Simon, J., Mastro, S., Dupuis, Eerdewegh, D., Del Pandit, al. J., asthma gene and hyperresponsiveness. : of ADAM33 bronchial with Association the 418:426–430. Nature 2002,

and Raby, genetics B.A., Rogers, A.: and S.T., genomics. Weiss, Asthma Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev. 19:279–282. 2009,

interact with 14-4 disease. susceptibility genetic to Environmental allergic cause factors may

Openshaw, P.J. and Pollott, J., F.J., Culley, T the pattern : during Age infection in of disease viral determines at reinfection adulthood. cell-mediated first J. Exp. Med. 196:1381–1386. 2002,

X., R., M., J.W., Estell, Gaggar, J.F., Weaver, J., K., C.T., Xu, al. et R., A., Lai, Deshane, Deshane, Zmijewski, Spell, Luther, radical-producing myeloid-derived suppressors and and cells: hyperresponsiveness. inflammation regulatory of activators lung airway potent Free : Mucosal Immunol. 4:503–518. 2011,

Prenatal childhood and C., of the E.: Fuchs, and for asthma. infections: treatment Mutius, and development childhood von implications Lancet Respir. Med. 1:743–754. 2013,

Harb, epigenetics in H., disease. and Update on allergic Renz, H.: J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 2015, 135:15–24.

Johnson, Huang, L., B., Baban, B.A. 3rd, and A.L. Mellor, privilege. 2,3 immune acquired and Dendritic : indoleamine dioxygenase cells, Int. Rev. Immunol. 29:133–155. 2010,

Holloway, Bleecker, and S.T. D.A., Meyers, Holgate, E.R., J.W., and Asthma personalized : medicine. genetics Lancet Respir. Med. 2014, 2:405–415.

and Holloway, R., Shaheen, Minelli, J.A. M., Granell, Torrent, Ring, J.W., Newson, C., S.O., M.-J., S.M., R., Henderson, Rose-Zerilli, Epidemiology phenotypes: genes Human Genome systematic meta-analysis asthma : including a review and and unpublished data. Glutathione-S-transferase (HuGE) Int. Epidemiol. J. 2010, 39:539–562.

G.E., Sly, G.P., White, P.D., Holt, G., and M., Wu, Kendall, Huang, D., Morahan, P.G. Holt, B.J., atopic children. IL12B severity of polymorphism with and : promoter in of asthma non-atopic Association 2002, 360:455–459. Lancet

ozone. M., Romieu, to London, Marzec, Ramirez-Aguilar, I., respiratory Moreno-Macías, and Rio-Navarro, H., children David, S.: M., exposed Hernández-Avila, GSTP1 GSTM1 B.E., and and in asthmatic J.J., del Sienra-Monge, G., health J., Eur. Respir. J. 28:953–959. 2006,

and A., you Air are what breathe. and Diaz-Sanchez, D.: Saxon, pollution allergy: you Nat. Immunol. 6:223–226. 2005,

evidence. -the Allergies, the infections hygiene E.: von epidemiologic and Mutius, hypothesis 2007, 212:433-439. Immunobiology

allergic responses. T Regulatory 14-5 cells control can

S., asthma. regulatory Bohm, and immunotherapy ameliorate and T Schild, Bopp, allergic cooperate E., cells H., C.: Taube, Klein, IL-10 T., Meyer-Martin, Finotto, allergen-specific H., M., to Reuter, in L., S., Schmitt, Immunol. J. 194:887–897. 2015,

airway Control Croft, lung of and Duan, dendritic by W., and T and tolerance M.: cells macrophages regulatory cells. Ann. Am. Thorac. Soc. Suppl 5:S305–S313. 11 2014,

Hawrylowicz, C.M. inflammation. IL-10 and T allergic : cells Regulatory in J. Exp. Med. 202:1459–1463. 2005,

Chatila, Haribhai, Wang, C.B., M.G., Williams, Lin, W., Martin, N., Truong, W.J., and D., J., T.A. Grossman, Foxp3 Allergic E mice. : in and dysregulation hyperimmunoglobulinemia mutant J. Clin. Allergy Immunol. 2005, 116:1106–1115.

cells: IDO dendritic and catabolism. and Munn, tolerance D.H.: Mellor, by expression tryptophan A.L., Nat. Rev. Immunol. 4:762–774. 2004,

immune cell-bound system IgE is mechanisms isotypes. those the and of effector of different Most other pathways antibody from engages 14-6 by

S.S.: and Saini, immunoglobulin E.R., receptor: Conner, regulation. and E The expression Curr. 5:191–196. Allergy Rep. Asthma 2005,

C.: signalling for Tkaczyk, A.M., Integrated activation. mast-cell pathways and Gilfillan, Nat. Rev. Immunol. 6:218–230. 2006,

IgE-dependent D.W., a for therapeutic Mcglashan, allergies. as signalling target Jr.: Trends Pharmacol. Sci. 33:502–509. 2012,

Scheffel, Suzuki, on New of the high-affinity J.: signalling function R., receptor insights and IgE. for and Rivera, J., the Curr. Top. Microbiol.Immunol. 388:63–90. 2015,

in reside Mast orchestrate and 14-7 cells tissues allergic reactions.

Liu, D., cat M.C., Effects B.S., on S.S.: and Eckman, mast D.W., cell omalizumab basophil MacGlashan, P.M., an Kelly, Saini, intranasal V., Bochner, responses Sterba, Alexander, challenge. J.A., using allergen and of J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 2010, 125:889–895.

Tsai, adaptive cells responses. S., development Mast S.J., Galli, M.: in of the Nakae, and immune Nat. Immunol. 2005, 6:135–142.

upon allergy-promoting and Preferential Olivera, on Barra, Spiegel, A., Odom, Gonzalez-Espinosa, and J.M., J.P., lymphokines the of affinity signaling M.E., Penninger, cells. S., C., mast J.: IgE Rivera, Martinez, induction A., S., Hobson, weak of high L., receptor Oliveira-Dos-Santos, stimulation Exp. J. Med. 197:1453–1465. 2003,

S.A., T Islam, A.D.: to epithelial allergic barriers homing and in Luster, cell disease. Nat. Med. 18:705-715. 2012,

Development K., Y., and Oboki, of Kitamura, A.: Ito, mast cells. Proc. Jpn Acad, Ser. B 2007, 83:164–174.

C.H., B.P., Grammer, M., R.P. Schleimer, Kulka, Tancowny, L.C., and Sheen, chemokine cell human Neuropeptides and mast degranulation activate production. : 123:398–410. Immunology 2007,

and D.: cells Mast Metcalfe, mastocytosis. Blood 112:946–956. 2007,

Schwartz, L.B. : mastocytosis. Diagnostic of tryptase value in and anaphylaxis Immunol. Clin. Allergy N. Am. 26:451–463. 2006,

Bryce, Smuda, P.J. C., and New use : histamine histamine in the of and receptors. development Curr. 11:94–100. Asthma Allergy 2011, Rep.

Shultz, C., L.D., J., et A.D., A., V., Miyahara, Tager, Ott, Swanson, al. A.M., N., Loader, Luster, K., Dakhama, Takeda, B., Taube, for mast leukotriene receptor : CD8+ airway hyperresponsiveness. B4 required effector The cell-mediated, cell-dependent is T (BLT1) J. Immunol. 176:3157–3164. 2006,

R.L. Thurmond, receptor: : H4 The histamine clinic. the from to orphan Front. Pharmacol. 6:65. 2015,

Eosinophils allergic damage 14-8 cause inflammation and reactions. in tissue and basophils

Rothenberg, C., M.E. Blanchard, and Biology eosinophil. of the : Adv. Immunol. 101:81–121. 2009,

Moqbel, M.E. R., Rothenberg, P., Phipps, Foster, H.F., P.S., A.B., Lacy, S., Hogan, S.P., Kay, and Rosenberg, and and Eosinophils: role biological health in disease. : properties Clin. Exp. Allergy 2008, 38:709–750.

N.A. R.P., M.P., Schleimer, E.A., McGarry, Jacobsen, Lee, Lee, and J.J., Eosinophils LIAR health in the : hypothesis. and disease: Clin. Exp. Allergy 2010, 40:563–575.

and G., Jr, MacGlashan, Schroeder, J.T. Gauvreau, D., disease. airway : in Basophils Curr. 2002, Allergy Asthma Rep. 2:126–132.

immunity Schwartz, chronic D.: Naumann, allergic protective R., Ohnmacht, helminths. orchestrate and M., Basophils C., and C., Panzer, Voehringer, Schiedewitz, against I., dermatitis Immunity 33:364–374. 2010,

inflammation. J.U., Schwartz, D.: Voehringer, Eberle, and in Basophils C., Eur. J. Pharmacol. doi:10.1016/j.ejphar.2015.04.049. 2015,

Kriegova, and lung: leukocyte receptors opportunities and Tomankova, diseased trafficking. far beyond M.: their in T., Chemokine therapeutic E., Liu, Am.

J.Physiol. Cell. Lung Mol. Physiol. 308:L603-L618. 2015,

onset chronic also but 14-9 responses. a reactions rapid to can IgE-mediated lead allergic have

S.F. Kemp, R.D., deShazo, and : agents. to biologic drugs reactions and Allergic JAMA 278:1895–1906. 1997,

F., T., Fujii, S., D.D. and K., Mizutani, Nabe, Yoshino, S., Ikedo Akiba, M., Ishihara, M., Hosokawa, A., Chaplin, N., Kishima, for a in Regulatory model of neutrophilia : CD4(+) murine in airway T interleukin-10, asthma. cells, by antigen-induced role produced Eur. Pharmacol. J. 677:154–162. 2012,

Hayashi, inflammation. The Yamanishi, in paradigm S., Igarashi, M., of R., cytokine T.: and allergic Pawankar, airway networks Curr. Opin. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 2015, 15:27–32.

J.W., and Park, Gelfand, Cui, Z.H., A., Y.H., Rha, K., Donaldson, Taube, D.D., C., Balhorn, A., Takeda, Dakhama, Duez, E.W. C., disease. role The : IL-13 in allergic of airway established J. Immunol. 2002, 169:6482–6489.

cause introduced Allergen can the bloodstream 14-10 anaphylaxis. into

J.W. Coleman, and M., E.V., Warbrick, Fernandez, M., Blanca, the and two-site Activation recognition cells for antibodies: with determinant. hapten inhibition IgE sensitized mast evidence penicillin derived : monoclonal of anti-penicillin of Eur. J. Immunol. 25:2486–2491. 1995,

Finkelman, Strait, with S.C., and mechanisms Rothenberg, M.E., anaphylaxis: R.T.: of murine models. studies E.B., lessons F.D., Morris, Molecular Brandt, from J. Clin. Allergy Immunol. 2005, 115:449–457.

D.B. Golden, Anaphylaxis insect stings. : to Immunol. Clin. Allergy North Am. 2015, 35:287–302.

Anaphylaxis. R.F., Kemp, Lockey, Lieberman, Wolf, S.F., B.L., P.: and A cases. of review 266 Arch. Intern. Med. 155:1749–1754. 1995,

D.Y. S.H., and Leung, Sicherer, to hypersensitivity : anaphylaxis, foods, in 2014. in disease, drugs, insects and allergic Advances skin and reactions J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 2015, 35:357–367.

Padovan, Weltzien, H.U., of E.: features allergy. Molecular and penicillin J. Invest. Dermatol. 110:203–206. 1998,

of and the inhalation rhinitis is with 14-11 development asthma. associated Allergen

Jeffery, W.W., Busse, M., P.K., Bousquet, Asthma. Johnson, Vignola, J., and A.M.: remodeling. From bronchoconstriction airways and to inflammation Am. J. Respir. Crit. Med. Care 161:1720–1745. 2000,

C., Davies, Holgate, D.E. and Boxall, S.T., asthma. to transforming factor-β chronic airway signalling and epidermal in The contribution factor growth remodelling of growth : Eur. Respir. J. 27:208–229. 2006,

and A., E.W. A., Park, Balhorn, A., Gelfand, Miyahara, Taube, Dakhama, K., Joetham, N., C., J.W., Takeda, on age during hyper-responsiveness infection airway reinfection with The respiratory enhancement is or and at virus of dependent first syncytial the IL-13 prevention : production. critically J. Immunol. 175:1876–1883. 2005,

K., Haley, et K., S.J., al. Lehr, Green, S., Glickman, M.F., F.H., Finotto, S., Szabo, P.R., J.N., Neurath, Qin, H.A., Galle, Ackerman, spontaneous lacking human mice in with of asthma consistent airway T-bet. changes : Development 295:336–338. Science 2002,

C.R., Hudgens, Edwards, E.A., D.M., Cohen Neas, L., B.L., Gallagher, W., S.W. George, Heidenfelder, Hubal, Williams-DeVane, and E.E., Jones, Reif, B.J., J.E., : defined asthma blood Data-driven biomarker expression endotypes from data. and gene 2015, 10:e0117445. PLoS ONE

Gour, and IL-4 in N., disease. airway IL-13 M.: signaling Wills-Karp, allergic and 75:68-78. 2015, Cytokine

Larche, Haselden, epitope-induced T histocompatibility reactions. cell asthmatic Kay, and E-independent major M.: B.M., late Immunoglobulin peptide A.B., complex-restricted J. Exp. Med. 189:1885–1894. 1999,

and X., Kuperman, Erle, Dolganov, J.A., Zhu, G.H., Huang, Chang, Z., D.J. D., Sheppard, G.M., Koth, Elias, L.L., D.A., of overproduction effects cells and airway in on epithelial interleukin-13 asthma. mucus Direct hyperreactivity : cause Nat. Med. 8:885–889. 2002,

The of B.N., allergic role epithelial Lambrecht, master inflammation. and as and dendritic H.: airway regulators of cells Hammad, 2010, Lancet 376:835–843.

and Hawrylowicz, C.M., C.M. Lloyd, : T Regulatory asthma. in cells Immunity 31:438–449. 2009,

R.F., Custovic, Bjermer, A.J., Wenzel, T.B., L., J., Jr., Casale, and Wardlaw, Lotvall, S.E., Greenberger, P.A. Akdis, L.B., A., C.A., Bacharier, Lemanske, within endotypes: entities Asthma new the classification of approach a disease syndrome. : asthma to J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 2011, 127:355–360.

DeKruyff, R.H., and D.T. E.H., Umetsu, Meyer, T the NKT : cells asthma. of cells and in pathogenesis Annu. Rev. Med. 59:281–292. 2008,

Th17-mediated and R.S., inflammation Jr.: in asthma. Newcomb, D.C., Peebles, Curr. Opin. Immunol. 25:755-760. 2013,

Peebles, R.S. 2 human innate The lymphoid disease. group Jr.: emergence in cells of Leukoc. J. Biol. 2015, 97:469–475.

Robinson, D.S. : cells and Regulatory T asthma. Clin. Exp. 39:1314–1323. Allergy 2009,

H., et M.F., Martinez, Mane, Zhao, Holm, S., C., J.-H., F.D., J., Gomez, Yan, X., He, X., Koenigs, M., al. Chu, Perez, the asthma. : Non-invasive phenotypes analysis of discriminates clinical transcriptome sputum of Am. Respir. J. Crit. Care Med. 2015, 191:1116–1125.

particular the reactions symptoms foods systemic 14-12 well causes to gut. to Allergy limited as as

al. Brough, Bahnson, S., H.T., Du M., Toit, H.A., M., Santos, Basting, Feeney, A.D., Sayre, D., et Radulovic, G., Robert, Phippard, G., P.H., in peanut peanut of for consumption risk Randomized allergy. trial at infants : N. Engl. J. Med. 372:803–813. 2015,

Burks, Lee, and L.A., A.W. prevalence, characterization, : and Food strategies. molecular treatment/prevention allergies: Annu. Rev. Nutr. 26:539–565. 2006,

14-13 can aim techniques to be treated biological desensitization to the tolerance allergen. at lead symptoms that IgE-mediated by allergic inhibiting the or restoring disease pathways effector that by

immune Mechanisms allergen-specific C.A., of and and immunotherapy to tolerance allergens. Akdis, M.: Akdis, World Organ. Allergy J. 2015, 8:17.

V., al. J., Khan, M.J., Leckie, Bryan, S.J., Renzetti, L., B.J., S.A., Warrington, et O’Connor, Bock, Kanabar, Rames, J.A., A., S., Matti, on Effects late asthmatic eosinophils, interleukin-12 and airway recombinant response. of human hyper-responsiveness, the : 2000, Lancet 356:2149–2153.

M.E. Wechsler, R.M., Dunn, and asthma. Anti-interleukin in therapy : Clin. Pharmacol. Ther. 2015, 97:55–65.

R.P., R.H., B., al. Haldar, Sousa, et C.E., P., Wardlaw A.J., W., Brightling, P., S., Monteiro, Hargadon, Marshall, A., Bradding, Green, Gupta, Mepolizumab of eosinophilic exacerbations and : refractory asthma. N. Engl. J. Med. 2009, 360:973–984.

C., Ying, Y., of Z., uncontrolled Zhang, C., Cao, a safety asthma: Chen, Wang, and Y., Long-term systematic S., patients Hu, S., meta-analysis. omalizumab Z., Li, T., Zhao, in allergic et efficacy Lai, persistent and al: W., review Xu, with Sci. 5:8191. 2015, Rep.

disease. immunotherapy in of Mechanisms allergic airways Larche, M.: peptide Ann. Am. Thorac. Soc. 11:S292-S296. 2014,

prednisone-dependent sputum Efthimiadis, Pizzichini, Inman, for F.E., A., E., P., Pizzichini, Mepolizumab asthma O’Byrne, M.D., Kjarsgaard, with M.M.M., P.M.: Nair, M., and Hargreave, eosinophilia. N. Engl. Med. J. 360:985–993. 2009,

M., W.R., role and in Jr: The of Henderson, Peters-Golden, leukotrienes allergic rhinitis. Ann. Immunol. Allergy Asthma 2005, 94:609–618.

seasonal pollen Hurley, as G., effective allergic immunotherapy V., Lack, an Roberts, asthma. Grass Turcanu, for C., G.: and childhood therapy J. Clin. Allergy Immunol. 2006, 117:263–268.

Shamji, S.R. Durham, and M.H., to aeroallergens. : of Mechanisms immunotherapy Clin. Allergy 41:1235–1246. 2011, Exp..

fusion allergy. Terada, Kepley, A.: Saxon, cat-induced T., protein Zhu, chimeric Zhang, D., and A Yamada, C.L., human–cat T., blocks K., Nat. Med. 11:446–449. 2005,

of drug circulating the cells. of blood susceptible surface individuals occur by to binding the

Arndt, P.A. 30 hemolytic of last immune anemia: years the : Drug-induced changes. 2014, 30:44–54. Immunohematology

Eckhardt, antigen. the and J., A., of characterization as Mueller complex Potzsch, a C.: major and B., Greinacher, A., Heparin-associated multimolecular antibody Amiral, PF4–heparin isolation thrombocytopenia: Eichner, of the V., Dummel, Thromb. Haemost. 1994, 71:247–251.

anemia. and autoimmune Semple, and pathogenesis Autoimmune Freedman, J.W., J.: hemolytic Semin. Hematol. 42:122–130. 2005,

Systemic caused immune-complex poorly the large of follow quantities by antigens. formation of can disease 14-15 catabolized administration

Lawley, N.S., Bielory, Young, M.M. T.J., Frank, and Gascon, L., P., sickness: 35 serum for of with : a globulin prospective marrow analysis failure. equine anti-thymocyte treated Human patients bone 1988, 67:40–57. Medicine (Baltimore)

A.J., myocardial M.J.: after Walport, sickness P., streptokinase failure for renal therapy C.G., and K.A., Davies, Serum Rees, Winearls, and Mathieson, infarction. acute Clin. Exp. Immunol. 1990, 80:83–88.

J.A., T., and A.J. Kropshofer, George, H., T.T., Singer, Hansel, Mitchell, safety monoclonal and effects The : side of antibodies. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 9:325–338. 2010,

J.A., Schifferli, D.K. and Peters, Y.C., Ng, its immune and of role of elimination The the : complexes. receptor in complement Engl. N. Med. J. 315:488–495. 1986,

R.E., and Schmidt, J.E. Gessner, and autoimmunity. receptors Fc in with complement : their interaction Immunol. Lett. 100:56–67. 2005,

et Skokowa, B., R.E., Ali, Kumar, Schmidt, J., Piekorz, Felda, S., S.R., Konrad, K., al. N., Shushakova, Spicher, Nurnberg, R.P., V., O., Arthus in inflammatory that Macrophages response induce Gαi2 Fc controls C5aR activation the cooperation. the through : pulmonary reaction and receptor J. Immunol. 2005, 174:3041–3050.

14-16 Hypersensitivity TH1 reactions can be cells T cells. and by cytotoxic mediated CD8

contact N., findings and dermatitis. E., allergic in A.: Lauerma, New Fyhrquist, Lehto, Curr. Opin. Clin. Allergy Immunol. 2014, 14:430–435.

exogenous and J.A., Kalish, endogenous Wood, LaPorte, in hapten of presentation pathways cells vitro. urushiol A.: Processing R.S., ivy) by both and for (poison to T J. Clin. Invest. 1994, 93:2039–2047.

Slavin, Mark, R.G. B.J., and : Allergic dermatitis. contact Med. Clin. Am. North 2006, 90:169–185.

G., and Schuler, IL-12 J., of the Enk, Muller, Germann, vivo. for and J., A.H.: T., Saloga, in adjuvant G., induction mediator as contact Knop, sensitivity Immunol. J. 1995, 155:4661–4668.

et C., Tchaptchet, Kalis, C., Vogl, S., Müller, T., V., Fejer, S., Nielsen, M., G., Schmidt, Keck, Raghavan, P.J., Galanos, al. B., contact the nickel. Crucial Toll-like for : to receptor allergy development in human role 4 of Nat. Immunol. 11:814–819. 2010,

C.: in contacts region allergy but superantigen-like human excludes indicates H.U., J., recognition. Vollmer, and with reactivity 3 Weltzien, TCR Moulon, complementarity-determining nickel J. Immunol. 163:2723–2731. 1999,

both autoimmunity. disease Celiac and has 14-17 of an features allergic response

G.R. Sabatino, Di and Corazza, A., R., Ciccocioppo, celiac disease. : immune in recognition of gluten The Clin. Exp. Immunol. 140:408–416. 2005,

Green, R.: P.H.R., Greywoode, B., disease. and Lebwohl, Celiac J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 2015, 135:1099–1106.

place. rock hard and a Celiac a caught disease: between F.: Koning, Gastroenterology 2005, 129:1294–1301.

I., celiac Structural intolerance and for C.: L.M., basis L., Molberg, sprue. Filiz, Parrot, Khosla, Shan, Gray, Hausch, F., in F., Sollid, O., gluten G.M., 297:2275–2279. Science 2002,

Mulder, among Local disease. with immune Koning, C.J., patients F.: and celiac J., van M.L., communication in cells Mearin, mucosal Bergen, 2015, 148:1187–1194. Gastroenterology

be and can by responses immune how have atopic undesirable environmental elicited of allergic seen (see reactions this in disease can adaptive antigens, the cause already serious Chapter how form We and 14). body’s categories In commensal to or microbiota, examine other tissues, the by own we organs. this responses transplanted of chapter, by important expressed cells and by antigens—those the medically commensal associated because are autoimmunity—although, are genome. broadly speaking, disease which as by damage microbiota to the to The antigens immune that with self the responses or microbiota not human from organisms the antigens of derive and lead the to a and antigens disease-causing are tissue form xenoimmunity responses the to are foreign encoded referred strictly against of because extended of immune-mediated the being be part can directed microbiota of Nevertheless, as and a together. diseases, up will disease part autoimmune commensal the ‘superorganism’ made regarded microbiota spectrum to commensal microbiota of here be host the consider we organs response is transplanted antigens on rejection. nonself The to allograft called

generation central in for during gene antigens. organs the self rearrangements inevitably affinity of that development some lymphocyte lymphoid result in lymphocytes the with The occur the from held mechanisms. removed are repertoire Such lymphocytes or a in check of normally by variety state the tissues system body. normal which the of generate of These self-tolerance an does individual’s attack not immune a in failure breakdown self-tolerance. Autoimmunity represents of a the or of mechanisms keep may we these that the repertoire first see lymphocyte self-tolerant Therefore, mechanisms revisit and how the fail. damage discuss various a pathogenic illustrate diseases autoimmune which that mechanisms We of autoimmunity body. the then the by can selection genetic and environmental or factors to are considered. predispose autoimmunity then How trigger chapter, cause part the remaining rejection. responses to that nonself discuss immune tissue the the transplant In antigens of we adaptive

The of and breaking making self-tolerance.

Chapter in we immune 8, potentially advantage lymphocytes. self nonself of identify the As of system delete learned self-reactive surrogate markers takes and and to autoimmunity. this, cause lymphocytes subsequently can Despite elimination some escape be activated and to self-reactive be function if In can system addition, all lymphocytes lymphocytes would foreign immune of impaired. degree some many weakly self-reactivity the also with eliminated, therefore, the antigens; respond to self-reactive of were

A to self discriminate critical nonself. of system is function the immune from 15-1

of system a eliminate variety immune mechanisms pathogens. can has The effector very that powerful host, severe against Early damage. the of turned could, if these cause immunity that it tissue in realized study was the The concept

breaking making The of self‑tolerance. and

pathogenic and mechanisms. Autoimmune diseases

autoimmunity. genetic of basis and environmental The

transplant rejection. to alloantigens and Responses

Fig. autoimmune Some 15.1 diseases. common autoimmune chapter. as most used are the listed of examples common the among this diseases will part and in diseases The be listed prevalence. are in They of order

against and autotoxicus.’ self self Paul 20th autoantigens—and described to antibodies, rise first that beginning Autoimmune effector are of specifically cells it autoreactive by this immune autoimmunity presented was normal or to ‘horror they responses Ehrlich, the responses antigens, give resemble case antigen. century who by of pathogens called autoantibodies, as in at activated the the antigens—in diseases. of a called dysregulated self chronic syndromes tissues cause occur autoimmune they variety to reactions When their and quite These are syndromes varied tissue (Fig. in distribution, tissue critical severity, in mechanisms are their effector that causing damage 15.1).

the is 5% countries, the disorders on populations Western Collectively, and of of autoimmune rise. their approximately incidence affect their multiple relative mechanisms the that prevent immune has indicates self-injury. to evolved individual Nevertheless, system rarity principle fundamental this to most is not achieve. discrimination The from of self is the mechanisms easy these underlying but discrimination nonself, from originating one B epitope be shape can but pathogen the humans. in three-dimensional a of an an cells recognize presented by epitope, indistinguishable peptides. processing identical of can short Similarly, self antigens be peptides from the pathogen derived to if does unique are there lymphocyte what molecular is So of know signatures a self? ‘self’ really how no

to between was antigen lymphocyte first self immature signal recognition death an nonself of mechanism leads or The negative a lymphocyte that inactivation. proposed and by distinguishing causing for to comprise by it its began to lymphocyte receptor. Thus, was after antigen molecules a ‘self’ shortly recognized express thought important an is bone Indeed, in in and lymphocytes inducing the developing mechanism marrow. this of thymus self-tolerance this tolerance The (see at tolerance is 8). as induced central Chapter stage known mature same lymphocytes periphery. to activate by signals Newly the antigen formed especially signals sensitive are whereas strong in through inactivation receptor, the their lymphocytes

making The and of self‑tolerance. breaking

the left as after Tolerance tolerance. have central known induced recognized peripheral organs lymphoid antigens is lymphocytes to or primary result a periphery in damage immune of ‘danger’ infection. with correlates signals absence system antigenic innate that self as the is in An of the produced recognition or by are tissue quality the that skin). body the cells all cells (for hematopoietic and in steady become undergo and of intestines cells Nearly many state routinely and cells and turnover epithelial the at example, senescent die, this or cell apoptosis. Typically, death, programmed by occurs patterns generate (DAMPs and apoptosis or MAMPs, In results respectively), that and tissue generally which that cells senescent antigens activating phagocytes presentation of from of signals to contrast physical releases promote molecular an damageor an in microbe-associated form. death anti-inflammatory response cell death microbial by injury, repress to B7.1) of physiologic, antigens IL-12) induce fail effector turnover co-stimulatory context naive differentiation. molecules or cells to the pro-inflammatory Thus, in example, recognized and otherwise that or IL-6 cellular cytokines example, (for would induce normal, (for self T to undergo the at damaging antigen encounter development a may of naive to all, development such encounter a self with that signal of effector regulatory circumstances, these suppress can of lead the promote In an lymphocyte or lymphocytes no responses. the removal immunological cells apoptotic tissue maintaining is phagocytes important and promote in antigen-presenting The by thus programs cells that for of homeostasis tolerance. activating tissue unless generate is be commensal bacterial the of of antigens intestines, in to inflammation the of not there associated antigens tolerance does where typically damage. recognition appear to mechanisms involved Some the induction the microbiota in same of

of antigen received nonself of several in used lymphocyte cell is ligands: binding inflammatory have the encounter from signals, of and ligand with of ligand or distinguish signals cells self that recognition recognition from clues of in the absence immature, are signals. when tolerizing cytokines Thus, antigen-presenting turnover to the co-stimulatory context the homeostatic a ligand error-prone of distinguishes level. of molecular a these none from the them mechanisms one are All foreign self because at controlling they start. therefore for responses system autoimmune has should several additional mechanisms The immune

prevent mechanisms normally autoimmunity. Multiple tolerance 15-2

prevent checkpoints. be thought succession mechanisms of that of autoimmunity The normally as may a checkpoints responses system without against responses, autoimmunity pathogens. to the in inhibiting immune to the preventing the ability mount of protection checkpoint is and synergistically effective efficient effective together to partially provide act antiself Each Central formed, strongly tolerance autoreactive newly eliminate lymphocytes. mechanisms self-reactive sense be lymphocytes are or the central organs—because not inactivated self other expressed killed cognate periphery. in do On the mature for there, hand, their strongly in that the example—may antigens self not lymphoid of to mechanisms of unresponsiveness), from suppression T-cell of development (functional (functional cells, repertoire deletion lymphocytes death. instead peripheral anergy activation-induced T development are The due and cell principal the cell deviation), induction tolerance of by effector T the system are normally antigens that sequestered in are to some In (Fig. not organs immune addition, accessible 15.2).

checkpoints greatly, not too immunity effective between a defense the impairing against in all provide and and Each autoimmune overall checkpoint balance autoimmunity combination, disease. an preventing strikes relatively is It

the are autoreactive of activation caused system in specific and listed, prevents predominantly The different lymphocytes occurs. damage along the immune and tolerance mechanism ways by with where such which

Immune factors environmental Genetic exposure dysregulation and Autoimmunity Infection Fig. for of disease. autoimmune Requirements 15.3 development the a individuals, triggered triggers intrinsic In result of of predisposed and/or as failure may such as the environmental infection. autoimmunity be genetically tolerance mechanisms

individuals. or even of of breakdowns to layers more one protection, easy healthy find even isolated in lymphocytes necessarily activation disease. of autoreactive equal not does Thus, autoimmune In function. physiologic a to and level fact, crucial low is normal of autoreactivity immune periphery the and of in B repertoire cells form the naive Autoantigens autoantigens mature exposure 8). survival help to continuous Chapter the requires lymphocytes, T (see of cells and to of effector the destroy and generation lead Autoimmune sustained develops safeguards are that reaction cells that self to includes a tissues. to overcome enough to if only molecules disease natural Although autoimmunity understood, of occurs result in breakdown thought as a the which and to infections mechanisms, combination are mechanisms tolerance this is susceptibility, from by such triggers incompletely (Fig. genetic environmental 15.3).

self-tolerance. first inactivation formed of lymphocytes Central or the deletion newly 15-3 checkpoint of is

most mechanisms, which autoreactive are Central first self-tolerance the remove and strongly in (see lymphocytes, 8). important Chapter tolerance checkpoints life. Without early be lethal in them, occur system would self-reactive, and immune the would strongly autoimmunity would to It mechanisms lymphocytes self-reactive remove to failure be that development. peripheral is during compensate for the primary tolerance unlikely sufficient autoimmune are some attributable with mechanisms, Indeed, failure a complete to partial failure associated known these central are of diseases of tolerance. no although

were in that only or bone not antigens long was the generating thought For that of be and marrow, tolerance peripheral a the self expressed mechanisms many it way thymus to must them. time in expressed dendritic medulla of many be can insulin, thymic all) these centrally. cells, as epithelial now clear by in It cells against CD8α+ the self-tolerance antigens that not and tissue-specific generated or such (but is either a subset thymus thus the are antigens, is but How has completely important yet thymus genes these ectopically an turned the out, been on worked are in not clue found. ‘peripheral’ Section (for to factor, on in for regulator), turning autoimmune be the thymus single AIRE is genes A peripheral transcription (see many 8-23). thought responsible fungal defective endocrine patients destruction polyendocrinopathy–candidiasis– The form of to (autoimmune leads infections, known is also of syndrome polyglandular including inherited autoimmune candidiasis. (APS-1)—that dystrophy), a multiple gene rare in pancreatic particularly AIRE to islets, as tissues, type with 1 ectodermal insulin-producing autoimmunity—APECED and many Mice genes syndrome. peripheral to thymus fail similar in engineered the and lack express develop a gene to AIRE the an (Fig. to and that thymus autoimmune indicating to leads these express antigens they of disease antigens the in encode, This links inability genes, the expression AIRE to these the 15.4). AIRE always organ all and that autoimmunity not deficiency develop to time The does affect accompanies takes targets. potential central important importance layers tolerance, that So of well shows as this have other disease roles. as tolerance the of emphasizing control

mature Lymphocytes tissue-speciÿc In reactive T with that In cells tissue-specifc express the thymic cells activated. bind AIRE antigens antigens to thymus, leave control T low antigens capable cells the AIRE, of to Under proteins, of protein, deletion tissue-speciÿc arise of the affinity thymus relatively tissue-reactive absence 15-4 medullary cells self recognizing and T of the leading

be self of and 8-6). circulating response affinity have Most but a low ‘ignorant’ to effector for self them, make no (see may lymphocytes considered antigens Section into self-reactive recruited can exceeded if by cells but ignorant be factors. is their threshold responses autoimmune for activation Such co-activating latently One is infection. stimulus such self-antigen or infection. high a pro-inflammatory and become levels affinity signals with activated cells the result co-stimulatory presence of cell as encounter T they an activated a of cytokines that presenting antigen of expressing can if Naive ubiquitous dendritic for low

their are in is A ignorant be receptors normally for may which autoantigens also Toll-like situation ligands when activated lymphocytes (TLRs). be self some found microbe-associated among molecules. patterns molecular are specific These can usually patterns receptors but to Section of for 3-5), be these considered (see recognized TLR-9. DNA in An CpG is that by are sequences unmethylated example mammalian than bacterial CpG mammalian normally cells. enriched is in common is DNA, Unmethylated in but much more apoptotic cell can B In extensive B-cell cells sequences specific for via a their coupled of fragments, with apoptotic clearance death chromatin CpG internalize scenario inadequate components of receptors. B a can be by to intracellularly, recognized TLR-9 anti-chromatin ignorant (Fig. signal that leading previously co-stimulatory activates the sequences These cell 15.5). for cells autoantibodies autoreactive cells activated produce anti-chromatin T B also act way can as and antigen-presenting in this cells. similarly activate uridine-rich complexes shown Ribonucleoprotein have containing been to RNA

Fig. causing tissue-specific The deletion of the antigens. AIRE medullary antigens regulator’ thymocytes these react to that the promotes ‘autoimmune of expression thymic cells, 15.4 immature gene can in some the retina of cells, thymocytes. many that antigens (first such are all the and to genes, is promote common to the self autoreactive to proteins, tissues, specialized gain specific expresses access panel), selection ovary obvious or to as it not immature Although negative how thymus thymus thus a promotes gene is AIRE called thymic now It that the proteins cells. many expression in of tissue‑specific known medullary (second will Some panel). developing tissue‑specific thymocytes antigens able to be recognize these as (third the Peptides they from undergo the panel), proteins in cells. are causing negative to deletion developing presented thymocytes these of these thymus selection of could the does they the panel), deletion the and instead, cause (fourth this periphery to mature autoimmune autoreactive In where are disease. exported not AIRE, absence occur; thymocytes dystrophy. called autoimmune develop ectodermal that Indeed, autoimmune AIRE an expression and or lack people of syndrome mice APECED, polyendocrinopathy–candidiasis–

Fig. that can providing by autoreactive are antigens B recognized Toll-like by activate co-stimulation. Self receptors cells 15.5 systemic produce that autoimmune receptor Fig. common activation (see B promotes of specific the The autoantibody (SLE) antibodies a the in TLR‑9 cells disease for DNA, erythematosus lupus 15.1). not with eliminated DNA the periphery affinity in B the and in bone but persist are for some normally DNA‑specific lower with escape marrow, B cells cells strong activated. affinity are Although B these to may leading of the activation conditions genetically individuals, DNA Under concentration initiate some enough and susceptible receptors of B‑cell increase, of in cells. the ligation to panel) their receptor endosomal panel) to but signal panel). (right through B an compartment take (center cells up deliver it the DNA also (left and Here that the CpG sequences. is recognizes in which unmethylated DNA has enriched access DNA TLR‑9, to DNA CpG‑enriched this and DNA more normally common from sequences microbial are in Such than TLR‑9 allows distinguish self. to pathogens much eukaryotic and in compartment. B in however, in concentrate will endosomal cell mammalian the is DNA‑specific enriched apoptotic cells also CpG, the this self‑DNA unmethylated DNA and the provide activate to potentiating against This would B DNA. leading activation autoantibodies of the ligands to the cells TLR‑9, sufficient of DNA‑specific production

TLR-9 sending an the B signal compartment, DNA, through The DNA B binding a cross-linked DNA bind of internalized receptor endosomal signal GC-rich by with receptor specifcity cells B-cell in for is the TLR-8. with or TLR-7 internalized the sending fragments naive B-cell a TLR-9 through cells bind from DNA bound soluble to molecule co-stimulatory fragments chromatin, by against systemic disease to and stimulated DNA, this lupus to produce the self-reactive are erythematosus are (SLE), autoimmune in B mechanism which and produced ribonucleoproteins appears be them. cells Autoantibodies one

into or Another ignorant changing lymphocytes self by mechanism which form can the drawn of the antigens. is by be of availability action they be may injury Some as massive antigens or result by of lymphocytes, tissue encountered inflammation. are normally released and but not intracellular a can antigens T These activate cells, and B then autoimmunity. ignorant to leading autoimmune infarction, an detectable days is some after occur can release myocardial response after This of cardiac when the antigens. however, typically cease continue, have and are autoimmune can autoantigens causing they Such the when disease. mechanisms clinical transient inadequate, reactions are been when clearance removed;

are quantity form. in great in present some are but a autoantigens usually nonimmunogenic Additionally, in IgG as there a large blood is fluids. good quantities extracellular example, are and of it IgG B IgG specific B-cell usually cells receptor. constant because the are the is not cannot monomeric and activated, region for cross-link immunization, or to in is However, infection form when following otherwise B multivalent ignorant response evoke IgG complexes from enough form a cells. immune is rheumatoid The present called autoantibody often because produce arthritis. it is factor they in rheumatoid anti-IgG immune complexes normally is Again, short-lived, rapidly. as cleared as response the are long this

hypermutation (Fig. activated B in situation activated centers their Section unique occur becoming for when self-reactive B some cells affinity or antigen resulting (see self can newly 10-7), cells increasing in undergo germinal A somatic a 15.6). a to B however, affinity seems, mechanism be control self. have cells acquired germinal for There center that to apoptosis its receptor hypermutated proliferation. in rather it center, than of case, undergoes B-cell germinal cross-linking a self-reactive encounters if B cell further the strong In this

15-5 sites targets. serve immune can induce attack as privileged not do but in Antigens immunologically

immune body elicit responses. do some Foreign tissue in sites grafts not placed brain in For not of induce and instance, grafts chamber placed rejection. the the do eye anterior locations termed Such sites are privileged (Fig. immunologically 15.7). privileged antigens privilege from responses. the It leave immune and failure believed immunological arose originally to sites that was of induce

these Subsequent antigens leave with shown sites that interact do have T and cells. studies response, However, does that a eliciting not induce immune they tolerogenic instead response the effector tissue. of injure an

Immunologically be unusual sites ways. seem privileged three to in atypical sites not the proteins that lymphatics, and immunological does in can extracellular do these in is the through site although conventional pass privileged placed effects. have body and between leave First, communication fluid lymphocytes. that by are exclude Privileged generally barriers surrounded sites tissue naive barrier. is brain, the for guarded example, by The blood–brain affect soluble course are that Second, sites. an response of produced in privileged immune factors the seems factor important (TGF)-β be this The anti-inflammatory regard. transforming growth particularly to in induce (see Under which TH17 rather pro-inflammatory Treg to are homeostatic responses, IL-6 presence responses, with concert TGF-β conditions, Section recognized of 9-21). TGF-β in the in induced by antigens than tend that immunologically Third, of of of level ligand these privileged inducing may a sites enter lymphocytes apoptosis by the in the Fas sites. effector expression provide further protection Fas-bearing

spinal of targeted brain basic sites disease the are autoimmune targets antigens nervous for system sclerosis, sequestered such chronic immunologically Fig. attack; central and the in Paradoxically, are in demyelinating multiple a of example, (see cord autoimmune often privileged myelin disease protein as autoantigens inflammatory 15.1). to the antigens to Thus, previous due of tolerance shown deletion self-reactive T cannot the these cells. be normally that encephalomyelitis of become sclerosis, experimental which multiple only nervous tissue. mice model TH1 a and when immunized induce with diseased system antigens inflammatory infiltration (EAE), mouse for they local that TH17 damages nerve a adjuvants, cause with are In the cells response myelin autoimmune and central antigen-specific

immunologically targets elsewhere, activation normal tolerance some circumstances, neither privileged induce auto-reactive autoimmune lymphocyte expressed antigens attack. in are if become these activated for lymphocytes but sites Thus, in autoantigens nor can immunological are cells in of Likely, in a antigens specific privileged state sequestered ignorance. for immunologically T sites comes (Fig. evidence sympathetic disease the Further from ophthalmia eye 15.8). to this happens occur, or other although proteins a rarely. eye ruptured by trauma, autoimmune eye If only an is can blow one response Once induced, often eyes. attacks it is the both response source vision eye, the in damaged preserve antigen—is of undamaged the of Immunosuppression—and, to required the removal rarely, eye.

T can enter infected. cells effector such immunologically Unsurprisingly, sites privileged sites when become the accumulation alter tissue tissues seen of activation antigen after of barriers. T the recognized most Effector cytokines (see is when cells 11), but cells enter only is Chapter site, triggering production in that can

lymphocytes. pathogenic cytokines be nonpathogenic may that suppress T 15-6 or may express Autoreactive cells particular

TH1, various As CD4 and cells can TH17 of described effector namely, TH2, Chapter lineages, types in differentiate cells. 9, T into on control subsets macrophages, (see such as B to infections as orchestrate cells different of of cells, effector and eosinophils, evolved types types cells, Chapters in different and innate These reflected antigen-presenting responses, and distinct 9–11). their effects neutrophils A mellitus T-cell-mediated Fig. autoimmunity: for true certain such as diseases autoimmune type 1 diabetes (see paradigm holds similar to such psoriasis cells. on whereas 15.1) on depend autoimmune disease, others, TH17 TH1 the of depend cause (an cells skin), disease as

Fig. of 15.6 germinal autoreactive cells in centers. B Elimination (top can centers B B‑cell cells receptors arise. somatic panel), in with During hypermutation germinal autoreactive antigen the autoantigen absence (center receptor B‑cell of Ligation receptors by of B induces by cells the helper of (bottom autoreactive in the T apoptosis through soluble cell signaling panel) these panel).

Fig. immunologically 15.8 response. an site to Damage an can privileged autoimmune induce sequestered into tissues, the making one the to T eye the ophthalmia, antigens eye disease cells. surrounding In them sympathetic releases trauma accessible to also eye, infiltrate and elicited that the attack cells eye. are effector attack traumatized The and the healthy induced response they by is Thus, if induce themselves, elsewhere not serve although a can as the targets attack. sequestered response do antigens a for

development knockout differentiation was In of were mice models to TH2 or diabetes, inhibited. differentiation cytokines predisposed to when of studied, murine diabetes when the T-cell infused influence were T potentially for In of specificity. suppressed pathogenic components, some of by islet-cell TH1 cases, same pancreatic cells cells disease cytokines, the instead TH1 TH2 expressing specific and actually caused TH2), effector disease termed TH1 (for So by immune human a to not type control switching to another proved from cell example, autoimmune far, cytokine attempts modulation, one to profiles procedure successful. have cells, prevention might important CD4 be deviate prove studied subset cells, T-cell to T a the to autoimmune effector Another therapy efforts as more responses for are to autoimmunity. of disease, of regulatory and being in novel Treg

cells. Autoimmune regulatory 15-7 various at can T be stages by responses controlled

above disease. cause can regulated not tolerance-inducing so cells Autoreactive do they that escape described that still the be mechanisms antigen-presenting into is themselves. extrinsic, and act size second lymphocytes mediated responses cells; the are basis on This the T regulatory in takes that programmed is has activated its T immune by and that duration the intrinsic, and cells of regulation forms: cells two is first limits on and of (introduced first in shall Chapter 9). cells regulatory the T discuss We role

lymphocytes that fact by the is recognize to Treg by self-tolerance potential from lymphocytes Tolerance that distinguished of the other to the due self-reactive have recognized from suppress those cell cells Treg antigens regulatory (Fig. forms different 15.9). of regulatory type This tolerance is known as tolerance. as The are long different autoreactive self same variety by recognize that regulatory feature a that cell. can tissue antigen-presenting antigens, presented cells or are of key same antigens the as suppress from is the the lymphocytes of tolerance regulatory As T regulatory in Chapter have been two cells of types experimentally. discussed 9, defined general the in express programmed response to thymus self are transcription (nTreg) to factor in ‘Natural’ cells the antigens. Treg FoxP3 that same function. their effector effector T the cells tissue cells T prevent prevent or nTreg antigens in by to in When the into differentiation recognize self-reactive inhibit antigens tissues, their peripheral activated cells same other tissues express antigens TGF-β also immune recognized cells response in peripheral but FoxP3 cytokines. in presence the (iT to of ) in absence pro-inflammatory but the ‘Induced’ of T in develop animals antigens induces of Giving oral prevent can sometimes which to orally, when by amounts autoimmune these antigen tolerance to routes, given unresponsiveness large Section and (see other lead can 12-18), self disease. so-called antigens generated of iTreg mesenteric in to and is generation the tolerance the nodes. by Oral is such routinely antigens lymph cells as food accompanied gut-draining the responses immune in to peripheral suppress are cells the achieved the how rest given in gut known immune suppression These the unclear. antigen of itself, is system the is but to therapeutic then that infused the induced and iTreg to be autoimmune be investigators into if cells have hypothesized treatment disease patients. isolated for potential differentiate of Many could have they could or

function the in that severe, Treg gene systemic controls—in Section is maintenance whose evident rapidly carry that importance of FoxP3—and autoimmunity develop FoxP3 the (discussed for The mice in humans and tolerance and the it from cells of the immune 15-21). mutations development fact Treg EAE, for and A FoxP3-expressing autoimmune syndromes intestine, in SLE, large has cells of (colitis). in been diabetes, colon the including protective inflammation demonstrated or role mice, several established these these immune suppress models cells in disease. actively depletion multi-organ mouse Treg in of diseases system, disease in have the results that FoxP3+ normal as of autoimmune Experiments cells described such to prevent graft-versus-host syndromes, this rejection, and chapter. shown also been as Treg graft in immunopathologic cells which later ameliorate have are other disease or

autoimmune importance been of diseases. human has in demonstrated several regulatory The T cells occur Treg 2 are diseases although more or sclerosis numbers suppressive two or type normal. syndrome rare autoimmune FoxP3+ the with polyglandular patients in activity For simultaneously), with (a which their in multiple syndrome defective, cells some autoimmune is example, of cells autoimmunity, variety these Thus, functional Treg role an a preventing in may in to defects have of and important autoimmunity. lead cells

identified. Treg regulatory has been not are type lymphocyte of FoxP3-expressing the that cells only intestinal in may enriched inflammatory disease an regulatory characterized IL-10dependent For where their they tissues, example, production of IL-10 mechanism. (IBD) FoxP3-negative by cells through are T the suppress bowel understood. of these not The are developmental cells origins currently

to circumstance. regulatory every type Almost has lymphocyte shown been display of in some activity B regulate Even and (CIA) collagen-induced syndromes, cells autoimmune EAE. induced including experimentally can arthritis regulatory and similar differentiation probably is that CD4 activity mediated T inhibit This of T cytokines effector cells. to that cells, of with secretion proliferation of the way a in

autoreactive (see and as can 11-16). have limits T cells of as proliferation Section addition regulation responses autoimmune help well to restrict and that intrinsic cells, extrinsic by B regulatory the lymphocytes survival In normal in illustrated as Fas development Section pathway pathways is of autoimmunity spontaneous by caused such autoimmunity. lead these pathway the that the is Bcl-2 spontaneous mutations control This or to mutations the (see that pathways apoptosis, by 7-23); in are form provides evidence then of normally This but are apoptosis. generated that autoimmunity by eliminated cells autoreactive seems an This important for be Tand both mechanism tolerance. to B-cell

a thymus periphery regulatory (nTreg) Treg an cell or inhibit for thymus recognized cells microbiota cell (iTreg) antigen for induced of T by antigen cell and TGF-˜becomes T T produced TGF-˜Regulatory in periphery specifc specifc cell presence (IL-10 natural T TGF-˜) commensal tolerance in cells self Cytokines becomes self T regulatory recognized other self-reactive

Fig. regulatory from the recognize 15.9 tissue. cells antigens inhibit T T that mediated by multiple all Tolerance autoreactive can same cells

by than that is cause panel). deletion required in regulatory Specialized too stimulation antigens T response develop (nTreg) for simple to left to in the natural is cells positive (upper self selection thymus weak but greater autoreactive cells from naive also TGF‑β in induced Regulatory the cell antigen in if and of can activated cells right T the the is presence naive cytokine recognizes periphery the T self‑reactive panel). T be its (upper cells, cells. The shows T natural self‑reactive inhibit regulatory and lower both panel T induced, other how can regulatory inhibitory If secrete inhibit an autoreactive antigen their antigen‑presenting regardless autoantigen of that encounter and cells T surrounding self cells, T their TGF‑β all cytokines cell, IL‑10 specificity. on precise such they as

Summary.

preventing between preserving be self and because a must disease imperfect, balance immune nonself proper autoimmune between competence. struck is and partly Discrimination always exist are the activated. Self-reactive immune lymphocytes in but not often repertoire natural become diseases, these activated by autoantigens. autoimmune however, In cells are persists, cause and effector autoreactive generated lymphocytes activation disease. If work autoimmune (see a of that The prevent Fig. together mechanisms has set remarkable immune disease to system 15.2). action self-reactive each work mechanism need collective perfectly apply cell. every means This to not nor that possible begins suppress autoreactive a the that T thymus when the or in in antigen-reactive rise T CD4 cells give to FoxP3+ the marrow subpopulation Treg B during self cells ‘thymic’ after case thymus. lymphocyte and are of cells development, Self-tolerance autoimmune deleted or, exiting the bone of responses cells, in ‘natural’ ‘induced’ not ‘peripheral’ such peripheral Mechanisms complement of or for or the that cells, tolerance, bone deletion, mechanisms as marrow. anergy thymus tolerance central or Treg expressed antigens the production extrathymic of are in these and cells too marrow), limitation impaired in in repertoire, great the immune and would autoreactive (thymus the tissues primary Weakly weakly impose pathogens. removed a on self-reactive as lymphocytes responses immune to deletion resulting of lymphoid bone not are inhibition the themselves include not although weakly mechanisms cells, T and self-reactive are are autoreactive, only if that Instead, they them by suppress in are activated cells periphery, pathogenic. which the suppressed targeting are inhibit self-reactive in the located regulatory the vicinity respond. lymphocytes the can lymphocytes cells which T autoantigens autoantigens the self-reactive cells if as same to regulatory to to and This sites allows of autoimmune home inflammation. cells suppress self-limited; intrinsic autoimmunity is that apoptosis. activated immune prone to in natural controls A responses the make be mechanism final of tendency lymphocytes programs to them such lymphocytes apoptosis-inducing by external as those Fas. Activated sensitivity acquire to also signals, mediated

Autoimmune diseases mechanisms. pathogenic and

self-reactive common loss self-tolerance some in syndromes, describe which clinical Here autoimmune damage. that of lymphocytes can cause tissue we generate ways and in The target resemble mechanisms pathogens. those that pathogenesis ways many invading of some receptor autoantibodies, Damage has Fc systems, SLE. in important as such through diseases, and an the complement by mediated role by them directed cells way would cells; β destroyed much pancreatic at tissues is diabetes. self virus-infected are Similarly, in destroy they cells cytotoxic as this which one T so most rare the not pancreas—the cells unlike persists as with typically response the However, in islet self are pathogens, proteins that, exceptions—such eliminated, chronically. are antibodies receptors against pathogenic unique myasthenia affect function, in gravis. as such that cell-surface Some autoimmunity, to mechanisms as their the of the some of chapter pathogenic In diseases. autoimmune part major we mechanisms this describe

antigens to immune responses Specific cause autoimmune disease. can adaptive 15-8 self

autoimmune mixed identical experimental Section I, In disease taken by from a strains and Appendix ‘self’ strong the tissues susceptible be animal of that induced A-1). can of were (see animals, with certain genetically injection genetically adjuvants autoimmunity provoked can immune adaptive by directly response to a be antigens. inducing shows This self specific that importance by cells, dendritic immune contained other highlight the the systems activation the bacteria of primarily in the experimental of of Such components system, adjuvant. the of such for drawbacks study autoimmunity, animal are of There models to however. the use self genetically what autoimmune In that autoimmune-prone autoimmunity initiate and disease. humans immune we response usually that the know spontaneously: is, to arises events to animals, not leads do the to has autoantibodies some these self although proven are particular studying the and was antigens. patterns to By disease, of yet reaction be it tissues the that initiated immune identify of it in of response antigens has same targets that possible affected, autoimmune to been

to against autoimmune tissue of infectious sensitization that patient epitope in a that may found triggered that an antigen lead agents by Some and tissue. express disorders be a resembling the self caused dysregulation of some animal the internal by is, participation There are models autoimmunity without however, the system agents. immune of that from infectious of also disorders apparent autoimmune evidence

classified either Autoimmunity or 15-9 disease. be into organ-specific systemic can

uncertain precise the causative classification science, of disease understanding of especially absence The of is mechanisms. a an in diseases. is difficulty well This classifying the illustrated in autoimmune by to autoimmunity: autoimmune body the of perspective is a diseases; of major to it of many From body, following tissues those known in the often between and the are which specific the ‘organ-specific’ affected, patterns two distinguish as restricted clinical ‘systemic’ autoimmune diseases useful organs diseases. a cleared exceptions notable body. autoantigens example, chronic few rarely from has (for because, become In a are tendency types, with disease thyroiditis), to the both Hashimoto’s to Some pathway, effects autoantibodies dominated particular cells. seem T pathogenic effector be either or by diseases autoimmune the immune a of effector overall both the However, contribute pathways of these pathogenesis. to often

limited organs or one In diseases, few organ-specific targeted, disease are to and is from autoantigens organs. a those which β cells. by the and predominantly caused on is gland; both Graves’ Hashimoto’s immune thyroid 1 disease, diabetes, type include pancreatic attack affect Examples and insulin-producing thyroiditis which kidneys, tissues Examples SLE and are in autoimmune skin, be affected diverse of syndrome, and systemic disease which (Fig. may the brain primary all Sjögren’s as as 15.10).

in categories respectively. and disease autoantigens recognized themselves The organ-specific are these two systemic, of Hashimoto’s antibodies. production against peroxidase, by is against thyroid-stimulating anti-insulin thyroid of antibodies antibodies hormone characterized receptor, by (TSH) Graves’ Thus, disease the by thyroiditis and type diabetes 1 the chromatin as splicing the every the antibodies the presence proteins SLE spliceosome characterized ubiquitous and By abundant complex. of in the by of such cell and that against body, antigens is are of pre-mRNA machinery—the contrast,

usefully break down some A and autoimmune classified all manner. categories because to organ-specific separation this be does, diseases diseases strict however, into extent, can systemic of in not For autoimmune destroyed, anemia, are hemolytic which cells blood in sometimes red example, occurs

to in that occur grouped single are in clusters boxes. tend Diseases members Clustering or disease one single different affecting a as a defined more of patient than is family. this scheme. Not can according diseases to classified autoimmune be all occur in hemolytic systemic example, isolation erythematosus. For autoimmune with can lupus anemia in or association

be and an classified as organ-specific solitary entity a as could disease. in circumstances conjunction systemic it with In occur other disease. as part SLE can of a autoimmune

disease inflammatory disease of A includes disease later which variant clinical entities—Crohn’s inflammatory bowel ulcerative (IBD), chapter) is main and prevalent chronic (discussed colitis. this in two though We even an it many this not targeted is discuss disease, IBD it antigens. chapter of primarily against self-tissue has features because in autoimmune resident dysregulated antigens of the intestines. commensal immune the IBD response the in are derived targets in the from Instead, microbiota antigens; is microbial microbiota. diseases not directed Strictly therefore, is that speaking, it the is among rather, directed resident, response ‘self,’ of against immune against in ‘self’ or antigens the an IBD autoimmune outlier seen and, response localized are single tolerance primarily IBD, breakdown features wrought as diseases, organ-specific immune organ—the in tissue destruction aberrant also with by of the the is intestines. a autoimmune to the immune Nevertheless,

components recruited typically autoimmune system Multiple of in 15-10 are disease. the immune

long important parts autoimmune which useful with etiology of are this developing in system Immunologists the been be because concerned therapies. disease understanding have and immune different syndromes, can in function acetylcholine of the syndrome In a muscle receptor produced weakness. neuromuscular example, resulting junction, against for gravis, the block myasthenia autoantibodies receptor at in complement form conditions, from inflammatory damage consequence inflammation autoimmune In deposited of on of and results ligation complexes Fc and the a in tissue receptors of as activation cells. that immune tissues in the other are cause antibodies

autoimmune diseases to main Relatively include psoriasis, in effector and type IBD, which agents diabetes, common cells be the seem multiple sclerosis. T 1 destructive peptides T peptides molecules. that self complexed from or are cells the derived commensal these MHC with microbiota self recognize In diseases, is to to caused in damage by tissue of myeloid recruiting activating damage cells local cells. T-cell T diseases cells the such direct by innate or cause system inflammation, immune The and

nature disease autoantibodies from disease self-reactive both transferred a healthy individual be cells, also confirms transferring pathological in a process. the that diseased by transferred When one involvement the material autoimmune to the and and/or this the proves of can T in is proving from pathogenic animal transfer In patients anti-acetylcholine thus to (Fig. of can affected the role 15.11). symptoms gravis, autoantibodies the recipients, serum myasthenia (Fig. EAE, disease disease Similarly, animals cells transfer animal animals the from affected can to T model normal in 15.12).

Fig. of disease autoantibodies that with can patients myasthenia in transfer 15.11 Identification gravis. receptor patients immunoprecipitate from from skeletal of cells of serum the the (right‑hand lysates muscle panels). acetylcholine gravis Autoantibodies myasthenia with the both transfer the acetylcholine (bottom disease human antibodies into bind murine when and can to panel). the receptor, Because can they injected mice the demonstrates This are that experiment pathogenic. antibodies produce should able same to However, T to receptor. that patients cells acetylcholine antibodies, respond have from also CD4 derived to a the the be peptide them, (left‑hand presence grown of and isolated antigen‑presenting gravis patients panels). cells correct from myasthenia in with T MHC detect cells plus the the acetylcholine type of are To receptor the the acetylcholine receptor for of and T proliferate specific be detected. can thus to are epitopes cells stimulated

affected specifc normal with and cells TNF-˜IFN-°paralysisparalysisMouse from are for paralyzed develop protein healthy by myelin IL-17TH17TH1 mediated with (left), compared can of Mice be protein transfer animal TH17 by basic of disease EAE cells myelin T Freund's is and transmitted Disease basic injected EAE adjuvant induction after TH1 The and complete mouse

Fig. these symptoms. T 15.12 cause cells myelin disease also protein can specific mediate basic for TH17 inflammation specific and of autoimmune in the the for and of brain brain are MBP. experimental TH1 Inflammation paralysis cells mediated by encephalomyelitis (EAE). of Cloned can produced to recipients Freund’s cord TH1 symptoms in spinal provided injecting experimental This is carry naive homogenized recipients MHC in the with isolated adjuvant. them transfer by that the EAE MBP‑specific correct disease cells animals complete due reaction allele. is inflammatory EAE to an the therefore In proved (as complex in the the possible first hind left peptide:MHC recognized progressive this the disease. to the transfer TH1 has on a brain affecting the in tail shown by limbs that photograph, mouse identify the of that system and clones paralysis it causes components also more of symptoms there a death. the the to right) myelin Other can induce and forelimb paralysis than one autoantigen purified sheath on healthy before the eventual compared is progressing of so EAE, with mouse this the of in autoantigens disease. One Wraith, from Photograph et D., al. basic myelin 59:247–255. protein spinal 1989, : the is homogenate Cell identified in cord permission With from Elsevier. (MBP). in Immunization Freund’s alone with adjuvant complete MBP

Pregnancy antibodies IgG for 10-15). in not can but can T role antibodies, placenta a demonstrate the (see as Section disease, cells, cross some (Fig. autoimmune For diseases to (Fig. the transmission neonate placenta leads 15.13), in of across autoantibodies or fetus the disease 15.14). of some provides cause in that This the of proof autoimmunity. humans symptoms autoantibodies rapidly disease newborn The infant the typically of disappear symptoms in as

Fig. Some IgG be that autoantibodies. transferred pathogenic autoimmune can by the across placenta diseases 15.13 molecules. by autoantibodies are cell‑surface against These diseases caused or mostly tissue‑matrix the autoantibody in the autoantibody. that accessibility whether the This placenta an determining the disease baby crosses an important fetus of newborn to is suggests or the factor antigen that causes heart is which antigen. fibrosis developing expresses of caused the Ro abundant cardiac tissue, block conducting congenital by Autoimmune Ro protein an intracellular is cytoplasmic ribonucleoprotein. small of constituent a tissue is it target to autoimmune at the It cell yet tissue as expressed a act known for conducting not injury. whether surface is cardiac of heart of the results damage rate tissue to autoantibody in Nevertheless, and leads slowing binding (bradycardia).

Fig. autoimmune little the damage in symptoms maternal mothers Antibody-mediated consequence of the the because infants antibody. is disappear appear can along 15.14 affected lasting as diseases a with transfer. antibody of symptoms In are the Graves’ disease, transplacental caused hormone the antibodies and pregnant the fetus thyroid‑stimulating the before IgG In (TSHR). accumulate cross in women, placenta receptor antibodies against by mothers thyroid‑stimulating birth antibody making (see Children are of Fig. 10.30). mother few therefore the by corrected can autoimmune removing plasma first in to but disease hyperthyroidism, with mothers of life. plasma replacing Babies IgG‑mediated born normal weeks (plasmapheresis), thus show similar the born of those frequently with symptoms the this the with be to antibody. Fortunately, maternal there

damage of such as antibody catabolized, are of Sjögren’s babies to cases antibodies but cause injury mothers the in with the SLE tissue the heart or organ is in before some maternal conducting syndrome. removed, they the not this or infant’s the permanent plasma although can of by has exchange after clearance injury is accelerated useful be occurred. blood Antibody (plasmapheresis),

pathogenesis. their with of along 15.15 a immune autoimmune response lists the parts that to of selection diseases, contribute the Figure although pathway. most above examples effector caused particular by are solely function clear However, that the a diseases noted can effector autoimmune diseases are not a disease, single drive more is B, autoimmune and system typically useful integrated cells. involving as responses and It immune consider engaging pathogens, immune responses, T, immune innate the to to like Indeed,

AntibodyDisease Help B gravis erythematosus T cells T 1 all Present for T secretion the for but Pathogenic role cells response sclerosis Autoimmune immune Pathogenic antigen Present antigen Present, cells involve antibody antibody lupus Multiple cells T of unclear Myasthenia to antigen Type Help unclear cells diabetes aspects diseases Present, Systemic Antibody Pathogenic Pathogenic Present but Pathogenic to to role

Fig. of immune all aspects Autoimmune the diseases 15.15 involve response.

some Although of consider typically, autoimmune have have system all B immune useful or T be role. that, mediated the traditionally cells, by aspects cells diseases it a been is to thought to diseases, cells, of autoimmune cells, and roles important antibody. T B lists four the the For figure autoantibody tissue promoting some cells have diseases, damage. multiple T as as cells In SLE, can B such make such roles directly and helping to as two have cells to autoantibodies. secreting can and well—presenting roles stimulate B cells autoantigens T pathogenic

traditionally system—particularly of shows that and critical antigen diseases. cells—are cells subclass autoimmunity innate specificity tissue experimental myeloid B of damage phagocytic the on mediating has autoimmune of effector the evidence identification and focused in immune in autoreactive although T research most cells, barrier Innate cells especially lesions, (ILCs) been lymphoid at also in autoimmune have found those surfaces. therapeutic is disorders, in good they be may However, exact of ILCs, currently whether and role unclear. the autoimmune targets

clear to response. feedback of antigen, a inability from the broadening and the inflammation, self autoimmune

foreign which normal the by 11). cells ceases, immune cohort immune a typical memory small When of is responses invader, effector elimination a destroy most of the pathogen, lymphocytes Chapter of outcome persistence after extinction mass to are response accompanied and (see of the engaged is easily it the is in (as antigen self autoimmunity, or excess is, be ubiquitous vast for because cannot however, example, eliminated, chromatin). In an very immune mechanism Thus, response many for a abrogated in limiting autoimmune diseases. important is

an by chronic of by In involvement early general, phase with the a few only characterized followed diseases stage. activation a autoimmune are autoantigens, chronic constant to The presence inflammation. autoantigen of leads a to this of autoantigens result the autoimmunity leads from antigens kept release important are tissue immune to self more system. as This as and an known which of many apart the barrier breaks by damage, normally ‘sequestration,’ cytokines release nonspecific to the tissues such and of injured (Fig. from as It neutrophils macrophages to and that of cells attraction chemokines leads respond also the effector 15.16). process. The is evolving a result and continuing self-destructive

large secreting plasma antigen-specifc more cells, cell More antigens, causing cells specifc amounts amplifying self sites an into activated T self bind injury differentiate B At binds Circulating for self injury, B response, released cells cell a of cell of antigen-specifc of cells antigens from B antibody damage is the antibody self tissue B infammatory cell injured initiates self peptide cycle by

Fig. to in Autoantibody-mediated B autoreactive of further lead the tissues, from promotes damaged 15.16 autoantigens cells. release can inflammation which turn of activation

B when ones (first dying stimulate panel). cells that Autoantigens, targets intracellular SLE, are only released from in cells particularly panels). and the activation B result of the third and autoantibodies eventual cells of is T The (second autoreactive secretion and

(fourth through mediate of damage autoantibodies variety a further effector of cells These functions death 10), panel). Chapter resulting (see the in can tissue activate established can shown in because autoreactive panel. (fifth additional recruit A is the over loop again, which as B cells in positive additional turn feedback first and start these panel), autoantigens cycle the

well on response as as new autoantigen, clones of the by autoantigens. to new autoimmune of recruitment epitopes new reactive of initiating accompanied the lymphocytes is often Progression is spreading, and is and epitope important disease. phenomenon as in This perpetuating known amplifying can internalize 10, in the Chapter antigens derived receptor, cells cells. to via their receptor-mediated seen antigen B by endocytosis and them, peptides process activated As present T cognate ways. in Epitope several occur can spreading can reveal epitopes self of antigens activate be presented, Because processing that epitopes called to hidden, that normally cell to then present present low naive the novel, T in antibody-bound previously cells. more antigens peptide internalized autoantigen too efficiently are concentrations the cryptic B can cell can will cells help to ‘new’ clones T responding to autoimmune consequent B-cell to autoantibodies. provide these production B with a of of peptides, recruiting cells greater presenting the Autoreactive epitopes additional these reaction, variety the any B other and internalize B-cell that with internalizing addition, via molecules any their closely will associated on receptor, specific antigen antigen. In also cells binding act original routes, completely reaction. the for as cells from B can autoimmune these derived antigens cells that the different peptides initiated By antigen-presenting autoantigen from

these SLE The initiates spreading. epitope mechanisms of in autoantibody response this the both against chromatin In protein found. DNA of and autoantibodies disease, are components autoimmune cells cells shows autoreactive response. another DNA can recruit of specific specific for for component into chromatin, histone T how the B proteins, Figure 15.17 autoreactive turn, the B resulting to cells, anti-histone DNA-specific the not B also anti-DNA T original only provide to and in production antibodies. In but help these of both histone-specific cells cells

the disease skin characterized linked severe by disease of epitope which is spreading the pemphigus vulgaris, progression is autoimmune mucosal and which to of Another blistering in membranes. is by cell hold in type of It desmogleins, caused of is against autoantibodies a the cells (Fig. (desmosomes) present together that epidermis cadherin junctions 15.18). Binding of

Fig. for complex B antigen when an single 15.17 various spreading autoreactive stimulated a specific occurs T helper Epitope specificity. of components cell cells by of are a an is made histones dying and antigens against immune DNA ever‑broadening nucleosomes, with as SLE, patients are released which of and In cells. disintegrating such consist from nucleoprotein and response T shows single CD4 to of lead a panel to The upper of a clone cells emergence B‑cell response components. nucleosome how autoreactive the can diverse a which H1, specific in the linker is the The the center is T for of on present surface nucleosome. cell (red) the histone particular from peptide and specific DNA, a helper the of to peptide constituents, cell. The and for respectively, top and cells surface H1 on at are bind the the the nucleosome, on thus nucleosomes, B H1 process T and epitopes present intact the endocytose B of case cell the Such activated cells in DNA‑specific be be make B to anti‑DNA will will which antibodies. antibodies, the right and an is cell B‑cell which inaccessible The is on receptor. intact is B nucleosome for hidden to bottom the epitope at specific histone the the thus inside H2, cell. T and cell helper the does This by nucleosome become not the B H1‑specific bind does not activated specific A bind composed the particle, (which ribosomal proteins), another left) RNA not B (bottom T cell nucleosomes and by and ribosome not will of nucleoprotein for type cell. is of specific will be activated the clone with a will different of of members same T‑cell T reality time, cells In different cell cell B one interacts a B with interact at the specificity. but of panel T‑cell lower to response nucleosome. the broadening the the shows The II has an presenting nucleosome and on peptide B cell molecules. of is center nucleosome‑derived processed its H1‑specific The in MHC intact the antigens a variety class well any from H2, peptide as internal the which for from those those and B H1. specific H3, as H4 cell This a will cell of can include antigens, T activate these histones do peptide This specific cell for cells histones. because antigens T not H1‑specific ribosomes ribosomes contain B of will not activate

autoantibodies molecules of to the domains dissolution of adhesion the and junctions of extracellular causes dissociation tissue. the these affected Pemphigus in skin genital involved. vulgaris starts later usually only mucosa; and become does lesions the the with oral found, unable skin against on certain In mucosal seem to stage, autoantibodies blistering. are cause the only Dsg-3 epitopes desmoglein these antibodies and more abundant the epitope desmoglein, skin Progression epitope within to both to autoantibodies spreading associated can and the which in is with Dsg-3, gives intermolecular rise intramolecular to skin which that blistering, Dsg-1, deep epidermis. is spreading cause another with disease variant the pemphigus in the of also severe Dsg-1 is autoantigen less disease, a foliaceus. no In that cause involved are parts disease, produced autoantibodies protein epidermal against made the and epitopes of the in first only adhesion on cells. against autoantibodies damage, of Dsg-1 after appears the disease

tissue cause antibody in autoimmune T 15-12 cells damage and Both disease. effector can

by system being disease mechanisms manifestations tissues. caused are immune directed of the The at the effector body’s own autoimmune of maintained constant discussed the previously, of supply autoantigen. new response can the and by be As amplified An this 1 in to diabetes, destroys the most of response exception type cells. target all or the which is rule autoimmune diabetes. to insulin symptoms in to homeostasis, leads resulting This the failure maintain glucose produce sufficient of to a

Historically, to understanding according prior a were in ‘hypersensitivity’ of reactions the immune more to the early mechanisms defined that have adopted in classified (Fig. mechanisms 1960s, a autoimmunity modern injury been tissue scheme for of 14). see to Chapter introduction also 15.19; system, in injury) dysregulated well the immunity different clearance orchestrated become damage. the particular recognize pathogens the and that predominates dominant causing immune are types of both a that B types for are cellular example, and (for of response type autoantibody-mediated that as same of in effector contribute—even the autoimmunity, of of where as cells, that innate tissue cases We now ones T cells in and is against mechanism and determine disease. the is directed, by the antigen-bearing of the expression autoimmune or of tissue the which response clinical damaged, antigens, antigen, which together pathology the group The

disease by (previously most hypersensitivity) 2 or part atopic no of major mediated forms 14) IgE in immune allergic as cause type and Type inflammatory play referred autoimmunity. I (see responses to typically Chapter linked appears III of generation IgM-producing binding complexes of B cells. cognate or hypersensitivity) of on (type IgM to T-cell-independent type composed autoimmunity located to be of tissues autoantigens or (TH17) matrix (type By and by to hypersensitivity)—often to contrast, by 1 tissue that surfaces cell their II extracellular or 3 localization soluble dysregulated (TH1) or IgG autoantibodies—whether type or autoantigens autoantibodies by immunity, damages immune systemic. immune deposited can thyroiditis), or in arthritis), organ-specific example, antibody-mediated it or specific a (for in disease target can beds are tissue result injury example, type vascular (for or Because be autoimmune complexes can rheumatoid that specific cell autoimmunity, forms cause autoantibodies such SLE, by damage some both these as In of of mechanisms. (for cells diseases cells a which which inflammation at to type diabetes); type several organ-specific T damage response or TH17 example, 3 cells 1 cytotoxic due (type TH1 example, some disease). IV in diseases alternatively, response for due and/or tissues type are psoriasis a Crohn’s tissue barrier hypersensitivity; cause such are promote to in autoimmune directly Finally, 1

by in epitope extracellular Antibodies EC1EC2EC3EC4EC5Dsg-3 interactions Dsg-1 disease in skin of desmogleins made B-cell of autoantibodies Different late and targeted disease matrix mucosal on epitopes keratinocyte Dsg-3 targeted against EC1EC2EC3EC4EC5Dsg-1 are stage epitope the in unzip early adhesive stage targeted desmosomes

Fig. specific vulgaris autoantibodies disease is caused desmoglein. 15.18 by a skin-blistering Pemphigus for

cell‑surface in with protein domains (EC1–EC5; extracellular panel). cell is hold keratinocytes upper adhesion molecule a desmoglein the together, junctions that An five EC5 response, do made autoimmune the Early cause disease. not antibodies of against (Dsg‑3), the shed but desmoglein‑3 domain in are spreading However, are made antibodies against time, in and IgG and domains epitope occurs of Dsg‑3 EC2 Dsg‑1. intermolecular intra‑and the and EC1 maintaining interactions desmoglein adhesive adhesion that can are panel), inhibit for of integrity. and the desmoglein desmosomes autoantibodies with interfere thereby (lower physiological in These necessary of skin producing skin blisters. the cause layers Consequently, the of outer separate, antibodies the to

response according the predominant be of Autoimmune which grouped mechanism diseases tissues. immune type can by the and damages it to In immunopathogenic in diseases, operate autoimmune mechanisms parallel. several many which appears in arthritis, mechanism. rheumatoid than category of illustrated one here immunopathogenic is for This more

most autoimmune pathogenesis of however, diseases, several mechanisms In operate. cells T Thus, for always of production helper required pathogenic are almost autoantibodies. the cells activation T help auto-antibody damage an tissue in have the mediate B often Reciprocally, production. important cells of or that maximal role injury. rheumatoid antibody-mediated for diabetes both arthritis, cause type tissue 1 example, T-celland In and pathways antibodies autoimmunity SLE by known thought of T-cell-mediated of have mediated is complexes previously immune a and example is was to pathogenesis. component but solely be now that to an to inflammation virtually Moreover, T-cell-mediated autoimmune antibodyor in and injury. all cells tissue innate contribute immune diseases, and examine We autoimmunity. will autoantibodies consider responses self-reactive in then first T-cell tissue damage, how role their cause

cells their blood promote destruction. 15-13 against Autoantibodies

IgG located cells IgM destruction to blood these antigens the rapid to of responses or lead of surface on the cells. of leading of cells An anemia, the autoimmune on anemia. blood destruction which red hemolytic in trigger is antibodies example cells, antigens self against to this in ways occur can (Fig. two This 15.20). cells cleared from of system, Red rapidly interaction IgG cells with the circulation the Fc complement particularly or respectively, bound on IgM the in mononuclear–macrophage receptors, by or can spleen. phagocytic be antibody with by autoantibody-sensitized complement. of lysed can be cells of the membrane-attack complex blood Alternatively, red the formation depletion turn can purpura, thrombocytopenia platelets), other of the cause platelet-specific in antigens or surface autoimmune cause which GpIIb:IIIa In thrombocytopenic can fibrinogen hemorrhage. autoantibodies against receptor (a

by components complement against because cells are immune with of common cells by (see complement-regulatory 2-15). complement these is nucleated proteins, defended less Lysis cells of interfering the protect Section activation attack which by better Nevertheless, cells destroyed of targeted by phagocytic cytotoxicity cells autoantibodies mononuclear the by or cell-mediated (ADCC). antibody-dependent NK system nucleated still circulating are cells via bacteria. Autoantibodies infection which with increases for pyogenic cause example, neutrophils, against susceptibility to neutropenia, of In accelerated cause clearance cases, their the cells depletion. of all is these autoantibody-sensitized the of autoimmunity the removal cells, of is occurs. therapeutic main this the One approach clearance type spleen, platelets, to in and of leukocytes red organ which IVIG, receptor-mediated for the by and receptors quantities of uptake of myeloid Another suppress antibody-coated to large inhibits mediators the activates production IgG intravenous Fc Fc among cells administration other of is mechanisms immunoglobulin), cells. inflammatory (termed of which nonspecific inhibitory

15-14 powerful of fixation sublytic The complement stimulates cells doses to in response. inflammatory a of tissues

to by binding of causes injury tissues and mechanisms. cells IgG antibodies The of in a inflammatory IgM variety the of One these of complement. fixation is the stimulus. of nucleated a complex to their relatively sublytic lysis resistant cells powerful membrane-attack provides amounts by complement, Although are activating surface the on of assembly cause precursor acid—the release, phospholipids of respiratory cytokine the the mobilization mediators interaction of arachidonic on a or prostaglandins leukotrienes, and this inflammation. cell lipid generate type, membrane of burst, can Depending to

chemoattractant molecules. cells and and fixed immune innate cells are them attracted tissues Most in to by are in adaptive place, is such autoantibody the molecule result which binding. activation fragment One released by triggered of C5a, complement is as a complement can autoantibody-targeted B4, such by cells. as leukotriene released the be chemoattractants, Other to fragments complement on binding activated Fc C3 cells. fixed Inflammatory by are regions leukocytes autoantibody and further antibody-dependent by can from leukocytes activated by products and mediated NK the cytotoxicity Section 10-23). (see injury of cellular the cells Tissue result

autoantibodies prolonged at periods. antigens levels which found Hashimoto’s type is for in probable high of thyroiditis, A of extremely tissue-specific autoimmunity against are example this discuss cytotoxicity, Direct we which later, probably T-cell-mediated disease. is in important also this

Fig. Antibodies cell-surface 15.20 cells. destroy can antigens for specific (upper in IgG primarily autoantibodies against spleen In with red rapidly panel). Fc hemolytic from receptor‑bearing a (erythrocytes) uptake circulation are by the cleared the macrophages blood cell‑surface coated cells (lower autoimmune antigen by located panel) left anemias, by cleared IgM coated C3 and are Erythrocytes macrophages. autoantibodies with fix CR1‑bearing rare membrane‑attack complement binding intravascular red causes (lower The panel). of the leading that the fix on cells, the hemolysis complex of formation right to autoantibodies certain efficiently extremely

Fig. in is disrupted Graves’ 15.21 regulation production hormone thyroid of disease. Feedback is the Graves’ specific hormone autoantibodies caused (TSH). for receptor by disease thyroid‑stimulating for by thyroid their to and limit of inhibiting response Normally, are production (left in by pituitary TSH hormones production the TSH panels). own produced the are disease, TSH for hormones panels). autoantibodies (right therefore and agonists thyroid stimulate of the the Graves’ the In receptor production in TSH causes hormone hyperthyroidism. in of inhibit do hormones this The thyroid affect production thyroid not the production the way but autoantibody; way normal induced the production excessive

blocking against receptor cause disease receptors function. by 15-15 Autoantibodies or stimulating

a occur binds cell-surface when autoantibody disease can Autoimmune receptor. Antibody a by receptor block stimulation receptor the stimulate binding ligand. to either can or natural the on (TSH) hormone production against Graves’ excessive thyroid receptor the disease, of autoantibodies thyroid cells hormone. In stimulate thyroid-stimulating thyroid high inhibit hormone thyroid release levels feedback the pituitary. production by by The controlled normally is the TSH hormone of of of regulation; the chronically TSH, because levels patient and elevated in disease, Fig. Graves’ of fails autoantibody to the the continues TSH inhibition of (‘hyperthyroidism’; produces feedback thyroid stimulate absence receptor the hormone In 15.21).

block junctions α gravis, the myasthenia of neuromuscular the at skeletal autoantibodies receptor In nicotinic against muscle chain acetylcholine present in contraction. stimulation can cells of muscle and the The internalization of receptor believed to (Fig. are antibodies drive degradation 15.22).

Fig. 15.22 function Autoantibodies in gravis. myasthenia receptor inhibit receptors junction cells, muscle panel). acetylcholine to neurons In circumstances, from muscle on skeletal at neuromuscular triggering the motor binds released (upper contraction stimulated normal acetylcholine by is Myasthenia for gravis caused the of acetylcholine. autoantibodies receptor against subunit the α degradation activating autoantibodies and bind the it to also and receptor without internalization These receptor panel). (lower cause the number of acetylcholine. receptors decreased, to As is muscle muscle on responsive the the becomes less

Fig. autoantibodies cell-surface caused 15.23 against Autoimmune receptors. by diseases the depending inhibit on effects are they agonists produce or (which (which antagonists These receptor) antibodies it). stimulate different whether either against or stimulate Note signaling. can that inhibit autoantibodies the receptor different insulin

develop potentially a weakness fatal their result Patients gravis of progressive myasthenia as disease. with agonists antagonists by as or on listed act caused are cell-surface Diseases receptors autoantibodies Fig. that in 15.23.

inflammatory cause 15-16 against extracellular injury. antigens Autoantibodies

can responses infrequent, extracellular damaging. to matrix be very Antibody molecules but are syndrome, formed IV basement are of antibodies α3 Goodpasture’s against (type the collagen chain In collagen). membrane antibodies glomeruli (Fig. membranes renal bind These the to basement of disease and, untreated. cases, membranes rapidly alveoli, basement causing 15.24) in the some a to of if pulmonary fatal ligate Fcγreceptors effector monocytes as bound their basement and The neutrophils, activation. to on to membrane cells, innate autoantibodies leading such injury. a severe causing turn, tissue monocytes that attract glomeruli, of neutrophils influx These cells, chemokines release into and further in tissue of also complement, activation a amplifies which injury. autoantibodies local The cause

produced soluble Immune when an antibody there a is to complexes response are antigen. blood both because system are cleared mononuclear cells complexes efficiently Normally, receptors. receptors red tissue by Fc by that little such the and of cause that and phagocytes they have bear damage complement phagocytic complement the can, production immune the of fail in capacity This system exceeds complexes circumstances clearance where however,

Fig. syndrome. basement the as glomerular reacting Goodpasture’s glomerular known with Autoantibodies disease membrane 15.24 cause inflammatory

panels: Upper of schematic the kidney. damage antibody‑mediated glomerulus a of to two The of of the basement collagen the neutrophils membrane and capillaries, recruitment complement and causing activation IV monocytes. glomerular autoantibody and type within binds activation to taken of from kidney glomerulus Third with Goodpasture’s biopsy a section panel: in syndrome. of the renal patient IgG for glomerulus stained is The by immunofluorescence. deposition green) in linear basement basement glomerular is antibody a Anti‑glomerular along fashion the deposited membrane. membrane (stained glomerulus the of proliferating a (N) section Bottom of surrounding staining and (C), renal (G) formation a urinary cells monocytes shows glomerulus by (M), silver the crescent composed influx neutrophils an through capillaries. that are filled glomerular epithelial have the compressed capillaries and panel: (Bowman's) of a that the space of

production autoantibodies activate MyD88TLR-7 survival TACI cell B-cell immune DCs IFN-˜IFN-˜plasmacytoid IFN-˜IFN-˜stimulates autoreactive produce TLR-9 immune or from autoreactive to dendritic BAFF-R complex the acid-containing BCMA BAFF and dsDNA dendritic plasmacytoid cell autoantibody generated produce BAFF, cells Increased enhances ssRNA cells survival dying monocyte which B myeloid cell to cellnecrotic complexes cells of apoptotic Nucleic

Fig. BAFF activates Defective of can of interferons that cause complexes acid-containing nucleic overproduction 15.25 clearance I immune SLE. type and

normal there the or clearance mechanisms, in deficiencies when normal mechanisms. clearance of are serum small-molecule injection caused (see haptens. An binding of the acting of sickness of former 14-15), as proteins serum proteins which large serum and or by by is to example Section is amounts the drugs cleared. a Serum until disease, been immune complexes have the lasting transient is sickness be lodged overwhelmed is a the immune endocarditis, the of clearance to response chronic infections, in bacteria mechanisms Similarly, can normal cardiac bacterial as incapable in which valve clearing infection. on such immune-complex valve a antigens of presence the from and antibacterial to kidney persistent causes blood response injury widespread of infection bacterial the small release organs such vessels skin. in the strong in as the antibody The which infections, are lead cryoglobulins C condition cryoglobulinemia, Other chronic as mixed such in the of deposited and immune to joints production tissues. essential complexes infection, and can in the hepatitis clearance contribute of complement subsets expression impairment defects functional such patients either specific be be to that Alternatively, caused may of complexes; impairment with can normal which Fc in SLE. in there of in mechanisms receptors, by reduced receptors, components of each of or or of inherited immune occurs or its

multiple can Indeed, both, the SLE complexes, defective from levels overproduction either or the clearance immune at or (Fig. result of 15.25). against at ubiquitous present antigens production self antibody range to nucleated common directed leading In chronic is in this wide cells, a there constituents. IgG autoantibodies disease, cellular of as letters two three cytoplasmic the intracellular are proteins main antigens of discovered). (named proteins the complex these particles—the and subunits small patients after autoantibodies whom of ribonucleoprotein of spliceosome, two surnames the known La the chromatin, of a in The nucleosome and first were Ro types two containing nucleoprotein against For extracellular. immune-complex autoantigens become they must these formation, in participate to cells The released dead injured dying SLE from exposed and are tissues. of on autoantigens

vessels other of and membrane, deposited quantities and immune are complexes the amounts the large joints, basement continuously antigen are in SLE, glomerular small of (Fig. are renal large In produced in walls small so blood of available, organs 15.26). Fc the through cells receptors. activation phagocytic to their leads of This development proteins, is the and strongly of some C1q, C2, SLE humans. hereditary associated those specifically deficiency with A complement for C4, in of important cells (see apoptotic C2, of in the and clearance complexes is immune C4 classical antibody-mediated Chapter C1q, are pathway, components early complement in which and 2). immune apoptotic cells cleared, their not antigens and are will lymphocytes the that chance activate self-reactive increased. in the complexes low-affinity periphery If is The which form releases complexes. immune in complexes, damage more tissue nucleoprotein turn consequent more specificity. process, become T about this cells also their autoreactive During much known although activated, less is part initiated the Animal of kidney. SLE be help the and infiltrates cannot of can cells, for cellular cells skin the directly be also and T without pathogenic, T in models forming section, the As next in discussed

believed cells. complexes cells, by from dsDNA dead example, (green containing, In acid immune it plasmacytoid for bound that is or on rods) FcγRIIa dendritic ssRNA are antibody:nucleic SLE, activate ssRNA respectively, panel). endosomes, they and TLR‑7 (upper and where Fc are to The production IFN‑α to TLR‑9, induce dsRNA delivered receptor‑bound production increases IFN‑α monocytes and by BAFF receptors interacts dendritic cells. B with and cells, on BAFF can (lower to panel). leading autoantibody Excess B‑cell autoreactive production increased increase BAFF survival,

cells helping response; as B to target functions by to two infiltrate and direct they by destroy antibodies, a make immune normal and contribute disease autoimmune ways: analogous cells in effector T tissues. T-dependent

for 15-17 responses. autoantibody specific injury tissue antigens can direct cause self sustain cells and T

to of presence been reasons cells a demonstrate of existence the it number autoreactive more difficult has for of autoantibodies. the than Traditionally, T experimental autoreactive First, MHC-restricted. T to disease cells T-cell cannot human animals is transfer recognition because T of Second, be autoantigen, cannot tissues distribution same in be stain can cells to autoantibodies reveal the used used self the way. to whereas and autoimmune the cells A-24) providing use for autoreactive vivo to track Section fluorophore-labeled tetramers a of cells flow 1, antigen-specific can T in (see peptide–MHC diseases. both is cytometry means T now stain Appendix that in identify However, in strong the already Furthermore, autoimmune involvement is T diseases. for autoreactive evidence cells there many of 1 of are T for selectively the example, destroyed cytotoxic by pancreatic the type islets βcells In diabetes, cells. insulin-producing the by rapidly destroyed that grafted finding and is which in the βcells diabetes tissue were cases in transplanted by were selectively rare the This cells. a T from in half recipient’s the donor, the patients pancreas an twin out identical with borne with T-cell Chapter cyclosporin drug the activation. by immunosuppressive can which (see prevented A disease of 16), be inhibits Recurrence

patient. recognition CD4 autoimmune recognized from cells can cells, an to of be mononuclear by by and CD4 cells testing or for tissues identified derived by cultures T containing adding Autoantigens autoantigens blood cells be it CD4 recognized If by present, cells. T autoreactive autoantigen effectively the is should CD8 The identification in recognized have such autoantigens presented autoantigenic role, diseases peptides cells is of difficult effectively cultures. T T because particularly which in cells in a CD8 by are not autoimmune usually damage. target themselves cells to must I Chapter the made therefore MHC tissue be by molecules T the cells intact tissue cells must CD8 autoreactive from 6); (see patient cause Peptides class used by target of study be presented that some pathogenesis T-cell-mediated itself of CD8 the antigen give disease the the the identity clues can in Conversely, diseases. of to cells example, by diabetes, (Fig. to T type cells specifically insulin-producing destroyed and For the targeted in seem be β 1 CD8 15.27). unique cells the β by the source of the CD8 pathogenic is that to cells. peptide protein recognized suggests This T a the one principal shown that Studies mouse model as the by are type diabetes. in have autoantigens in cells, of 1 confirming recognized of of itself this model (non-obese diabetes insulin pathogenic NOD from peptides insulin T CD8 diabetic)

sclerosis is system destructive myelin T-cell-mediated Multiple against by nervous central immune a a caused antigens, response (MS) neurologic disease

Fig. immune Deposition systemic complexes erythematosus renal in of in (SLE). failure 15.26 glomeruli causes the lupus renal through of glomerulus showing the section from the the a: as a glomerulus. immune SLE, thickening clear a renal glomerular through membrane, with ‘canals’ running a complexes of seen patient has caused that basement Panel the deposition in stained b: basement the revealing Panel similar section deposits membrane. antiimmunoglobulin, immunoglobulin a with fluorescent deposits c, membrane the between under epithelial the microscope panel complexes dense immune the seen cells. glomerular In the are protein renal as and basement electron deposited leukocytes are complexes. the Polymorphonuclear present, neutrophilic by immune also attracted courtesy of H.T. Photographs M. and Cook Kashgarian.

Fig. on β destruction in of Selective autoantigen recognized indicates cells 1 the that produced surface. their and pancreatic type is diabetes cells 15.27 β in In β islet in there cell other destruction highly (α cells Langerhans, islets of 1 types δ). pancreatic of is specific the diabetes sparing and type insulin‑producing upper schematically is This the panels. in shown cells, lower and the from shows In which (right) mice insulin (left) for (black), stained (brown), β for shows islets which cells. the the and panels, normal diabetic are glucagon α β spared. loss cells islet (black) α in Note the (right) whereas the infiltrating lymphocytes of the (brown), the diabetic cells mouse and the are the selective cells. characteristic of with of the morphology β also the disrupted loss is islet The the I. Visintin. Photographs of courtesy

cell˛ hormones. of distinct several secreting cell˝ islets contain types cell cellThe ˜ Langerhans different but protein (Fig. a recognizes tissue-speciÿc cell and and ˜and still CTL (MBP), °cells, ˛-cell an be basic expresses protein the and In somatostatin cell including (MOG) 1 Each myelin type ˛cell glucagoninsulinsomatostatinGlucagon peptides proteins diabetes kills proteolipid can (PLP), from oligodendrocyte effector protein by myelin glycoprotein the T produced are made no speciÿc insulin 15.28). (sclerotic) from of plaques, that nervous the matter lesions, in central MS white name the system. takes the its develop hard or along nerve lesions inflammatory surrounding blood with lymphocytes myelin These that and infiltrates cell the of particularly show vessels. normally macrophages, sheath of dissolution axons, surrounds develop MS symptoms, ataxia, of blindness, weakness, may Patients and paralysis. a muscle variety including with neurological breaks cell specific activated lymphocytes endothelium cells the adhesion migrate few blood–brain T antigens integrin (VCAMs) out 11-3), T molecules this bind Section expressing cells (see vessel. vascular on myelin α4:β1 of but barrier can and to activated CD4 the barrier, if blood down, enabling for cross the Normally, (phagocytic class cells reencounter presented the they molecules in infiltrating MHC macrophage-like on macrophages nervous or by central There specific cells resident system). II autoantigen their microglial TH17 IFN-γ, CD4 heavily by produce T effector becomes site and GM-CSF. permeability, IL-17, which vascular and increased infiltrated TH1 causes the Inflammation and cells, cells these to Cytokines turn effector in myeloid by and of that and T resulting innate activate further produced immune B chemokines cells, cells, lesion. cells and inflammation, recruitment T cells in recruit exacerbate the with Autoreactive myelin produce cells. T antigens autoantibodies B help from cells against activities combined demyelination interference with to function. lead and These neuronal

affects what of clinical autoimmune The of both in tissue and course the diseases mirrors such specificity seen also is progression. their other displays how MS conditions reduction last by for years. Most patients that by months a in a may MS (relapse) attacks course acute characterized or disease followed experience disease activity (remission) and the the (besides Crohn’s symptoms rheumatoid of many arthritis, of into others), both diseases infiltration relapsing–remitting autoimmune terms and in This of experience affected course immune-cell MS, the degree is characteristic among disease organ. patients leading Not events still spontaneous always disease when of but the are autoantigen not remission—even clear, triggers the relapses present only is the to

cytokines reaction in mast-cell complement the antibodies, due activation, occurs in activation, discovered. Infammatory the to be to brain organ—remain and such makes a MS diseases must performed these of of effective disability. in is ensure over clinical the be Furthermore, time especially they long preventing relapses as to and difficult, disorders conducting relatively therapy around trials periods as relapsing–remitting nature

‘secondary to after Ultimately, change disease remitting often MS. decades, a patients most relapsing– progressive’ from course MS adaptive to immune this relapsing–remitting MS. many for therapies becomes their neurologic target less undergo the effectively remission, patients steady system In and the overt begin a decline without responsive periods to in patients disease of that phase capacity, leading to regenerative though are the unclear, neurodegeneration. has nervous chronic been for this central reasons system’s exhausts long-term course relapsing–remitting that The it suggested ultimately the large allow activated of periphery. microglia blood–brain and need to may of the promote inflammatory cells cells for Further, immune neuronal the remain without barrier, prolonged recruitment damage numbers continuing disease the from to continuous behind

(the is arthritis synovium by disease characterized joint). of chronic the (RA) a thin a inflammation of lining Rheumatoid inflamed invades by damages cartilage; and the (Fig. erosion synovium progresses, bone this As is followed disease the to of function, 15.29), leading pain, and chronic disability. loss Section cells factor first rheumatoid was disease anti-IgG an B called 15-4). autoimmune considered producing by driven autoantibodies RA (see However, this in individuals, and patients absence its suggested orchestrate arthritis, the rheumatoid that some mechanisms identification rheumatoid factor complex pathology. of healthy some more with in of that the that RA association are cells suggested also pathogenesis in The of II involved T class an particular disease. this the discovery HLA-DR genes MHC has with data and In least development, at RA, from autoreactive disease in humans become TH17 activated. in that, as models most early mouse indicate cells MS, antibodies. cells cells to Autoreactive help B produce provide to T arthritogenic and produce cells which stimulated TH17 also responsible synovial and cytokines with which, more destruction. tissue CCL2), recruit as The and pro-inflammatory IL-1, cells TNF-α, (CXCL8, for to or produce finally along fibroblasts, metalloproteinases, chemokines are endothelial neutrophils cytokines are monocytes/macrophages, that matrix activated such in ligand into the fluid for mature of synovium concentrations IL-17A, expression NFκB high (RANKL), patients, of receptor been activator induce RA and which resorb the found can synovial osteoclast in that the affected has in stimulates bone which precursors osteoclasts of joints. differentiation of Although starts, T to that disease. do models B know RA both have needed shown initiate cells and how not yet mouse cells we are interrupting Interestingly,

Fig. sclerosis. pathogenesis The of 15.28 multiple cells enter cells they the brain, T can blood–brain for antigens cross barrier reencounter their and and At brain sites IFN‑γ. antigens secrete the such on microglial inflammation, activated where cytokines of autoreactive as B blood a complement) blood as affected cells, cells influx cytokines site. and of The further of and induces into cells) T‑cell dendritic and and macrophage exacerbates macrophages, production (such the proteins the (including inflammation activated. become also Mast cells well loss are understood. components neuronal roles The not demyelination these of individual in of and function still central nervous system. CNS,

joint MMPs tissues. osteoclast attack cartilage attracting Autoreactive in by RANK induce IL-6 by of sets joint TNF-˜Cytokines leukocytes bone-destroying fbroblasts membrane, macrophages, RANK ligand tissue and trigger resulting synovial the results ligand of of fbroblasts production activate destruction RANK MMP T up cells production ligandMMP cytokines sustained into osteoclasts and infammation initial in infammation cytokines pro-infammatory of CD4 Activation in Unknown focus

Fig. arthritis. pathogenesis of The rheumatoid 15.29 lymphocytes some by inflamed the synovial macrophages attracts autoreactive and Inflammation of the initiated to membrane, unknown trigger, tissue. cytokines such Autoreactive effector TNF‑α macrophages, produced. IL‑17, as activate IL‑6, pro‑inflammatory are cells and IL‑1, T CD4 and activated contribute destruction. matrix to Fibroblasts metalloproteinases tissue which by cytokines produce (MMPs), is cytokine joint, expressed RANK osteoclasts. primary the in inflamed ligand, the bone‑destroying T The family cells of fibroblasts TNF by activator and Antibodies also pathogenesis in against (not shown), several uncertain. role joint but produced are their is proteins

complex all in treating been this successful cells, the at disease levels—including T-cell against (TNF-α), multiple (discussed cascade the of symptoms therapeutic Section cytokines activation—have antibodies 16-8). and in B

into proteins of more RA have which have in foreign mechanism be in disease develops, of also other how a may autoimmune self as autoantibodies and insights global Studies seen targets the by conditions. identified this yielded the in nonself may that can converted the During be self (Fig. acid arginine citrulline, cause to it change immune amino inflammation, the system result protein this view of as into and now alterations structural 15.30). are proteins these that protein tests pathogenic, be shown (ACPAs) antibodies highly and for against for altered can models specific RA. Experimental diagnostic have anti-citrullinated antibodies been suggesting tolerance-breaking an important associated HLA with RA environmental risk in most factor development—has that to the mechanism with gene–environment patients as node APCAs in be important may risk known lead alleles, interactions for this smoking—long autoimmunity. that the Interestingly, stimulate post-translational now have self responses (oxidation, to other proteins periphery of autoimmune shown Tand diseases. in B-cell other glycosylation) been in the modifications Finally,

Summary.

those organ the throughout affect classified diseases a and body. that tissues Autoimmune into can affect specific be those broadly that type 1 and Graves’ autoimmune disease. Crohn’s diabetes, sclerosis, diseases multiple Organ-specific include disease, β of system restricted nervous the intestinal case (Graves’ that target receptor disease, pancreas the (multiple in in central particular the microbiota. components sheathing axons to each sclerosis), hormone Crohn’s autoantigens disease)—or, effector of and myelin the cells In are the 1 the functions (type of case thyroid-stimulating diabetes), organs—insulin-producing on the In (SLE) inflammation erythematosus ribonucleoproteins, systemic contrast, of and because diseases autoantigens, in found such tissues cause multiple chromatin body. in most which their as are include cells lupus systemic the active and leads antigens their cessation systemic autoantigens cleared. if unique activity, untreated, some but to to the destruction of autoimmune it diseases expresses tend organ-specific self chronically of be because immune be tissue target diseases, In cannot the classifying functions way to the important diseases according most that in pathogenesis. are effector autoimmune is of Another by effector to one clear, diseases however, is becoming solely It actually involve that be thought several. many mediated once function In the pathogen-directed way, which of activities diseases immune responses, effectors—adaptive typically resemble and multiple autoimmune this elicit innate.

to disease to immune shown to be a antigens. classified the self by response autoimmune, must as be damage adaptive tissue For be the caused target that intestinal in intestines, diseases are the of the are but directed self’ are (IBDs), those a such Autoinflammatory ‘self,’ special derived case microbiota the strictly microbiota. the ‘extended as against from in of antigens commensal inflammatory the not seen bowel reactions diseases. IBD, with other features autoimmune immunopathogenic shares nevertheless, of of convincing that component The immune transferring is transfer causal the response recipient. to the by is autoimmunity immune disease the appropriate in an active the response most proof diseases are lymphocytes responsible products, for cytokines, autoantibodies injury. inflammation autoreactive soluble by pro-inflammatory Autoimmune tissue and and their and mediated that of excess function. caused receptor few A either causing to cell-surface activity inhibition bind autoimmune diseases by antibodies or are receptors, transplacental of can cause In passage autoantibodies fetus the in neonate. and diseases, some disease IgG can to or an response. destruction, and T inflammation initiate typically sustain in autoantibody required directly be and cells involved they are cellular responses spreading. T-cell important sustaining Similarly, are for and epitope causing cells cells autoantigen-specific antigen-presenting B induced. remains responses therapeutic mechanisms damage has to the are tissue it of engendered, approaches the determined and our this of that In spite be information of how knowledge autoimmune

and genetic The basis environmental autoimmunity. of

multiple not to of surprising result diseases are exist both that the genetic autoimmune autoimmunity, that the factors, Given complex and it mechanisms is prevent environmental. understand basis We defects of various attempting perturb first discuss how mechanisms. to genetic genetic autoimmunity, tolerance the cause disease. are sufficient to not, alone Genetic always defects however, autoimmune factors understood. although poorly part, are these also play a factors Environmental genetic result tolerance disease. mechanisms we in together overcome shall see, factors and As environmental can and

15-18 component. genetic have strong Autoimmune diseases a

individuals clear autoimmunity. that some is increasingly genetically are It predisposed to is of diseases. mouse demonstration to are strains prone autoimmune in clearest found that this inbred Perhaps of the various types of (Fig. with males NOD than are likely diabetic becoming the strain female get Mice mice diabetes, to faster very 15.31). are in common many males in still (see are autoimmune diseases Fig. that unclear, reasons than females more For 15.37 (SLE degree disorders below), high some and MS) sexual with showing a dimorphism. of a diseases have component. Autoimmune also in humans genetic type suggesting 1 role susceptibility. in run including Some diabetes, autoimmune diseases, families, for a genetic much is affected twin twins. (dizygotic) if less is identical is to the whereas as disease well, of (monozygotic) concordance quite Most other convincingly, nonidentical affected, likely in one be twin

clearly influences involved. are also Environmental at members develop For do so although NOD diabetes, a different most colony example, mice of they ages. of the mice even to often onset identical. the all colony animal though disease genetically next, Moreover, are one from differs individuals. in part, the in diabetes Thus, determining development susceptible be, genetically variables must of rate environmental in in striking the of the is importance development IBD of mice microbiota intestinal the that Particularly

Fig. the to tissue converts 15.30 arginine citrulline. proteins deiminase residues peptidyl The arginine enzyme of

or peptidyl by arginine deiminase induced. is activity tissues stressed In wounds (PAD) infection, citrulline, proteins By converting them susceptible makes PAD arginine to degradation. residues destabilizes more and to autoimmune epitopes introduces tissue B‑cell T‑cell It and novel that proteins can an response. also stimulate into

Fig. the disease. of autoimmune 15.31 in Sex differences incidence

than of NOD males, females in autoimmune more in are a illustrated common as diseases here of diabetes diabetes‑prone incidence population mice. Many the cumulative by age males, line) get greater their much younger (red than a diabetes indicating predisposition. at Females do by provided Wong. kindly S. Data

Fig. in cytokine can autoimmunity. or to that Defects lead 15.32 signaling production in analysis, mainly animal pathways signaling autoimmunity models. in involved Some genetic by have been the identified of (see cytokines listed intracellular of the for or overexpression the molecules discussion). of further some of and signaling here involved underexpression effects are text The

predisposed are genetically in diabetes NOD intestinal mice of develop Incidence to (%) inflammation. of onset, with or components that without microbiota) the or (i.e., a susceptible commensal raising eliminate Treatment eliminates under flora delay antibiotics eliminate and reduce disease. germ-free can mice disease conditions broad-spectrum many intestinal as colonies been TH17 promote that inflammation. intestinal certain Conversely, responses have bacteria intestinal (SFB)—present mouse microbes—such in some segmented linked to filamentous susceptible genetically organisms the Although may individuals in of identified, microbiota autoimmune components not have studies predispose human to been disease. suggest that clearly analogous humans twins, 100%. although is incidence much higher For not rate in monozygotic twins dizygotic is than instance, in disease Crohn’s concordance susceptible the or variability in explanation the epigenetic be The factors defined. in yet could incomplete intestinal differences, lie microbiota, concordance for to

providing insight basis 15-19 immunogenetic new are autoimmunity. the into of approaches Genomics-based

system disrupted. proteins technology Since (see Appendix experimentally been gene in of many knockout A-35), have genes mice advent Section I, encoding the immune mice that show cells. of by generated of and signs autoimmunity, of organs including have T infiltration Several been autoantibodies strains that the be and mutations autoimmunity, The mutations. has of expanded our induced therefore occurring to identifying candidates of study naturally pathways contribute knowledge these for mice might their molecules involved in proteins and clear involved proteins antigen These that in likely or apoptosis, cascades, mutations cytokines, antigen:antibody genes co-stimulatory affect molecules, co-receptors, that complexes. encode antigen-signaling proteins number A autoimmune signaling in and implicated disease in cytokines are Fig. of listed 15.32. in phenotypes in mutant listed or genes targeted are Fig. with mice Other autoimmune human corresponding are their known. as 15.33, where counterparts,

that disease IL-10R, cytokine in Cytokine, bowel bowel or IL-10, vasculitis production In˜ammatory bowel IL-2R ResultDefect signaling arthritis, bowel STAT4 psoriasis autoimmunity signal in˜ammatory disease. IL-7, In˜ammatory In˜ammatory to or disease, STAT3 intracellular lead disease, receptor, TNF-˜TNF-˜In˜ammatory underexpression leads In˜ammatory IL-23R disease TGF-°Ubiquitous bowel IL-2, can to bowel disease Defects leads in to Underexpression receptor SLE leads Arthritis T SLE SLE IL-3 to Overexpression syndrome cells IFN-˛Overexpression agonist speciÿcally in IL-1 Underexpression Demyelinating skin

Fig. genetic of syndromes. lead defects autoimmune that 15.33 Categories to

been models. animal have Many which identified in to autoimmunity in mutations genes predispose humans and by defect. are of These process understood genetic the type best affected by the text process here, (see such genes related organized (or further product) discussion). protein the is by given of A for the list humans. has gene In the identified cases, and mice in some been same same other are mice different affecting In cases, and the humans. in mechanism implicated genes in number human smaller populations. genes The difficulty the of identifying responsible genes reflects human outbred far identified so undoubtedly of the

In to between disorders polymorphisms, variants and look assessed a genetic (typically (GWASs), studies or by autoimmune genetic disease SNPs). for recently which humans, susceptibility large-scale correlation association single-nucleotide been frequency has genome-wide autoimmune studies Such of and thousands a given disease involve with patients diagnosis typically

Fig. disease. risk 15.34 of genome-wide association Manhattan from depicting (GWASs) studies Crohn’s plot alleles with by gene polymorphisms compared patients Section of disease The with with also in highly significant (see 15‑23). highlights selected identified controls (SNPs) analyses nuclear associations single disease loci healthy plot Crohn’s significance peaks The of reflects the the the height of statistical association. threshold associations 10–08). line The for dotted (5 × the indicates significant and Figure courtesy of Rioux John Ben Weaver.

order controls associations. highly healthy significant to identify in in plot genes linked Fig. Crohn's in candidate identify are the disease Example that ‘Manhattan’ from shown results to GWASs 15.34. plots These profile a skyscrapers resemble because so view named the in Manhattan are they skyline. of on logarithm the x-axis, on the with being of y-axis, and a assayed each represented by the given Here, is P-value association coordinates genomic the of the located dot. are negative SNP on disease are plot. the with skyscrapers’ the greatest the variants Thus, ‘tallest association the humans loci. hundreds autoimmune diseases, to this due variants may susceptibility be of disease autoimmune approach, susceptibility multiple Using in genetic have to at identified significant suggesting alleles been for a combination of multiple that

Analyses certain T-cell immune activation in and of that of notably autoimmune pathways—most to function—are different multiple from multiple autoimmunity. diseases those involved common forms GWASs indicate example, rheumatoid on association thyroiditis, multiple 1 with arthritis, show all sclerosis 2. Hashimoto’s and CTLA4 Graves’ diabetes, For type the genetic disease, chromosome locus 9-17). (see Section molecules co-stimulatory The produced by activated and T B7 is inhibitory cell-surface is for receptor protein CTLA-4 cells an most been of function (Fig. factors central linked TH1 involved the Similarly, many autoimmune and disorders in and common immune to have pathways development TH17 the of the 15.35).

gene-regulatory also revealed these our mechanisms knowledge immunology, studies human our much have ignorance from that of of predispose experimental disease. Despite to confirming protein-coding variants many relevant majority and are the to genes), For kilobases date identified (the away genes. from immunologically alleles of instance, vast contained risk exons not reside (>80%) within regions of these contribute the active to a genetic of variation at disease how very research. noncoding sequences can genome in Understanding is area using profiling computational Recent to algorithms, human coupled epigenetic immune-cell populations, of transcriptional evidence and

2, 2, bowel 3, IL-23 erythematosus 6 IL-12R°2IL-12R°1 IL-23 Infammatory CARD9 8 3 2, Systemic 44, colitis Multiple cell 3 Type 2 NF˛B 7 STAT4 7 diabetes °-glucan IL-22 spondylitis 8 3, 2 STAT3 Ulcerative 1 IFN-˜IL-17 3, Rheumatoid Dendritic IL-12 2 6, 7, 2, 8 Ankylosing 3, 1, IL-22 5 2, 1 8 2, TH17 production IL-12p19IL-12p40 JAK2TYK2 IL-17, CCR6 1, IL-12p40IL-12p35 2, 7 22 6, disease 4 IL-23R 3, production IFN-˜production 5, and 7, 4 6, 4 IL-12R°1 4, 4, TH1 1, cell JAK2TYK2 5, production arthritis Psoriasis IL-12 1, PTGER4 1, 1, 1, cell 4 sclerosis 7, 3 lupus 2, Dectin-1 4,

Fig. of 15.35 autoimmune Associations response and pathways IL-12R the IL-23R components diseases. with of

pathways significant ‑23 of components components broad associated a respective that response interleukin‑12 with genomic are is, range studies. associations within show diseases; these the of that receptor in immune‑mediated with map (IL‑23R) Multiple and genome‑wide disease association intervals the genome‑wide (IL‑12R) (TH1) shows helper cells Although now phenotype. type it this cell specific of to are and may the T and from components phenotype 1 the lymphoid lymphocytes, these in widely they expressed vary context in TH17 recognized that innate is figure conventional from Parkes al. et M. Adapted Nat. : Rev. 14:661. Genetics 2013, With Publishers permission from Ltd. Macmillan

example within cells elements of (for variants control are in that many critical gene-regulatory located that expression suggests immune causal the enhancers). gene the etiology of regulatory event elements or effector gene-regulatory further these of autoimmune following are their activation, utilized cells key confirming T-cell disorders. T Many in as by a activation a new understanding to mimic in relevant variants techniques the disease fully experimentally affect either populations these singly immune-cell Ultimately, or to in to elucidate disease. contribute order and require to of they combination, will how alleles, of how risk biology deeper manipulate

other mechanisms autoimmune genetic disease. have common several light to of variants ignorance from) the of most to genetic approaches how predispose Despite shed (or protect our on begun disorders, current the the study in immune or by tolerance; mutations regulating of molecules to into innate patients monogenic certain defects investigations their ability cause include certain rare, immune self These of alterations to disease of overt and antigens. tolerance predispose system; present that HLA the how alleles study with these briefly in the following will of explore We each sections.

mechanisms. that Many fall or more autoimmunity categories 15-20 predispose genes one that to into affect tolerance

cells signaling; to signaling (see autoantigen classified predisposing be cytokine genes co-stimulatory and or or can as thresholds; expression clearance; regulatory receptors; the Many apoptosis; availability T Figs. affecting their of identified autoimmunity as molecules or 15.33). and 15.32

the important both clearance thymus, the Genes and and in antigen in periphery. are centrally, control availability that influence tolerance control lymphocytes. of self thymus, In developing in expression genes that the proteins early the of of development deficiency can (see complement proteins deficiency cascade of SLE example, 15-16). associated with components predispose to the the hereditary autoimmunity—for of some Section is In periphery, the that and vigor as important immune in control of Genes responses. regulating are such apoptosis, duration FAS, tissues, self autoantigens. immune excessive causes destruction to responses Failure of properly releasing regulate immune self-reactive not cells. include anergy clonal absolute, responses some and addition, In are because can deletion apoptotic if cause problem mechanisms, are necessarily but limited disease, autoimmune not apoptosis their by long properly numbers regulated. cause they they As is not may as a could

One categories the to of activation. pertains signals with lymphocyte autoimmunity of associated mutations largest control that inhibitory Fc containing These molecules, as ITIMs, and receptors Section in mutations such co-stimulatory 15-19). inhibitory CTLA-4 (see PD-1 and include receptors, transduction in mutations Another through receptor antigen the involved in signal itself. contains proteins subset signaling that intensity more or less in result sensitive—can Mutations either affect in autoimmunity. direction—making signaling thereby lead autoreactivity A in example, thymus, the failure sensitivity in for decrease selection to in periphery. negative of a to the can and of In and effect the to activation, lead an receptor in in immune exaggerated autoimmunity. prolonged sensitivity increasing response with periphery contrast, greater side can resulting the the affect and Additionally, of autoimmunity. signaling or molecules have been that linked mutations to expression co-stimulatory cytokines Treg-cell function, A or such (see Section comprises mutations effecting mutations development subset 15-21). FoxP3 final as

of immune defects tolerance. Monogenic 15-21

genes, of (Fig. diseases Predisposition autoimmune but multiple there common the of to the due some combined monogenic effects to diseases most are autoimmune is 15.36). the is mutant risk population to variants Here, disease the these impact the very individual, overall minimal of because on high rare. but the a allele confers are first single-gene in in mice autoimmune consistent the was The a disease monogenic syndrome an defect. followed of observed a of mutant with inheritance pattern existence which autoimmune Such usually recessive alleles are or X-linked. APECED disease is example, caused Section defect autoimmune the in the a AIRE (see by recessive disease gene a For 15-3).

cells. autoimmune been to linked monogenic Two in syndromes have T regulatory defects transcription is which IPEX dysregulation, the encoding X-linked in some of syndrome differentiation X-linked) 9-21). is autoimmune FoxP3, missense factor (immune (see gene by the caused The key enteropathy, in types typically polyendocrinopathy, of mutations and the Section recessive function cells Treg disease polyendocrinopathy, to thrombocytopenia, by anemia, and characterized This allergic usually and secretory leads autoimmune is diarrhea, severe death. hemolytic early inflammation, with FoxP3+ is comparable cells in to the the the IPEX Despite in however, Treg number of mutation individuals number of healthy the blood the gene, of FOXP3 individuals;

Mechanism function mutants of with by of diabetes mutation apoptotic IBD anti-infammatory of None of cells cellsC1q of Single-gene autophagy/clearance ALPS self selectionINS bacteria self-reactive regulatory Decreased complexes of and thymus; gld/gld Graves’ immune and defective IL10RB Defective of death or resulting the disease of IPEX IL-10 of and autoimmunity CTLA4 CD25 Hypomorph Defective Knockout others traits impaired Defective autoimmunity of FOXP3 IBD T-cell Failure insulin in T innate self-reactive FAS Knockout intestines CD4 Failure 1 impaired cells cells of anergy knockoutGene responseIL10RA, type in lpr/lpr; activation with apoptotic thymus, Knockout in expression Knockout negative Decreased B AIRE Human expression and diabetes, selection self-reactive Decreased in Mouse negative APECED SLE T Type ATG16L1 T signaling; reduced clearance 1 disease, T Association and threshold cells associated (APS-1) cells antigens mutant Knockout (scurfy)

Fig. autoimmunity. 15.36 traits Single-gene associated with polyendocrinopathy, APS‑1, are in IPEX, monogenic humans. of X‑linked enteropathy, disorders cause examples syndrome; autoimmune 1; autoimmunity immune dysregulation, Listed that syndrome polyglandular autoimmune ALPS, Mice syndrome. with targeted (knockout) lymphoproliferative deletions characteristics mutations for have affects in FasL. gld mice lpr gene the homologous affects the models gene lpr/lpr) genes useful in disease the or and mutation whereas spontaneous The similar example, mutation are Fas, for (for J.D. Adapted from Rioux and A.K. disorders. study for basis the pathogenic of for Abbas: these the Nature 435:584–589. APECED, dystrophy; Macmillan function polyendocrinopathy–candidiasis–ectodermal is Ltd. impaired. autoimmune normally displayed permission these Publishers from cells With suppressive by mutation) of the the to that the case with of A results an Treg cells. (the Foxp3 scurfy of FoxP3 domain this knockout Foxp3 mutation in in or mouse systemic associated frameshift analogous DNA-binding disease, FoxP3+ loss spontaneous absence autoimmune of complete in leads gene

defective survival cells development and caused the complex (see by mutation from that Treg chain the 9-16). Treg results Autoimmunity of Section constitutively high-affinity is cells by receptor IL-2 of CD25, of also expressed susceptibility addition by and suffer CD25 this to in T deficiency to well, affects immunological function as and effector of deficiencies cells patients mutation affected multiple of Because autoimmunity, infections. the development the further the regulation of Treg importance confirm of These system. findings the in cells immune

in syndrome encoding syndrome of disease the case is caused (ALPS), a gene An lymphoproliferative systemic by autoimmune a monogenic autoimmune interesting mutations Fas. autoimmune to cell activated normally the by Fas-bearing ligated undergo and apoptosis Fas Fas B it ligand, the on signals of when Section is and cells, (see present T 11-16). surface limit functions immune of responses. extent to In the way this it a especially quantities eliminate of large lead and inactivate to SLE. in T production massive the accumulation of Fas disease resembles and that that mice, or pathogenic cells, of a to Mutations autoantibodies lymphocytes, identified it subsequently lpr, observed named lymphoproliferation; strain in syndrome was this the and MRL for A mutation to leading first mutation autoimmune a in as Fas. was mouse Fig. of gene of is the autoimmune syndrome patients which the the MRL/lpr as study most for The syndrome, responsible the human these lymphoproliferative (see identification to mice, to similar FAS mutant in the led rare with cases of 15.36).

Fig. Associations autoimmune susceptibility and to disease. HLA with 15.37 of sex would with the allele of calculated an The given prevalence in be number HLA number carrying disease HLA HLA allele the allele for of in that the expected, an general risk’ the the observed by comparing population. ‘relative patients the autoimmune is linked gene, the DR serotyping. to diabetes association not is mellitus, is fact genes insulin‑dependent in with type is by For detectable the the tightly which but 1 HLA‑DQ that in taken hormones are imply significant pathogenesis. is sex to the ratio; in this Some sex involved a show diseases bias greatest Consistent menarche when with in these and levels are is the in highest. diseases menopause, of the such this, between ratio hormones difference sex

controls Healthy DR3/4 DR3/x DR3/4 Diabetes DR4/x (17.5%) (25.7%) (30.3%) (39%) (27%) DR3/x DR4/x (2.5%) (4%) (30%) (24%) DRx/x DRx/x DR2/x

identify rare, that but normally by development of interest, genes Autoimmune mutations important pathways the responses. are caused great single prevent diseases them are of causing autoimmune as the

important to autoimmune controlling 15-22 role MHC disease. susceptibility genes in an have

to associated genotype so consistently to most MHC Among (Fig. autoimmune contribute far disease genetic with been has autoimmunity, that loci susceptibility II CD4 class MHC cells their implicating particularly 15.37), T etiology. alleles, in thus alleles MHC particular strongly diabetes experimental mice expressing of or human confer transgenic susceptibility. arthritis development in suggests HLA The antigens that specific disease

As of in association MHC population. by with frequencies the identified association disease comparing the patients disease with is in (GWASs), in with the studies frequencies the normal of MHC alleles genome-wide HLA-DR3 an serotyping (Fig. demonstrated the by with type approach identified alleles, and association For diabetes, this HLA-DR4 1 15.38). dominant that II has also studies protective showed Such allele the MHC class HLA-DR2 a

Fig. diabetes type 1 genotype. HLA of 15.38 to Population with susceptibility association studies show representative general population panel). of serotyping) (determined genotypes found HLA The by in panel) (upper those patients are with (lower diabetes not the of with and patients HLA‑DR3/DR4 controls. all greatly compared HLA‑DR3 Almost diabetics in is diabetes HLA‑DR4, and/or express overrepresented with heterozygosity type diabetes. alleles to that tightly 1 to alleles HLA‑DQ These linked are confer susceptibility diabetes diabetes. development rarely against the of By only in extremely is HLA‑DR2 contrast, patients with and protects found or x represents allele letter small than any The DR3, DR2, other DR4.

in 1 studies HLA type haplotypes diabetes Family of

Fig. strong with 15.39 susceptibility of Family linkage show to diabetes HLA genotype. type studies 1 more families compare siblings or possible of In which HLA to 1 the affected have type in genotypes is two diabetes, it siblings. not share the susceptibility. HLA influence two siblings more expected did than Affected HLA if be frequently disease haplotypes genotype much would

association diabetes. effect: susceptibility one rarely alleles, in develop even HLA-DR2, of carrying individuals the with share that are It autoimmune haplotypes (Fig. far also siblings has MHC disease likely the expected same two than to affected been more same with shown the 15.39). by precisely. more serotyping has defined associations DNA originally HLA more have exact been discovered become As through disease sequencing, genotyping to their to diabetes that For susceptibility to known alleles to example, association between due the is and the tight confer 1 DR3 type disease. alleles genetic be DR4 linkage DQβ the now and the position particular cleft closely is MHC (Fig. polymorphisms class most with II affect associated that of DQβ peptide-binding sequence acid a amino Indeed, the susceptibility at in 15.40). at mice known also MHC as serine same polymorphism mouse molecule, that of I-Ag7. residue II NOD a homologous in the The position has class strain diabetes-prone

with autoantigenic present susceptibility autoimmune surprising; molecules associations determined autoreactive in disease explained to MHC variants be an by by in The simple of not of association differences cells. is of different peptides to disease model ability to autoimmune allelic T genotype can the is which MHC a in diseases. of involvement would This T-cell with what know be we consistent particular II diabetes, example, and are response. finding CD4 autoimmune CD8 consistent the MHC T associations both that with the with and cells for MHC mediate alleles, there I both In class class 8). role repertoire (see the MHC T-cell receptor shaping emphasizes the Chapter An hypothesis in alternative alleles of the with proposes This MHC certain for thymocytes are of developing selection autoantigens. hypothesis drive that specific that molecules peptides may associated positive particular self Such

Fig. protein 15.40 with from susceptibility II the and changes acid protection MHC class correlate diabetes. sequence an in Amino of to instead, more this serine, The at well in an differences. contains most 1 with 57 diabetes type Caucasoid position acid position residue alanine (Asp) as or other valine, aspartic at (T1DM) often as HLA‑DQβ1 patients people; have populations, in chain the arginine in DQβ of the the chain shown panel, the top forms an structure the to in backbone 57, red bridge α pink) salt green a Asp (gray). in in on chain panel) center adjacent residue (shown in (shown in alanine, the residue salt (for change disrupts The the bridge, example, in this bottom uncharged yellow shown to in an DQ of stability molecule. panel) altering the of and diabetes, substitution mice, which develops for in diabetes a shows non‑obese (NOD) Asp strain 57 marked similar aspartic The have transgenic mice homologous the a incidence. for diabetic I‑Aβ at 57 chain, of spontaneous β with of reduction chains NOD position serine acid Courtesy Thorpe. of C.

Fig. Crohn’s 15.41 the disease that of from responses the gut breakdown to mechanisms a normal limit microbiota. inflammatory homeostatic results bacteria production translocation cooperate epithelial goblet to IgA adaptive of to and promote the development layer into they intestinal of cells tight where intestinal combination Paneth of innate lumen, antimicrobial and and that epithelial limit the that (not cells; released The transported cells inhibit cells; produced from inhibit antibodies immune mechanisms: peptides cells; a normally and intestinal junctions a mucus by responses bacteria the Treg of systems T‑cell CD4 through are inflammatory shown). induction intestinal between effector TH17‑cell individuals generating impaired chronic responses with mechanisms, can dysregulated disease‑causing intestinal microbiota result, inflammation. to homeostatic In the TH1‑and the autophagy susceptibility genes IRGM. genes disease of and and ATG16L1 immunity innate Crohn’s include NOD2 cells cells is TH17 susceptibility that major adaptive is expressed A Fig. gene immune affects (see also IL23R, which by 15.34).

a low too molecules a or to level thymic at at negative might expressed selection. but or bind peptides MHC enough be autoantigenic be to strongly drive sufficient positive selection, to too present drive poorly level bind might and many observations be molecule MHC may is I-Ag7, negative that thymic in driving selection. II hypothesis less the NOD by class poorly effective supported peptides This therefore in mice, binds very

15-23 responses immune predispose that chronic variants Genetic to disease. T-cell-mediated can inflammatory innate impair

noted bowel disease. in inflammatory types is (CD) two Crohn’s earlier major As chapter, of this the of one disease hyperresponsiveness antigens. commensal cells result rather abnormal CD thought from of of true microbiota, gut the to to to than self is T antigens CD4 and pathogenic. cells to be Dysregulation TH1 thought of is TH17 from system, cause from or (Fig. cells adaptive failure mechanisms bacteria mucosal to that can sequester innate of result to immune from defects cells TH17 Treg Disease the heightened effector TH1 from of luminal suppress T-cell-intrinsic and immune responses, a failure microbiota-reactive 15.41). have of of without terminal with involvement for episodes colon—hence of ileitis’ that alternative Patients with inflammation name or affect severe be part can CD disease—but the the ileum, commonly involved. any the this tract ‘regional the gastrointestinal inflammation and granulomatous is the the and sub-mucosa intestine. characterized lesions by of chronic The disease in mucosa identified (see and of Genetic CD a with has analysis Fig. growing families of list patients their genes disease-susceptibility 15.34). monocytes, NOD2 is Paneth as cells of predominantly known cells, and microbial earliest to in in CARD15), of intestine, part antigens the the Section small expressed innate response identified One (see and of recognition which be 3-8). of (also involved immune is the dendritic was as the NOD2 associated and CD. are with rare variants in polymorphic Mutations strongly in joints. syndrome, eyes, typically disease and skin, also same cause which in the dominantly Mutations of the named develop the granulomas gene granulomatous inherited Blau in a are Blau a of from loss that results syndrome gain is NOD2, thought function. a it function CD of from Whereas results of

intestinal phagocytic TGF-˜IL-1˜, TregTH17TH1 Paneth propria layer antimicrobial lumen auto-phagosome IRGM) activated intestinal goblet mucus bacteriaintestinal cell NOD2 epithelial pro-infammatory cell cell cells TGF-˜RAIL-12 (ATG16L1 cell peptides dendritic IL-23 anti-infammatory lamina homeostatic macrophage IL-6,

factor receptor Section derived bacterial 3-8 transcription the expression peptidoglycan, NOD2 stimulation for and its and cytokines activates intracellular an of dipeptide the Fig. NFκB from the (see pro-inflammatory encoding and muramyl is genes and chemokines 12.15). the epithelial commensal Paneth of the the sequester help adaptive peptides from the release the of intestinal granules stimulates bacteria crypts—activation away lumen, containing base cells—specialized system. small In intestinal cells immune to NOD2 intestinal antimicrobial that in of T-cell predisposing individual consequent of CD4 limit commensal antibacterial NOD2 to inflammation lost to chronic the Mutant microbiota thereby the this intestinal responses forms response, Section effector innate this and heightened (see have 12-22). function that

identified in deficiencies including neutrophil In inflammation. have CD, with with production NOD2, defective patients to accumulation, NOD2 promote been in synergize innate addition to intestinal which other and can CXCL8 immunity defects in CD. immunity act Thus, the regulation of inflammation immunopathology synergistically and innate promote compound to may defects in Fig. identified (see innate may immune be GWASs susceptibility genes have that to functions linked impaired other CD for 15.34). might (ATG16L1 to predispose autophagy contribute intestinal other been chronic to that two that linked and suggesting to in of mechanisms have CD, Defects genes clearance impair commensal inflammation. IRGM) that bacteria its damaged own a bacteria. the and and turnover (see antigen autophagy and the or processing by also important cytoplasm presentation lysosomes, in the 6-9), Autophagy, contributes of cell’s role cellular proteins; a some of Section of phagocytosed digestion is to organelles has clearance in

immune genes response susceptibility. have innate pathways immune to regulate the contribute been also adaptive CD, the associated in that important defects system with of While IL-23 with the that (IL23R) heightened receptor variants consistent for tissues. of to there disease, gene the notably, TH17 Most are in diseased predispose responses factor. responses confer abnormal microbiota the immune that to increased to for the as innate intestinal of susceptibility common a and growing Collectively, genes point adaptive regulation of risk CD homeostatic number

External 15-24 events can autoimmunity. initiate

The distribution and of among countries, continents, autoimmune geographic heterogeneous a diseases different reveals distribution ethnic groups. Hemisphere to north incidence decrease to of the seems in the Northern from For example, south. disease the regions. the sclerosis for greater in 1 where in such type gradient and northern diabetes incidence countries Mediterranean Europe, diseases as particularly is in is multiple prominent This than immunoregulatory including numerous less cells that and TH17 and of has and to in partly response of northern the to this vitamin levels suppression be innate epidemiologic available latitudes—and in Numerous suggest skin may adaptive associations D sunlight—which the systems, is active development. less formed is of cell of form related immune functions genetic in vitamin D. that intense The affect developed also unknown. incidence of is more autoimmunity which in increased shown basis Studies of have an the countries,

are D there these and socioeconomic status numerous Besides other diet. levels, vitamin to nongenetic variations, including contributing factors geographic at nongenetic autoimmunity exemplified different in and to severity. which disease The genetically of contribution factors mice, is develop rates identical of with contributing disease—reflecting in diversity disease—including an is immune microbiota microbiome of commensal There the the emerging and of the the interplay for appreciation a systems having to the role innate in shaping importance autoimmune the the extraintestinal adaptive

Fig. in different 15.42 self-tolerance ways. break agents Infectious could several are expose antigens sequestered tissue either from a tissue within cell, antigens. or behind the that circulation, panels: the cell infection barrier breaks barriers an might hidden and Left because some result with that agents self antigens. can might or either molecular T‑ Right infectious in inducing mimicry panels: B‑cell cross‑react responses

immune response. systemic environmental help be to exposure factors autoimmunity. infections may Finally, and trigger that toxins between studies the in the clinical century past over However, shown correlation allergy to and of should autoimmune that also some be diseases. life and have development early types of negative a infections noted it and epidemiological exposure This greater Section responses childhood in hypothesis’ to the leading ‘hygiene system proposes likelihood lack immune a life, allergic (see autoimmune regulation later of a affect during infection the of 14-4). may and of that

promotes autoimmune can providing activation. environment 15-25 an Infection that lead by to disease lymphocyte

to might How contribute pathogens autoimmunity? of cells of activated the released While is infection for progress, from the in affect mediators cells—lymphocytes antigen-presenting themselves not molecules an expression co-stimulatory the are that agent. antigens can increased bystander lymphocytes infectious inflammatory and and specific so-called of become these availability lymphocytes in antigen self can leads if the destruction infection by increase particularly an the Self-reactive to circumstances, in activated (Fig. the tissue 15.42, left panels). that become suppressive and response. self-reactive as into naive T cells initiate impair cells, differentiate pro-inflammatory of effector autoimmune T to T IL-6, the regulatory can IL-1 cytokines, activated activity Furthermore, allowing such to cells an

The by has exacerbation disease of viral models. animal in bacterial or been infections or perpetuation experimental autoimmune shown the virus B4 and mice NOD leads of Coxsackie 1 by in diabetes autoreactive inflammation, exacerbated the cells. which infection, is antigens, of the tissue damage, islet severity of For sequestered to type release example, T generation

ability activate autoreactive Fig. directly via their discussed as such the break self-tolerance Section DNA and We and (see B RNA self CpG TLRs thus unmethylated ligands earlier of to cells 15-4 and 15.25). and by ligands for activated large cells. inflammation produce TLRs quantities autoimmunity stimulating T local cause and already macrophages also help may cytokines that cells and stimulate B dendritic autoreactive Microbial to promote of This associated vasculitis to autoimmune relevant the infection of with inflammation anti-neutrophil mechanism cytoplasmic patients might antibodies. with in flare-ups be follow that

TLR which characterized ligands of injection an macrophage arthritis bacterial model is mice into One of an inflammation of induce DNA, can infiltration. animal by induces TLR-9, joints which the local CpG derives in arthritis from example of recognized how by express macrophages produce the receptors large amounts surface site chemokine and which recruitment leukocyte These of chemokines, promote CC of to injection. on their

and and can autoimmune disease. to responses lead molecules self antiself

with autoimmune sequelae. certain is associated with Infection pathogens molecular molecules, pathogens host antigens that a resemble mimicry. phenomenon Some express called against may molecule such epitope self with cross-react Fig. cases, produced In a (see a antibodies pathogen right 15.42, panels). it by to the antibody. that to they is Such necessarily be identical: similar be not enough be sufficient recognized structures do same have from also tissues peptide cells host an in self processed activate T Molecular and is mimicry on to a autoreactive attack similar pathogen result peptide. may antigen if a a transgenic using model mice been mimicry pancreas. by in A the a molecular antigen system demonstrate expressing generated has viral to

mouse. into LCMV Inject results NP NP T is pancreas by cells Make transgenic express diabetes T NP; cells activated pancreatic this are CD8 and ˜ kill only ˜ cells in LCMV response ˜ NP-speciÿc that and in Activated mice in T-cell CD8 the expressing expressed islets cells no inÿltrate only cells infection provokes

response was cross-reactive ‘self’ of virus to virus upon with that the T antigen, (Fig.15.43). transgenic develop but no antigen, because activates is the source Normally, with viral mice this the cells virus-derived there the that the ‘self’ antigen infection are diabetes,

these not self-reactive by of might or why self-tolerance. wonder One inactivated the lymphocytes have deleted been mechanisms usual (see Section ignorant that present B lymphocyte 15-4). lymphocytes reason in T removed repertoire One and naive not are and efficiently cells self-reactive as the is lower-affinity are may doses whereas antigen substantially eliciting to of lymphocytes. Pathogens immunogenic in be local higher provide normally unavailable would the an it form, relatively can sometimes the and after Some infection, follows of that examples molecular enteric streptococcal autoimmune involve reactive are rheumatic thought mimicry to arthritis fever occur that the syndromes infection.

been destroy can tissues. such effector mechanism, a functions activated Once have by self-reactive lymphocytes their eliminated. when and Autoimmunity sometimes type inciting of this is is transient, the pathogen remits anemia in the infection. is This case that follows hemolytic mycoplasma autoimmune the hemolysis blood the Section leading 15-13). (see ensues to anemia The cells, pathogen against antigen on cross-react red an when with antibodies The autoantibodies the recovers the infection. when from disappear patient infection. the Sometimes, the however, autoimmunity persists well beyond initial This (Fig. true cases some is fever rheumatic of in a follows sore 15.44), fever, which or throat, (impetigo) scarlet occasionally local infections skin

cell rheumatic antibody causing Some fever antibodies bacteria blood heart response antibodies cell valve Streptococcal plasma tissue, stimulates in heart cross-react wall with

Fig. viral 15.43 infection a tolerance cells. pancreatic expressed in break β Virus protein transgenic can to nucleoprotein lymphocytic do not to choriomeningitis the and rat transgenic virus respond made but not promoter this insulin their express do of pancreatic for under in cells β therefore develop protein an the Mice control (LCMV) autoimmune diabetes. the the nucleoprotein leading the infected antiviral kills diabetes. is to cells, response this LCMV, if mice However, β T‑cell with transgenic a potent cytotoxic the are and elicited, this cross‑react disease elicit self can that sometimes is way. that agents peptides autoimmune It infectious process and cause T‑cell a thought in mimicry) responses could that with known (a molecular similar as

Fig. antigens on streptococcal heart with Antibodies 15.44 against antigens tissue. cell-wall cross-react surface. bacteria bacterial the cell antibodies against epitopes various response produces to of immune the The the (blue) antibodies not. others (yellow) cross‑react whereas with valves, of these do heart Some epitope epitope a not An is heart (red). similar, structurally in to identical, but (orange) the bacterial

pyogenes. Streptococcus by caused to a to kidney. on including leads epitopes and possibly self T-cellmediated, of heart and tissues, similarity streptococcal damage antibody-mediated, The antigens epitopes valves variety the of to tissue the with can transient, antibiotic typically treatment, chronic. especially it Although become is injury late-developing arthritis). an spirochete with disease, autoimmunity burgdorferi, infection Similarly, followed (Lyme Borrelia the can Lyme be by pathogen clear, but leading cross-reactivity to it of the autoimmunity. and is likely to mechanism case, is In not host involve entirely components, this

cause toxins can and 15-27 Drugs autoimmune syndromes.

evidence small drugs, Perhaps patients. which autoimmune human a elicit effects external of causative proportion agents clearest of autoimmunity in of certain the reactions the from comes in those a autoantibodies drug arrhythmias, pathogenic. heart these rarely notable is although to similar in used inducing Procainamide, for to are treat SLE, and hemolytic associated autoantibodies 15-13). cells Section in (see components of anemia, blood the surface are Several autoimmune against red which with cells of drugs destroy these development attack autoimmunity. in Toxins also can cause the environment When as autoimmune are ensues. metals, susceptible to syndrome, production or the of of strains including mice, such heavy mercury, a predictable autoantibodies, administered gold the autoimmunity promote syndromes. extent factors that roles such have which animal The but humans environmental heavy as could metals in to certain models show debatable, in toxins is

uncertain. by autoimmunity which drugs mechanisms cause and toxins The are form thought chemically the is with immune For that derivatives that foreign. self and some they system it react drugs recognizes proteins as the self inflammation, deposition, finally immune and these can to lead response self proteins. haptenated immune to complement tissue, proteins to responses of The original destruction

the events may initiation for Random be autoimmunity. 15-28 required of

this scientists would cause, specific the diseases onset physicians may always attribute and not like to of be Although ‘spontaneous’ some to possible. even virus onset bacterium, pattern be of of that one understandable disease. autoimmune might or or precedes not the There any events the interact a lymphoid providing moment is with B the peripheral just can and each infection signals, when encounter pro-inflammatory cells in is be The may of an T tissues needed. other, few that all at that chance autoreactive event, difficult control. events susceptible but a frequent and/or rare be could more to This more individual in could be a such

to of seem incidence or random. can Thus, onset be autoimmunity the chance occurrence predisposition of increased in Genetic an part, event. represents, of random this explain diseases in later, after to many low-frequency appear in early has turn, to view, or occur. time elapsed adulthood events why permit This could enough autoimmune interval disease after a aggressive also explain of long the recurs It kinds may therapies, remission. certain eventually why, after of

Summary.

specific The of autoimmune causes not are most diseases known. particular with many particular disease class not alleles Genetic risk do genes, individuals autoimmune to MHC disease. and predispose or been factors, molecules other II a the genetic get mutations variants have that of of identified, including but polymorphisms animals although in strong of of factors studies a they influence understood. autoimmunity, role have initiation of on are not well populations the highlighted disease, have the factors of Epidemiological identical environmental environmental but genetically in are drugs toxins cause to and common diseases unclear. known but autoimmunity, Some their the autoimmune role is infections. can Similarly, some follow viral autoimmune bacterial syndromes or damage, responses and proteins and inflammation self, mimicry. to causing elicit self by can express a nonspecific known promote they resembling as autoimmunity Pathogens molecules tissue phenomenon can if sometimes molecular is factors of environmental research More to define contributions diseases. to specific autoimmune needed diseases or found, combination that single roles. trigger important induces environmental most disease even chance, a prove events, but of or have for rather It no be triggers, will that may stochastic, will

Responses rejection. and transplant alloantigens to

emerged diseased impediment. major adaptive organs tissues responses as Although the important therapy, of has an immune replace transplantation grafted to are a tissues medical to by within foreign recipient. therefore perceived is responses proteins are on Rejection that and as to species the the individual from which are by a individual vary immune graft, caused to alloantigens tissues against the are highly grafted polymorphic responses transplanted, nucleated the containing T-cell When organ. always almost a response to MHC molecules cells trigger rejection, at and when matching rate related, and but even the perfect the success cases, the Matching trigger less recipient genetic recipient possible only of still differences other of these in are loci the grafts, is donor increases can and severely. MHC type although donor graft precise now advances is for longer that mean the Nevertheless, major survival. transplantation no and in immunosuppression of transplantation in matching factor medicine tissues the MHC common molecules; amounts routine because matching express transplant, and transfusions, cells they tissue transfusion, necessary MHC most is not targets. red class not and and class blood for small do are platelets II earliest thus, molecules I usually In T-cell not express of MHC the blood of problem platelets I class However, are repeated MHC can required. molecules antibodies against made be when a platelet transfusions cells and by easy Blood blood matched are Rh antibodies A-7), rapid be types, matching. this Rh there is ABO blood four must the in a tissue antigens destruction types group of ABO avoid the and (see mismatched I, recipient A-5 only because major of and Sections red Appendix but relatively to for form two

part the fetus. to the we routinely—the responses response tissue chapter that grafts examine reject not foreign graft such of In immune why is mammalian and this tissue do one ask also the tolerated

mediated an rejection immunological Graft primarily response cells. T 15-29 is by

skin elucidated tissue basic inbred of mice. grafting were first transplantation by strains rules The between of between grafted same sites success genetically animal person animals or graft). or can with people identical on (an the different (a be between Skin 100% syngeneic or autograft), skin about days 10–13 grafted is or allogeneic after when initially survives graft (an individuals but between unrelated rejected is the However, allograft), grafting then

Fig. result graft 15.45 is the accelerated Skin is rejection a second‑set of and response a rejection, the response. T-cell-mediated MHC‑anti-graft specific; a are second skin that panels). (first type about grafting the of MHC but differing the MHC‑different is fast, panels), second from permanently rejected rejection, 10–13 skin rejected equally (first‑set same from are syngeneic Grafts grafts are donor is accepted whereas donor after MHC days an rejected at (not in shown). a pattern first‑set a (third panels). the been sensitized is grafted same it had from the donor are mouse faster a behave donor, When already cells as T time second rejects Naive given grafted a graft for second they with mice from that skin if (final This called is panels).

(Fig. 15.45). is acute T response is on onto mice, grafted response, an rejected. T-cell because not nude called and lack This cells, a it depends which rejection, skin be can of the transfer T mice reject skin adoptive by cells. ability to nude The to normal restored

regrafted graft donor, the rejected (6–8 is in rapidly more rejection When (see a previously from an has Fig. second the graft with is rejected recipient same that accelerated a skin days) 15.45). response does donor but rejection a faster this follows not same course. from time same onto show at first-set recipient the a Skin grafted the third-party The course showing primed also be that transferred clonally second-set rejection by specific response skin. for recipients and from expanded rejection new a the cells can by initial T second-set T Chapter from 11) rapid recipient, is the (see of donor memory-type cells to caused

an adaptive major foreign response immune destroying by tissue are its effective grafted responses to proteins. to the Immune tissue barrier transplantation, CD8 can or T be either cells, These mediated or both. responses by CD4 also contribute Antibodies rejection second-set tissue grafts. to of can

Transplant response by immune strong MHC is nonself caused molecules. to rejection primarily 15-30 the

immune of known alloantigens, an alloreactive the response. known antigens and differ against species an is response as same that between members such are as Antigens When graft. an differ the directed donor the molecules is nonself response at allogeneic or at molecule recipient on and immune MHC, the alloreactive MHC are class tissues MHC In most these predominantly I antigens. response. any second rejected rapidly a type, of MHC nonself the a Once MHC bearing will same graft rejected a in has recipient particular a graft further be cells 6-13); MHC specific role of frequency molecule relatively MHC trigger for named making (see T nonself was so its differences rejections graft rejection. because of originally in the indeed, of initial most central MHC potent Section is loci the at high, graft The any

amount became a effort of considerable of determinant Once graft major recognition a nonself clear matching MHC rejection, it was into put donor. of molecules was and of that recipient MHC in in discussed become MHC Today, Section transplantation, most largely although 15-36. marrow has for irrelevant with it matching for that immunosuppression, for bone are remains reasons allografts, important advances not humans, the the locus match a Even MHC reactions. prevent known HLA as in locus, does at perfect rejection twins. albeit recipient an slowly unmatched will siblings than a identical Grafts unless invariably rejection graft, and HLA-identical more donor are between reaction, incite non-MHC also differences from antigens of between the vary result proteins is individuals. reaction This that between

must recipient Thus, unless given and twins, rejection. to be donor chronically prevent recipients immunosuppressive drugs all graft identical are the in the of is than solid therapy organs transplantation Chapter of 16) result of improved (see advances clinical more matching. success immunosuppressive tissue Indeed, current of the matching notable becomes of available, types achieved The that with of of of urgency the a limited rarely, exception kidneys. once organ organs, with of matched-sibling recipient donor is means supply accurate donation a coupled only tissue cadaveric identifying

is alloantigens molecules. other peptides grafts, caused MHC from bound rejection by to graft 15-31 In MHC-identical

identical graft not at rapid, donor graft at When and the genetic as are left but the differ other it rejection destroy (Fig. recipient MHC unchecked but loci, still will is 15.46). without grafts the immunosuppressive HLA-identical rejected that between would is treatment. be This siblings reason derived of made of and members proteins a molecules present be these in species. them then and large bind peptides will if self from proteins cell, peptides produced II different from and class in I selection a the polymorphic, different are MHC also antigens recognized histocompatibility minor can as be Such proteins

Fig. not survival. at the 15.46 Even ensure MHC complete matching graft does not (center antigen differ grafts Although albeit (right other syngeneic at (minor from that MHC‑disparate grafts rejected MHC‑identical (left donors than grafts panels), more loci rejected slowly panels), panels). loci) are H are

of 100 surviving grafts Percentage

Fig. molecules. antigens MHC Minor polymorphic peptides derived proteins are cellular 15.47 H I class bound from to digested cell proteasomes derived the can to bind within where delivered them reticulum, by delivered cell’s molecules are the to routinely cytosol, they the surface. peptides class endoplasmic I and Self proteins to are be from MHC and the on recognized response. can and an recipient’s donor can cell) nonself between elicit red the the on the recipient protein If in as antigenic differs left) and polymorphic a that graft (shown by give the (red it cells peptide right), to rise be donor in (shown blue immune T the an on antigens are antigens. the H minor Such

15.47). (Fig. of chromosome. proteins responses Y on set induce male that minor encoded One histocompatibility are the H-Y. as collectively Responses by known these are proteins induced Y are X-chromosome male genes not occur, however, express anti-female expressed As not in chromosome-specific occur; sexes responses genes. female responses do anti-male females, because both gene and H-Y identified protein mice as encoded peptides from Smcy. One has humans by been antigen in a the Smcy not peptide Kdm5c), Smcx therefore expressed does uniquely are (or these which X-chromosome An Kdm5d), males. called sequences, in contain homolog of (or minor genetic level. and autosomal now largely number antigens have identified Most by although increasing histocompatibility unknown, are their genes identity encoded the been an is at

response to the to analogous minor is viral histocompatibility to antigens in infection. ways many The response response in a antigens. the antigens, whereas cells, fraction in histocompatibility However, only the and response eliminates these graft thus the graft an against of cells antiviral express is destroyed infected large minor between the the of requires potency understandable histocompatibility they of use individuals, powerful that the and reactions drugs. incite, minor immunosuppressive it mismatches the virtual transplantation Given of antigens certainty successful in two is

ways 15-32 lymphocytes. There the T recipient’s presenting of to organ on transplanted the are donor alloantigens two

molecules. both cells that T co-stimulatory cells can Before that rejection, antigen-presenting naive the activated cells allogeneic alloreactive and develop into by cause they must express be T MHC effector Organ important with called antigen-presenting carry and leukocytes, passenger are of sometimes to them an donor grafts these cells alloreactivity. stimulus origin, the of recipient donor involve lymph lymphoid graft cells tissues a spleen to that they route of recipient, where T-cell and seems This corresponding the can receptors. leaving antigen-presenting those and T bear graft to to secondary nodes, sensitization cells the migrating the including host for activate the occurs cells via organ by migration the of donor drainage solid lymphatic of antigen-presenting is the allografts transplantation, interrupted Because

Fig. graft 15.48 direct rejection of kidney through the Acute a allorecognition. pathway of on surfaces. their Donor case a this of peptides cells HLA in and carry the donor dendritic kidney) complexes graft molecules donor (in to the the blood node here), T‑cell lymph The organs via move areas. carried is are illustrated dendritic they (a secondary where to cells lymphoid complexes II) activate recipient’s bind with donor class to in the T they combination donor whose the lymphocytes, can allogeneic Here, of HLA receptors specifically and (both I peptides. class the grafted display the cells where they activation, T complexes molecule which specific. cells for travel are attack the to that After the peptide:HLA blood effector the organ, in T cells

not lymphatics. blood, to attack which T directly alloreactive effector can circulate then activated (Fig. the The graft, they cells 15.48). is as (Fig. pathway recognition direct allorecognition known This panel). upper 15.49, much incubation, time. of by longer if grafted with the cells treatment antibodies by is after or a only Indeed, tissue antigen-presenting rejection depleted occurs prolonged

presentation graft self of cells to and allogeneic the recognition cells is by their A mechanism by MHC uptake the rejection second recipient’s leading proteins T molecules. to allograft of antigen-presenting own This (see indirect allorecognition known Fig. is as panel). lower 15.49, MHC derived foreign minor and be histocompatibility the by can Peptides presented allorecognition. indirect molecules antigens themselves from both

rejection, T acute to responsible for MHC when the allorecognition be directly largely frequency recipient is mismatches thought that of alloreactive mean Direct is high. especially cells direct made cytotoxic that graft attack Furthermore, by on T be molecules T-cell recognize only graft MHC the directly. cells can a cells for fibrosis. and presented can specificity activating contribute alloantigens injury tissue by MHC to T which self on cause Nonetheless, cells rejection with macrophages, graft antibody development indirect important likely cells with to to in T of an are a be allospecificity graft. also the response produced against same alloantibodies. species from nonself antigens are known as Antibodies the

Fig. of contribute rejection. and graft 15.49 to pathways allorecognition Direct indirect Dendritic an secondary indirect of lymphoid from to the direct organ graft travel graft from tissues. stimulate and the they both allorecognition cells when pathways and CD8 T‑cell class the (direct of with alloreactive upper cell receptors a of and HLA The will recipient I CD4 type donor shows the DC) (donor cells allotypes T the dendritic allogeneic interact how allorecognition). on donor of II directly panel the I same recipient’s the vesicles (recipient by produces antigen‑presenting are containing The dendritic shows allotypes, HLA the which membrane death allogeneic of the lower and class how endocytosed cell then II panel DC). cells the by molecules (indirect the (yellow) cells molecules HLA recipient’s HLA can donor’s to Peptides T presented (orange) from then derived allorecognition). peptide‑specific be to CD4 T molecules here. class HLA by shown is cells Presentation II cells recipient Peptides (not presented class T can HLA from derived donor by shown). also molecules I be HLA to CD8

bind occludes response group becomes graft, an Antibodies engorged Graft donor antigens endothelium because of blood that and Graft hemorrhage graft of dead in˜ammatory initiating against vessels blood failure purple-colored vascular

Fig. against antibody rejection. donor hyperacute graft 15.50 graft cause Preexisting antigens can some transplantation, with have ABO Prior to class recipients that antibodies donor react made HLA or antigens. I to is in into recipient, When complement bind organ graft, the the clotting antibodies these the and a cascades. the donor such vascular initiating grafted endothelium and of by hemorrhage graft become obstructed vessels blood clots in Blood leak, into the causing the graft. of and blood, graft the turns presence The purple dies. becomes engorged, deoxygenated from

rejection. endothelium cause react graft with Antibodies that hyperacute 15-33

an graft responses Antibody important are rejection. cause of potential rejection in complement-dependent can rapid antigens against transplantation. antigens reaction and of group that polymorphic transplanted blood can cause within minutes occur organs alloantibodies a MHC Preexisting of hyperacute as reaction is known type rejection. graft This of to recipient’s are vascularized in grafts routinely circulation. Most that organ are medicine the linked transplanted clinical grafts directly cases against donor In antibodies recipient the graft have some preexisting may antigens. red just Antibodies not all type to the can of bind blood cells. ABO tissues, produced antibodies against previous antigens addition, transplant be to other In can response in transfusion. a or a blood complement All grafts of initiate cascades. rejection on the vascular with because and vascularized of such antigens and the can clotting cause preexisting blood endothelial cells they react the graft rapid antibodies blocked, vessels or become The causing destruction. the of rapid its graft thrombosed, purple-colored which engorged hemorrhaged (Fig. from become deoxygenated and grafts blood, Such becomes 15.50). by This as recipient. cross-matching well donor be as can ABO-matching avoided and problem recipient Cross-matching with antibodies react that has the white the the determining blood whether donor. involves cells of to considered solid most been Antibodies lead serious to hitherto contraindication transplantation this treatment the type, of in a because have hyperacute absence of found, when organs, any rejection. of they near-certain

reasons incompletely type For organs, be less understood, incompatibilities. to are can particularly transplanted transplanted injury, liver, are ABO the susceptible of and that despite some this are as transplantation, cross-match proportion contraindication MHC present. immunoglobulin addition, the alloantibodies of absolute In a successful been donor antibodies positive has with of no a donor-specific the and in tissue were considered an already longer presence whom intravenous treatment against for in patients

animal transplantation. similar use A of prevents problem organs—xenografts—in routine organs. donor If it replacement circumvent could limitation shortage in a xenografts would therapy: organ of used, the be react antigen most organs for ubiquitous been Pigs (α-Gal) xenografting, humans have other source mammalian pigs. but of carbohydrate have with that as of a including species, antibodies a cell-surface suggested in clotting cells endothelial hyperacute rejection initiating humans, and by binding trigger cascades. pig and When placed antibodies graft complement are xenografts these is problem MCP rejection (see across work (CD55), efficiently (CD46) and barrier. a DAF hyperacute in proteins because exacerbated species such less xenografts complement-regulatory 2-16) CD59, as Section The of that development well lack has as A pigs of the transgenic been DAF α-Gal. recent pigs expressing step human xenotransplantation as toward day xenotransplantation. rejection These in reduce or approaches one eliminate hyperacute might

the Late chronic injury organs graft. by caused 15-34 to is of failure transplanted

functioning of kidney that 90% immunosuppression grafts after means transplantation. about of year success a still The are cadaveric for the graft remains There has, been long-term improvement little renal allografts in about survival however, years. half-life functional 8 of rates survival: of transplanted it whether failure allograft a been organ injury, has or typically rejection, the late determine is Although to nonimmune chronic traditionally specific termed immune the alloreactivity, difficult both. cause injury of of involves chronic

transplanted depending is to chronic on pattern variable, The organs the injury of tissue. failure of cause called vasculopathy, of injury of allograft is prominent major allografts. heart and late reaction a organs is vascularized chronic A transplanted a kidney component which chronic in its fibrosis which arteriosclerosis concentric of and charac-terized vessels, of graft blood is and to leads This the hypoperfusion atrophy eventual graft by (Fig. 15.51). this Multiple development subclinical or form cause T to to is events, of acute donor-specific endothelium reactive cells, may the the allospecific mechanisms of (so-called antibodies), the thought to recurring, effector although to due both. contribute antibodies graft of to rejection major or injury, vascular vascular allograft-reactive be the whether vascular such calcineurin injury, limited vascular different to immunosuppressive lumen. very arteries is pattern Some arteriolar cause although example, therapy and small forms also of causes to referred that of marked that narrow injury, (for inhibitors hyalinosis, is the cyclosporin) as proteinaceous by deposits typically more a this as loss bronchiolitis rejection of transplanted termed obliterans. duct the ducts, tissue the ‘vanishing is bile chronic bile whereas of scar associated In with late cause syndrome,’ bron-chioles, so-called the in organ lungs, failure in accumulation is transplanted livers, of major of Alloreactive be is gradual loss can years detect to may clinically. hard months to responses and after occur function transplantation, that associated graft with the allograft signals restoration include: viral the due can to Other the at that transplanted; flow be period blood which organ. recurrence causes that of time in disease injury, result of chronic a the organ immunosuppression; destroyed and graft a of emerge after of grafting important of the perfusion the to ischemia– reperfusion dysfunction sterile of same infections promote poor as of inflammatory original injury progressive, Irrespective complete of to allograft irreversible ultimately chronic function. typically allograft of and failure etiology, is leading A are routinely organs clinical variety of transplanted in 15-35 medicine. organ Three the advances clinic. use transplantation major possible in to it made have rou-tinely point most such for are surgical centers. First, medical performing major have the routine where advanced organ relatively surgeries in techniques replace-ment now to transplantation from donors. available centers procure organs Second, cadaveric of have been become to organized networks healthy that Endothelial wall to enter the the in˜ict effectors powerful Third, drugs increasing artery and of damage the use to enables immunosuppressive injury of immune

Fig. in blood vessels a transplanted of the 15.51 rejection kidney. Chronic

chronic initiated panel: of alloantibodies with class of vessels Left‑hand transplanted interaction I by rejection the anti‑HLA organ. blood is the to neutrophils. Fc cells recruit endothelial and monocytes bound receptor‑bearing Antibodies and lamina alloreactive cells, panel: with of the macrophages, leads damage granulocytes, to antibodies. underlying to Right‑hand elastic thickening accumulating intima internal the and of cells, smooth T muscle infiltration lumen of net a and the the chronic blood vessel create narrow inflammation effect that The remodeling. to is tissue intensifies fibrotic. becomes ischemic, the Eventually and obstructed, vessel

other and before T anti‑CD52 antibody deplete leukocytes transplantation. and monoclonal Rabbit (alemtuzumab) cells to are used anti‑thymoglobulin generation nuclear Anti‑CD3 monoclonal T‑cell prevents T nucleus calcineurin. of signaling translocation complex, cells (NFAT) interfere the to of the by the receptor of tacrolimus cyclosporin with factor inhibiting activated whereas antibody by and the The co‑stimulation CD28. fusion of generation binds protein belatacept via B7 the CTLA‑4–Fc prevents and signaling. to anti‑CD25 receptor prevents IL‑2 binds the high‑affinity an antibody, and partially cells on Basiliximab, activated T IL‑2 of cells. for of T with cascade, differentiation activation is effector Sirolimus mTOR the which interferes required and mycophenolate inhibit cells. T the of activated replication and Azathioprine proliferation

markedly antibodies, rates thereby has T-cell the limiting (Fig. that activation, anti-allograft increased effector survival and inhibit cells T graft of development 15.52). organs transplanted or that Fig. rates and different in The frequently allograft survival are are listed tissues 15.53. the twins frequently is most organ transplanted between The the first the 1950s. transplanted kidney, organ successfully identical solid in are frequent; unrelated grafts and it between case is vascularized, of more is the because this even is immunosuppression. special Transplantation corneal usually without people cornea not successful a tissue

are problems other organ than transplantation. associated graft with Many rejection organs First, are donor to obtain. difficult recipient’s as diabetes. in cells might in organ destroyed that the Second, destruction graft, disease β also the destroy of transplant autoimmune the pancreatic the infection. of graft increases risk rejection immunosuppression and to the cancer Third, required prevent the problems of of The of the induction scientific solution amenable development rejection more tolerance, the minimal solution to generalized of the development impairment means availability. a and effective are organ graft-specific prevent immunity, as to most practical that xenografts of more with immunosuppression

of organ tissue grafts are numbers 2014 United in States shown. performed The the in and blood blood cord and (includes hematopoietic HSCs, transplants). HSC, peripheral marrow, bone cells stem kidney of grafts heart organ or multiple lung). and (for example, includes and *Number grafts pancreas, transplanted and between based graft solid on the For is survival performed 2007. 2002 5‑year transplants of organs, Data Network the from Organ Sharing. for United 69.1%. transplants donor donors; 5‑year cadaveric listed survival kidneys (81.4%) for for #Kidney living is is survival from survival with when survival 73.5%. is listed †Pancreas is (53.4%) a kidney alone; 5‑year transplanted transplanted when and ** autologous allogeneic transplants. Includes ‡Successful transplant, years. of HSC not assessed engraftment within is weeks grafts kidney, Nearly require heart) long‑term all immunosuppression. solid (e.g., organ

disease. graft-versus-host The is of 15-36 graft rejection converse

some fetal successful for and Transplantation blood tumors stem of or hematopoietic (HSCs) therapy cells, such from derived lymphomas. hematopoietic marrow, peripheral cord leukemias certain blood, as bone a is from cells replacing cell blood ones, as HSC cure severe to and other donor immunodeficiencies disorders, thalassemia. with such Chapter forms primary can of 13) also some inherited stem used cells be normal transplantation (see By genetically defective In leukemia, the source recipient’s by and chemotherapy. a leukemia combination bone be aggressive must of destroyed of therapy, the irradiation the marrow, first cytotoxic

cells intestines, transplantation rashes, (Fig. severe dysfunction but involving the a HSC graftversus-host which skin, and disease in One and major disease recognize (GVHD), HSCs and recipient preparations allogeneic as inflammatory the characterized T by present mature causing of donor diarrhea, of in particularly of multiple foreign, tissues, complications liver liver in the of tissues is the 15.54). antigens, GVHD is between MHC organ consequences critical of more recipient HLA particularly of transplantation. is or Because class than class there I and solid are mismatch donor aggressive matching the when II in when transplants only Most HLA-matched frequently, HLA-matched therefore siblings are or, is and unrelated less are an there recipient donor. the when undertaken donor every antigens, Therefore, used occurs context between HSC histocompatibility the be must mostly immunosuppression transplant. in disparities so in minor GVHD of

of be by are a demonstrated (MLR), cells The the lymphocyte irradiated recipient. can mixed presence with the experimentally from mixed alloreactive donor which donor lymphocytes T from potential lymphocytes reaction in If naive lymphocytes or recipient cells the recognize proliferate (Fig. the T will lymphocytes, kill they cells alloantigens the that recipient target 15.55). on contain donor cells. is alloreactive the selection the of MLR does that accurately However, donors test HSC the of limitation quantify not the T in version counts more I, Section Appendix precisely (see is of alloreactive test accurate limiting-dilution the frequency T cells. A-21), which assay of the a A

T cells in CD8 tissues. injury secondary Effector cells tissues cause T host and circulate lymphoid and CD4 to blood enter transplant and cells hematopoietic proliferate memory T contains dendritic efferentlymphskinlymphnodebloodvesselAllogeneic cells cell and cells with mature Alloreactive interact

Fig. the that Graft-versus-host T disease attack graft recipient’s due donor tissues. the 15.54 in to cells is and transplantation, marrow donor graft CD4 mature allotypes present are activated After become tissues. lymphoid HLA any the that in bone specific recipient’s T cells for the secondary CD8 in and tissues of that regimen damaged prior CD4 have graft move of of skin, intestines, irradiation and the the attack conditioning the Effector recipient, the into cells CD8 epithelial to transplantation. enter circulation and and liver been and preferentially cells T chemotherapy particularly by

Fig. histoincompatibility. 15.55 used lymphocyte mixed to can (MLR) The detect reaction be are two and from be isolated tested. mononuclear cells, the blood include individuals to lymphocytes which Peripheral monocytes, as their proliferation. (yellow) prevent first cells from person stimulator serves the to The are irradiated who the the they cells are panel). days serves who responder mixed for other (top person, the and the cultured from Then (blue), 5 as with monocytes and dendritic are molecules responder expressed that the stimulator’s differentiate monocytes. the and from stimulated In by II HLA class I allogeneic culture, lymphocytes cells the by the and effector lymphocytes into The stimulated proliferate cells. differentiate response CD4 differences. mixing, differences, T right due which the (bottom for class Five T culture left II in HLA assessed panel) days HLA panel), after T‑cell cytotoxic for cells to (bottom is proliferation recognizing cells and is produced to class I class distinguishing II lymphocyte MHC from instrumental mixed The is I. class in reaction MHC

therapy. crucial to can beneficial transplant, it that harmful the GVHD success is of Although an HSC have the recipient effects the are to of effect, in the antigens the of by a effect which transplantation the recognize of Much minor for to of preparations leukemia the expressed leukemic graft-versus-leukemia T kill histocompatibility HSCs allogeneic the and leukemic due therapeutic be cells. cells cells in HSC donor can is preparations in vitro T the the GVHD from alloreactive mature for development suppressing of the T of removing before cells. of treatment elimination the HSCs One thereby transplantation, options of donor cells Those subsequently mature antigens. donor in recipient’s that the to cells from the recipient tolerant T in the vivo are marrow the effect. in for of leukemic benefits has evidence relapse, the an strong provides GVHD support of patient, the graft-versus-leukemia which risk Although elimination is increased of there

another of complication donor Immunodeficiency is depletion. T-cell a irradiation and T-cell repertoire by Because combination donor mature destroyed T the early are of transplant. source recipient cells transplant, the are treat reconstituting the to for the chemotherapy before after T most cells major of recipient’s used T-cell particularly precursors. This repopulate limited in poor repertoire a ability T-cell and function is true who adults, residual thymic have therefore their to from Thus, too transplant T recipients are and cells if graft, the die experience, can from, opportunistic infections. depleted from many has cells by effects need effects donor of beneficial of graft-versus-leukemia immunocompetence to spawned balance T caused the research. the and with effect the GVHD The adverse much could after T shortly is One particularly approach the antigens they promising reacting cells to from meet that with recipient prevent donor transplant. recipient’s by is depleting This cells. the antigen-presenting accomplished Here, are do not the transplant, accompanies activated the initial donor they GVHD. not inflammation that T cells the during thereafter promote and unclear graft-versus-leukemia is this it context. be whether would in However, a there effect

T 15-37 involved cells alloreactive are immune Regulatory responses. in

in thought the immunoregulatory alloreactive all As responses, immune involved an important graft responses immune regulatory role in T in to cells rejection. are have on have mice question. Experiments HSCs allogeneic of transplantation in thrown the some this light on transplantation accelerated graft CD25+ death. depletion either subsequent of cells recipient of GVHD HSC before the in the and onset or the Treg Here, expanded even from prevented, with the vivo Treg In GVHD, or either graft studies. contrast, death similar or in fresh ex with human early cells delayed, results supplementing cells, IL-2, treatment Also, effects expand is positive has thought Treg to with GVHD. preferentially which low preventing in shown of dose a Similar made either transfer Treg allograft models or observations occurring naturally rejection. mouse where cells significantly organ in induced experimental delayed been transplantation, of of solid the have generating HSCs experiments a in in preparations of therapy the donor possible These or cells future. enriching for suggest might GVHD that Treg provide

maintain of to the cells, cells. an class T-cell of activate cells indirectly anergic CD8+CD28– capacity to have T thought T phenotype by Another and cells, are regulatory T antigen-presenting tolerance CD4+ inhibiting T express levels have cells do display 3-25). the donor alloreactive (see isolated CD94 activity against Section killer cytotoxic patients, inhibitory been transplant receptor can high from These CD8 of and they not because from and cells cells be distinguished T activation interfere the that cells CD8+CD28– maintenance in with and a cells antigen-presenting have tolerance. of transplant role of the This suggests

fetus repeatedly. is an is allograft that 15-38 tolerated The

modern are the result medicine. far discussed in transplants of advances so All the of the and is repeatedly grafted tissue fetus. tolerated ‘foreign’ However, one is that mammalian that paternal those The mother carries minor of fetus the (Fig. differ histocompatibility MHC and antigens from a successfully same can 15.56), derived the nonself proteins bear yet many and the mother father. children from expressing has emerged. lack no of rejection mysterious immunologists, yet fetal explanation The and consistently comprehensive puzzled has mechanisms difficult is much for fetus of rarely activated, allograft is one is mechanism that norm problem rejecting that so the fetal how the the study that acceptance analyze mechanism to the rejection; if it is that can One the it? prevents the control

are The to and tolerance’ ‘fetomaternal likely multifactorial redundant. contributing mechanisms has that been red and blood who not antibodies proposed Although borne recognized often the make simply the children father’s foreign, against antigens. it have as directed is cell MHC women fetus cells. tissue, the placenta, T seems to the is sequester However, the mother’s which fetus fetus-derived from a of the placenta—the the interface maternal layer fetal outer The trophoblast. between and tissues—is II expresses maternal restricted and recognition only by molecules, a T express This MHC low cells. making I not class subset resistant of and MHC levels molecules, class does direct it to alloantigen class by Tissues lacking cells (see are, NK expression to 3-25). vulnerable attack MHC I Section however, shown killing. been which has by of nonclassical the HLA-G, might protected attack NK to class be The by trophoblast HLA NK from polymorphic minimally and expression a I molecule, cells inhibit

also mechanism The the may nutrient placenta depletion. T by mother’s inhibit active an cells of (IDO) by interface. high indoleamine The 2,3-dioxygenase maternal–fetal expressed at cells is enzyme a level at the tryptophan site, show enzyme starved responsiveness. T essential acid and the tryptophan depletes at amino cells this of This reduced using 1-methyltryptophan, in mice, of inhibitor syngeneic, causes pregnant Inhibition rejection not IDO but fetuses. of allogeneic, rapid the

tolerance. at maternal–fetal the milieu interface cytokine The also to contributes fetal uterine IL-10. and the secrete TGF-β the and trophoblast epithelium Both This T Section suppresses (see combination the of cells of cells 9-23). cytokines favor effector iTreg of development in during the increased including placenta. T Regulatory iTreg in cells are cells pregnancy, as equivalent promotes These iTreg abortion cells in example, for induction deficiency of in are to important and does spontaneous fetus humans—as IFN-γ TH1-inducing (for responses of IL-12). the mice, resorption—the cytokines fetal suppressing expression Provocatively, in element iTreg FoxP3 regulatory that a controls

Fig. fetus allograft is The an is 15.56 not that rejected. With in human mother families panel). different types have exceptions, very father HLA few (top the and fetus HLA When and 9 (blue) for panel). haplotype pregnant origin a that mother of HLA becomes (pink) origin maternal she paternal one one haplotype of the expresses carries (bottom months alloreactive potential antibodies during Although not paternal a pregnancy the response does are from T II protected and the against system has provoke HLA cells. preexisting and immune the molecules class the by fetus mother’s respond, which is fetus to or alloantigens the expressed I such bears same when Even of no several mother is father, the sign seen. rejection the children to immunological

placental cells, expression not for only been cells, but has is by required found nTreg in FoxP3 mammals. have evolved maternal–fetal play tolerance. an important iTreg cells that to might This role suggests in uterine the cells chemokines. maternal local repress cell-attracting interfaces of the the placenta— with that expression specialized stromal to tissue the decidua—appear of T Finally, key directly prolonged privileged suppression other sites fetal eye of immunologically an the the 15-5). allow maternal such site Section to and contribute formation then, that akin to local factors of tissue of grafts, acceptance (see immune Collectively, as both

Summary.

reality, Clinical techniques. drugs, now and built matching, its transplantation success advances an on is MHC everyday immunosuppressive surgical in rejection. donor these other presented differences However, by not responses accurate in MHC graft and on matching even lead host between MHC whose the molecules result does to peptides proteins grafted can are to genetic prevent can tissue, and rejection; allogeneic response we graft can risk the specifically the recipient Because to require increase ability defense, without infection. host of the the most suppress immunosuppression that to transplants generalized the lack cancer and compromising of that a The must the species is to fetus be natural accepted for survive. allograft provide tolerance better could inducing ultimately understanding specific in to for insights tolerance transplantation. A the fetus of allograft

15. Summary to Chapter

self of pathogens targeted tissues. effector to be never only system Ideally, the functions immune and would the foreign to practice, proteins discrimination are self is strict impossible. and self and foreign similar, chemically between In because nonself self. immune Yet tolerance the maintains system to direct immune self This markers by to is regulation, layers properly to surrogate the use from which distinguish of all accomplished of response. nonself these result. break can mechanisms When disease autoimmune down, other the day the tolerance of at breaches thus, overall effects regulatory probably immune single the every of regulatory occur barriers Minor are level operates quelled but by system. layers; of chronic. to to tolerance be occur, disease have to overcome layers and For effect be of needs the multiple as and include regulatory in anergy, cytokine tolerance the such layers peripheral and marrow cells. mechanisms begin T bone These thymus, central with deviation, and do Sometimes antigens not responses not as available, occur in the because simply immune immune sequestration. are

responses failure. self-tolerance responses promote limited dampening immune of selective to Perhaps effective to is mount the prone pressure pathogens, immune of to and to because develop an individuals role autoimmune Genetic has predisposition in will an determining which important disease. identical even also affected role, not the autoimmune Environmental forces both because have significant are a always by disease. twins same environment chance toxins, and infections, events. include Influences from the

responses those pathogens. is effector quite broken are and disease the similar to When to employed mechanisms in self-tolerance autoimmune ensues, and involved. disease the cells can both from details to antibody T vary disease, be Although and transplanted to examining rejection the been to made the about and antigens tissues; vice graft has study responses to autoimmunity versa. immune response by of learned learned lessons nonself tissue apply in organs Much in either or syndromes brought similar minor has on antigens. the histocompatibility are Transplantation disease, are that targets to autoimmune but major rejection ways many of the disease, graft-versus-host T effectors antibodies main and also although rejection graft are in can cells contribute.

discussed each is the to question affecting responses immunity of here, the undesirable response the infection. adversely to protective For control how without understanding may of tolerance. more lie especially of answer important in complete immune the suppressive the regulation The the response, in a mechanisms response in further Chapter is 16. control The examined of deliberate immune the

Questions.

disease self or bowel colitis—is which antigens. adaptive the and disease a system 15.1 immune response damage ulcerative True False: Inflammatory to causes in tissue disease—Crohn's in

associated defective with Match the autoimmune gene. Matching: 15.2 the following monogenic diseases

is following the Which Multiple statements of 15.3 Choice: incorrect?

A. a drug by autoantibodies widely similar to rhythms, abnormal heart that autoantibodies to the induced The used characterize are erythematosus. procainamide, lupus treat systemic

B. activation of infection can to of mediators the lymphocytes and response. cause during released course self‑reactive an thus an lead autoimmune Inflammatory

in other disease and mutations both Blau loss‑of‑function Crohn’s causes. strongly associated with NOD2, syndrome are C. among

D. ATG16L1 normal to have and autophagy that to under IRGM genes defects these disease. and contribute linked Crohn’s circumstances, been in are

correctly a following scenario? options 15.4 Which describe transplantation the of Multiple Choice:

A. from A skin a rejected young by mouse. syngeneic is adult an graft mouse

B. not a An from allogeneic by is male skin graft mouse. a female mouse rejected

rejected mouse. male is mouse by A skin C. a a graft syngeneic female from

skin A is 3 transplantation. autograft D. weeks after rejected

How 15.5 (GVHD) disease Answer: can graft‑versus‑host of Short patients to with benefit be leukemia?

mechanism a the rejection? of following Choice: describes 15.6 fetal used Which options to Multiple prevent incorrectly

A. starves of 2,3‑dioxygenase (IDO), High expression cells of T which tryptophan

B. of levels Absence MHC II trophoblast the by expression class MHC class I expression and low of

of by HLA‑G expression Downregulation the C. trophoblast

by IL‑10 TGF‑β and and uterine of trophoblast. the D. the Secretion epithelium

by is not a the Choice: Multiple following immunologically of privileged mechanism which sites Which maintain tolerance? 15.7

Exclusion A. of cells during infection T effector

naive exclude B. that (for example, barrier) Tissue barriers lymphocytes the blood–brain

production TGF‑β) cytokine C. (for Anti‑inflammatory example,

Fas‑bearing lymphocytes Fas of effector to D. of ligand Expression apoptosis induce

is the a lymphatics via Choice: mechanism tolerance? 15.8 Decreased peripheral Which of not communication E. Multiple conventional following of

A. Anergy

B. Negative selection

C. Induction Tregs of

Deletion D.

the epitope and systemic in lupus erythematosus Tregs occurs to phenomenon of where The by of may E. anti‑DNA antibodies. present 15.9 (SLE), Short Answer: spreading Suppression progress are autoantibodies production anti‑histone this occurs. mechanistically Describe how

result candidiasis–ectodermal (that by reduced tolerance). which genes 15.10 dysplasia caused AIRE, peripheral expression Answer: Short impaired transcription defects (APECED) is, Autoimmune central the in polyendocrinopathy– selection factor impaired negative is and of in suffer of impaired tissues multiple immunity. with destruction afflicted antifungal exhibit Patients APECED and endocrine time organ patients. all to develop these phenomena in not potential and targets take in develop autoimmune all do However, Explain case. this is why the

antagonists 15.11 Autoantibodies depending disorders as or Fill-in-the-Blanks: act or whether either on agonists, can function. in develop stimulate autoimmune inhibit they a certain that a syndrome receptor its _______________, autoantibodies weakness. function resulting In junction, in the against in neuromuscular _______________ muscle block the of receptor is production stimulate thyroid _________________, Another of against hormone. autoantibodies excessive where the example __________________

autoimmune Match with disease the Matching: 15.12 pathophysiology: its

Rheumatoid arthritis i. A. immune of leading C that in complexes tissues and infection production hepatitis to deposit joints Chronic

Section references.

to from critical the discriminate nonself. is system A self immune function of 15-1

The Morgenroth, Ehrlich. of and On Paul Collected F. Ehrlich, Himmelweit, haemolysins, P., Papers (ed): J.: in London, Pergamon, 1957, 246–255.

evolved system self. noninfectious from infectious C.A., immune Janeway, nonself to Jr: discriminate The Immunol. 1992, Today 13:11–16.

Matzinger, renewed self. sense The a P.: of model: danger Science 2002, 296:301–305.

Multiple autoimmunity. tolerance 15-2 mechanisms prevent normally

Groth, de J., B., St C.C., C.G. Goodnow, Vinuesa, Sprent, Fazekas and and self Cellular and genetic of autoimmunity. tolerance : mechanisms Nature 2005, 435:590–597.

autoreactive M.J.: of Sites regulation. and cell and stages Shlomchik, B activation 28:18–28. Immunity 2008,

lymphocytes newly formed of is deletion or self-tolerance. the inactivation of checkpoint 15-3 Central first

Central tolerance: and self-control K.A., the T.A., thymus. S.C.: Hogquist, Baldwin, Jameson, in learning Nat. Rev. Immunol. 5:772–782. 2005,

thymus. elimination Marrack, Kappler, clonal Roehm, N., cell P.: and T by J.W., the tolerance in 1987, Cell 49:273–280.

Kyewski, central tolerance. role for L.: B., A central and Klein, Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2006, 24:571–606.

B. Type diabetes mellitus I ii. T‑cell‑mediated disease attack against central autoimmune to nervous demyelinating antigens, phenotypes leading with neurological system myelin

C. sclerosis iii. Multiple IgG Autoantibodies against

Hashimoto’s thyroiditis iv. D. fibrinogen Autoantibodies platelets GpIIb:IIIa against the receptor on

hemolytic cells red Autoimmune E. blood v. anemia Autoantibodies against

F. Autoimmune vi. cells TH1‑dependent purpura in the pancreas autoimmune of attack thrombocytopenic β

Goodpasture’s vii. G. against membrane collagen α3 chain the Autoantibodies IV of collagen) basement syndrome (type

viii. essential H. Mixed hypothyroidism thyroid mediated Cell‑ to leading of autoimmune cryoglobulinemia and attack autoantibody the

of class-I Burki, a mouse transgenic deletion D.A., Nemazee, anti-MHC K.: antibody Clonal genes. lymphocytes bearing and B in 1989, Nature 337:562–566.

and D., R.M., Nussenzweig, M.C. Hawiger, Steinman, cells. Tolerogenic dendritic : Annu. Rev. Immunol. 21:685–711. 2003,

ignore that activated. circumstances them self low bind Lymphocytes 15-4 become antigens with usually in but relatively affinity some

Medawar, Billingham, P.B. and Brent, R.E., L., Actively cells. tolerance of foreign : acquired 172:603–606. Nature 1953,

tolerized the disease-related in L.G., Haberman, Hannum, Weigert, a RF Shlomchik, disease. M.J.: mouse: not and M.G., for origins implications autoimmune autoantibodies D., normal Ni, of is autoantibody A.M., A in J. Exp. Med. 184:1269–1278. 1996,

dose. Lew, or E., and G., W.R.: ignorance R.M., Miller, Blanas, Davey, depends M., Sutherland, T C., islet A.M., antigen F.R., on cell Carbone, Li, CD8 J.F., tolerance antigens Kurts, Heath, to Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 1999, 96:12703–12707.

disease. Marshak-Rothstein, systemic autoimmune A.: receptors Toll-like in Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2006, 6:823–835.

as sites targets. induce 15-5 immunologically attack in immune but not serve privileged can Antigens do

R.: or privilege Lambe, Immune Xu, J.V., T., Cornall, and H., privileged immunity? Forrester, Immunol. Mucosal 2008, 1:372–381.

A.L., local that friends, privilege: and foes. immune suppression protects benefits Mellor, but Munn, D.H.: Creating active Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2008, 8:74–80.

privilege. on perspective E.: historical Simpson, immunological A Immunol. Rev. 213:12–22. 2006,

cells nonpathogenic cytokines express particular suppress Autoreactive may that T pathogenic lymphocytes. or may 15-6 be

and Herrath, Harrison, L.C. M.G., von regulatory autoimmunity. in T : Antigen-induced cells Nat. Rev. Immunol. 3:223–232. 2003,

cells. controlled T responses 15-7 stages can Autoimmune at be various by regulatory

and a of Asano, consequence abnormality of T S.: Autoimmune Sakaguchi, M., Toda, developmental cell disease Sakaguchi, a subpopulation. N., as M., J. Exp. Med. 184:387–396. 1996,

and M.J., Sweenie, S., Fillatreau, Anderton, D., Gray, C.H., S.M. McGeachy, of regulate cells autoimmunity B by IL-10. : provision Nat. Immunol. 3:944–950. 2002,

Rudensky, Fontenot, and A.Y. J.D., factor regulatory forkhead well A Foxp3. contrivance: T adapted family development and cell : the regulatory transcription Nat. Immunol. 2005, 6:331–337.

inflammation. and A., Izcue, Regulatory Coombes, J.L., F.: and Powrie, lymphocytes intestinal Annu. Rev. Immunol. 27:313–338. 2009,

Shao, potential L.: tolerance. and Therapeutic Mayer, oral of L., Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2004, 4:407–419.

C.L., Maynard, C.T. and Weaver, : immune the of Diversity interleukin-10 in contribution T-cell-mediated to regulation. Immunol. Rev. 2008, 226:219–233.

negative control T self-tolerance S.: Naturally for and regulatory immunologic responses. arising Sakaguchi, of immune CD4+ cells Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2004, 22:531–562.

Peake, et Casanova, L., J.L., R.S., Goulet, M., al. F., Levy-Lahad, J., N., Faravelli, O., E., F., Ramsdell, Mazzella, Perroni, Buist, Wildin, : scurfy. and endocrinopathy mellitus, equivalent diabetes X-linked syndrome is neonatal enteropathy the human mouse of Nat. Genet. 27:18–20. 2001,

Howlett, Cubbon, K., Hunter, Veijola, Clark, Garner, R., Gonzalez-Munoz, R., D., Serra, J., al. et J., P., Rainbow, S., A., V.E.S., Yamanouchi, cell causes gene regulatory impairs autoimmunity. function and T Interleukin-2 : variation Nat. Genet. 39:329–337. 2007,

autoimmune immune Specific to self disease. 15-8 cause antigens can responses adaptive

P.H. Lotz, repertoire: order. for autoantibody searching The : Nat. Rev. Immunol. 3:73–78. 2003,

understanding to and and winding conquering diabetes. 1 long type The P.: road Santamaria, Immunity 32:437–445. 2010,

Multiple against the myelin Steinman, central sclerosis: L.: a immunological system. in coordinated attack nervous 1996, 85:299–302. Cell

into can 15-9 or systemic classified organ-specific disease. Autoimmunity be either

Autoimmune Diamond, diseases. and A., Davidson, B.: Engl. N. Med. J. 2001, 345:340–350.

Khamashta, and G.R.V. Hughes, D.P., M.A., D’Cruz, Systemic lupus : erythematosus. 2007, 369:587–596. Lancet

and Marrack, B.L. Kappler, P., J., Kotzin, why Autoimmune disease: where : and occurs. it Nat. Med. 2001, 7:899–905.

are immune of recruited components Multiple the system in typically disease. autoimmune 15-10

Drachman, D.B. gravis. : Myasthenia N. Engl. Med. J. 330:1797–1810. 1994,

Firestein, G.S. : of Evolving arthritis. rheumatoid concepts 423:356–361. Nature 2003,

and P., cell Immune J., A.: Lehuen, Zaccone, diabetes. A., Diana, in Cooke, 1 type crosstalk Nat. Rev. Immunol. 10:501–513. 2010,

Shlomchik, Madaio, M.P. M.J., and lupus and nephritis. pathogenesis of B : of the The cells in antibodies role Semin. Springer Immunopathol. 2003, 24:363–375.

clear to and a the inflammation, broadening response. of from the self inability antigen, autoimmune

autoimmune systemic in Toll-like disease. receptors Marshak-Rothstein, A.: Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2006, 6:823–835.

S., and the Nagata, and Autoimmunity of dead R., Hanayama, K.: clearance cells. Kawane, 2010, Cell 140:619–630.

J.A., and M.S. Z., Lazarova, Salato, M.K., V.K., Hacker-Foegen, Fairley, Lin, pemphigus epitope intramolecular of in : Role vulgaris. spreading Clin. Immunol. 2005, 116:54–64.

A tale autoimmune vast in of smart few nonspecific an L.: autoreactive a a cells: population the infantry. bombs cells and control of infiltrate Steinman, Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 1996, 93:2253–2256.

Vanderlugt, C.L., Miller, and S.D. for implications in spreading immune-mediated Epitope diseases: : immunotherapy. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2002, 2:85–95.

T disease. tissue effector 15-12 cause Both and antibody autoimmune in can damage cells

Naparstek, Plotz, Y., P.H. and role : autoantibodies autoimmune The of in disease. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 11:79–104. 1993,

K.J., Foster, Barrett, and M.H., M.P. D., S.K., Ucci, A.A., Datta, Madaio, Vlahakos, bind nuclei, antibodies anti-DNA and penetrate proliferation vivo. glomerular and : monoclonal induce proteinuria in Murine to cells, J. Am. Soc. Nephrol. 2:1345–1354. 1992,

promote 15-13 cells their against Autoantibodies blood destruction.

M.: and Platelet thrombocytopenic purpura. D.S., Beardsley, autoantibodies Ertem, in immune Transfus. Sci. 1998, 19:237–244.

Ravetch, J.V. Clynes, R., and through receptors. Cytotoxic trigger antibodies inflammation Fc : 1995, Immunity 3:21–26.

R.E. Domen, hemolytic immune : An overview anemias. of Clin. Cleveland J. Med. 1998, 65:89–99.

sublytic in 15-14 powerful fixation inflammatory The of stimulates to a doses complement cells of tissues response.

Johnson, K., Hansch, and Alpers, J., Couser, G.M., Gordon, M., W.G. R.J., J., Schulze, C.E., Pippin, Brandt, mediating attack the mesangioproliferative experimental complement complex glomerulonephritis. : Role (C5b-9) in membrane of Int. Kidney 1996, 49:335–343.

G.M. Hansch, of C5b-9. complement : and effects The non-lethal of lysis control phase: attack 24:107–117. Immunopharmacology 1992,

or function. disease by Autoantibodies against 15-15 blocking receptor cause receptors stimulating

R.S., and Heufelder, Bahn, A.E. Graves’ Pathogenesis : ophthalmopathy. of Engl. N. Med. J. 1993, 329:1468–1475.

D.B. Drachman, Myasthenia : gravis. Engl. N. Med. J. 330:1797–1810. 1994,

Pathogenic neuronal O., Vincent, neurological Palace, disorders. proteins J.: to and autoantibodies A., Lily, in Neuroimmunol. J. 100:169–180. 1999,

antigens injury. extracellular inflammatory cause 15-16 against Autoantibodies

G., apoptotic Anhalt, Rosen, are systemic lupus clustered structures two surface populations Autoantigens targeted and in erythematosus A.: in L.A., on of Casciola-Rosen, keratinocytes. Exp. J. Med. 179:1317–1330. 1994,

Clynes, J.V. Ravetch, R., Dumitru, C., and autoimmune in kidney of complex glomerulonephritis. and : immune Uncoupling damage formation Science 279:1052–1054. 1998,

Kotzin, B.L. lupus erythematosus. : Systemic Cell 1996, 85:303–306.

D.P. and D’Cruz, Lee, R.W., : renal Pulmonary vasculitis syndromes. Autoimmun. Rev. 2010, 9:657–660.

B.: SLE. the Mackay, Stanevsky, Selective on receptor A., C., in dysregulation B J.V., Koenig, Aranow, cells Wang, memory Ravetch, Li, M., and of FcgIIB Diamond, M., S., T., Exp. J. Med. 203:2157–2164. 2006,

R.A., E.U., Walker, Xiang, Lawlor, K.G. R.J., Fairfax, Smith, K., Manz, and Cutler, E., D.M., Tarlinton, Brownlie, K.E., Z., Severinson, A.J., cell apoptosis. : controls bone marrow plasma persistence FcgRIIb and Nat. Immunol. 2007, 8:419–429.

autoantibody direct injury for antigens sustain T and specific self responses. 15-17 can cells tissue cause

immunotherapy Design for and autoimmunity. effective M., human L.: Feldmann, Steinman, of 435:612–619. Nature 2005,

G.S. Firestein, concepts of arthritis. Evolving : rheumatoid 2003, 423:356–361. Nature

Raine, M.K., Racke, C.S. Frohman, and E.M., its : and pathogenesis. plaque Multiple sclerosis—the Engl. N. J. Med. 2006, 354:942–955.

et Klareskog, K. P., Stolt, L., Lundberg, al. to immune by epitope)–restricted autoantigens modified Smoking trigger citrullination. rheumatoid may new A for of arthritis: HLA–DR an etiology (shared model reactions : Arthritis Rheum. 54:38–46. 2005,

sclerosis: and multiple Horssen, Progressive Lassmann, H., van J., and pathogenesis. Mahad, pathology D.: Nat. Rev. Neurol. 2012, 8:647–656.

cellular nervous surveillance in system. immune R.M., anatomical central and B.: Ransohoff, The and basis of the Engelhardt, Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2012, 12:623–635.

R., demyelination. basic Steinman, Nelson, relapsing myelin R., T-cell induce Knobler, clones L.: D., and specific S., J., protein Trotter, chronic P., and Zamvil, Fritz, Mitchell, for paralysis Nature 317:355–358. 1985,

a Autoimmune component. diseases 15-18 strong genetic have

M.M.A., T.J., Fernando, J.D. Jager, Rioux, De E.C., R.M., Goyette, P.L., and Plenge, Vyse, Stevens, C.R., P., Walsh, the the pooled and : Defining autoimmunity: a in of analysis. role review MHC Genet. PLoS 4:e1000024. 2008,

M.A. D.A., Heel, Cortes, Parkes, Brown, M., Van and A., and relationships common immune-mediated into among : insights complex diseases. pathways Genetic Nat. Rev. Genet. 2013, 14:661–673.

A.K. J.D., Rioux, Abbas, and autoimmune the basis Paths : to of genetic understanding disease. 2005, Nature 435:584–589.

and Behrens, Wakeland, Graham, E.K., T.W. K., Liu, R.R., : of Delineating genetic erythematosus. systemic the basis lupus 2001, Immunity 15:397–408.

immunogenetic basis providing approaches are the 15-19 autoimmunity. Genomics-based into insight new of

M., Tedesco, Wurzner, Complement and Botto, R., M., Macor, complement Kirschfink, human deficiencies. F.: from in P., diseases: Pickering, lessons M.C., Mol. Immunol. 2009, 46:2774–2783.

Hafler, D.A. Cotsapas, and C., Immune-mediated shared genetics: pathogenesis. disease the of basis : Immunol. Trends 2013, 34:22–26.

R.H., Regueiro, Taylor, S.R., Steinhart, Rioux, M.S., Duerr, Griffiths, K.D., al. M.J., et Abraham, A., M., A.H., Silverberg, Daly, J.D., C., Brant, association genome-wide an gene. : as A disease inflammatory study bowel IL23R identifies 314:1461–1463. 2006, Science

Farh, Shishkin, Ryan, Kleinewietfeld, A.A. Shoresh, W.J., N., A., et Housley, Zhu, M., Beik, al. Marson, K.K.-H., Whitton, J., H., S., R.J.H., and mapping Genetic variants. : fine disease causal epigenetic of autoimmune 2014, Nature 518:337–343.

P.K. Gregersen, in identification Pathways gene rheumatoid PTPN22 arthritis: : to and beyond. Immunol. Rev. 204:74–86. 2005,

R.J., and Xavier, J.D. Rioux, a immune-mediated diseases. Genome-wide into : studies: window new association Nat. Rev. Immunol. 8:631–643. 2008,

into mechanisms. to categories Many affect or more one predispose genes autoimmunity that tolerance that fall 15-20

Goodnow, C.C. SHP-1 selection. CD22, pathway of BCR a regulating and elements traits: signaling and biochemical limiting are autoimmune Polygenic Lyn, : 8:497–508. Immunity 1998,

Borriello, of multiorgan destruction, to leads Schweitzer, Loss regulatory role revealing massive critical fatal lymphoproliferation Lynch, A.H.: W.P., and CTLA-4. Sharpe, tissue J.A., Tivol, Bluestone, of negative F., A.N., E.A., and a CTLA-4 1995, Immunity 3:541–547.

E.K., Behrens, Wakeland, R.R., T.W. K., Graham, and Liu, genetic basis lupus of systemic the erythematosus. : Delineating 15:397–408. 2001, Immunity

Lupus, Walport, DNase and cellular M.J.: defective debris. of disposal Nat. Genet. 25:135–136. 2000,

Monogenic defects tolerance. of 15-21 immune

of Berzins, M.S., control Venanzi, Aire cellular C., Benoist, E.S., of cell Mathis, and mechanism Anderson, Z., tolerance. The T S.P., D.: Chen, 2005, 23:227–239. Immunity

Perroni, R., Dai, Bacchetta, Gambineri, al. Passerini, E., A., Sartirana, Matthes-Martin, et L., Lawitschka, M., C., Allan, Dagna-Bricarelli, S.E., S., L., F., and cell in FOXP3 patients effector Defective mutations. functions regulatory with : T Clin. J. Invest. 2006, 116:1713–1722.

Chamberlain, J.M., A.N., DiGenova, Hunter, Howson, Heward, Smith, D.B., Ueda, G., Snook, al. H., H., et J., G., K.M., L., Rainbow, Esposito, Association autoimmune with T-cell gene : disease. regulatory the of CTLA4 susceptibility to 423:506–511. 2003, Nature

Mazzella, Levy-Lahad, M., Buist, Faravelli, Perroni, J., J.L., N., Wildin, Peake, F., et L., E., Goulet, R.S., Ramsdell, F., Casanova, O., al. mellitus, X-linked human syndrome endocrinopathy equivalent of enteropathy : scurfy. neonatal mouse the is and diabetes Nat. Genet. 27:18–20. 2001,

MHC disease. to genes autoimmune have an role susceptibility important 15-22 in controlling

T.J., De J.D. Plenge, Fernando, P., C.R., P.L., E.C., Vyse, R.M., Walsh, Goyette, Stevens, Jager, M.M.A., and Rioux, in review pooled the of a Defining autoimmunity: : and the MHC role analysis. PLoS Genet. 2008, 4:e1000024.

McDevitt, H.O. immune role the response. complex major the of the : in Discovering histocompatibility Annu. Rev. Immunol. 18:1–17. 2000,

that variants immune predispose impair inflammatory responses Genetic disease. T chronic 15-23 innate to can cell-mediated

Carrero, Liu, J., Lennerz, Loh, Brown, S.L., C., J.Y., S., Miyoshi, Kishi, al. J.K., Hunt, W., et Kc, Cadwell, H., K., J.A., gene for in : autophagy intestinal autophagy the Paneth Atg16l1 cells. key mouse and A human role and 2008, Nature 456:259–263.

disease: M.: Karin, Eckmann, of NOD2 and L., Crohn’s or function? loss and gain 22:661–667. Immunity 2005,

D.K. and Xavier, Podolsky, R.J., bowel disease. pathogenesis : of the Unravelling inflammatory 448:427–434. Nature 2007,

initiate External can events autoimmunity. 15-24

Alfredsson, the J., and Ronnelid, development of Klareskog, rheumatoid in environment arthritis. L.: Padyukov, immunity Genes, L., and L., Curr. Opin. Immunol. 18:650–655. 2006

sclerosis. A.: Levin, L.I., levels Ascherio, Howard, B.W., Hollis, 25-hydroxyvitamin and multiple N.S., and D K.L., of Munger, risk Serum J. Am. Med. Assoc. 2006, 296:2832–2838.

can promotes activation. Infection lymphocyte that lead environment autoimmune providing by to disease an 15-25

J.F. Bach, : and diseases. autoimmune Infections J. 2005, 25:74–80. Autoimmunity

and Silsand, enterovirus B., Seternes, and Hey, P.: interplay Hober, Sauter, Traavik, of host. D., 1 diabetes Johansen, Y., between Moens, U., and mellitus: O.M., type A.W., Pathogenesis T., Nat. Rev. Endocrinol. 6:279–289. 2010,

autoimmunity: and C., Sfriso, Ghirardello, Bassi, P., Zen, the Botsios, M., Infections relationship. Bassetto, multifaceted F., N., Doria, M., and A.: Tonon, A., Biol. J. Leukocyte 2010, 87:385–395.

and Akira, inflammation. and Takeuchi, O., S.: receptors recognition Pattern 2010, 140:805–820. Cell

responses autoimmune Cross-reactivity on foreign molecules and molecules lead self to can and anti-self disease. between pathogens 15-26

T F.: and mimicry and cell-mediated Barnaba, Sinigaglia, disease. Molecular V., autoimmune Exp. J. Med. 185:1529–1531. 1997,

Rose, N.R. mimics, and Infection, disease. autoimmune : J. Clin. Invest. 107:943–944. 2001,

N.: paradigm D.A., and A., post-infection Neumann, of a disease. Herskowitz, Rose, autoimmune myocarditis: Neu, Autoimmune N.R., Immunol. 9:117–120. 1988, Today

toxins can and syndromes. autoimmune cause Drugs 15-27

initiation of events the for may 15-28 autoimmunity. Random be required

P.L. Eisenberg, S.Y., R.W., Cohen, Craven, and R.A., Warren, anti-Sm autoantibodies mice. Stochastic : of MRL/Mp-lpr/lpr control in J. Clin. Invest. 1987, 80:691–697.

M.E. Yoshida, and S., Gershwin, disease selected and Autoimmunity of : environmental induction. factors Semin. Arthritis Rheum. 1993, 22:399–419.

immunological is 15-29 response mediated T Graft rejection an cells. by primarily

Cornell, Smith, Colvin, and L.D., R.N., R.B. and Kidney mechanisms of acceptance. rejection : transplantation: Annu. Rev. Pathol. 2008, 3:189–220.

perspectives. Wood, and of rejection: Mechanisms current R.: K.J., Goto, Transplantation. 2012, 93:1–10.

immune the caused is to nonself strong response primarily 15-30 MHC Transplant by molecules. rejection

Kjer-Nielsen, Archbold, Bharadwaj, Saunders, P.M., et al. M.C.J., S., Macdonald, J.K., Clements, W.A., Tynan, Gras, Wilce, F.E., C.S., Z., Chen, L., M., mimicry. : cell via T allorecognition molecular Immunity 31:897–908. 2009,

Orkis, Metes, A., populations human the E.A., R., C., B.D., to and alloimmune response. naive D.: Lakkis, Macedo, of memory Shapiro, Zeevi, F.G., I., and Contribution Popescu, T-cell Elinoff, Am. J. Transplant. 9:2057–2066. 2009,

G., The compatibility of graft after HLA survival and T.: transplantation. Opelz, heart Wujciak, on influence The Collaborative Transplant Study. N. Engl. Med. J. 1994, 330:816–819.

grafts, rejection to MHC-identical graft is other caused by peptides MHC In bound molecules. alloantigens from 15-31

Dierselhuis, of minor transplantation. histocompatibility M., antigens organ and relevance The E.: solid Goulmy, in Transplant. Opin Organ Curr 2009, 14:419–425.

Shabanowitz, Haan, den W., et al. E., L.M., J., J.M., T.L., D.F., Reinhardus, R., Pool, Blokland, Wang, Offringa, Meadows, J., Bishop, Hunt, C., The polymorphism. amino diallelic antigen : minor gene single HA-1: a with acid a histocompatibility 1998, 279:1054–1057. Science

I-minor G., histocompatibility T., peptide antigen-specific Gillespie, antigen Falkenburg, complexes with demonstrate disease. Goulmy, and P., lymphocytes T Tetrameric histocompatibility cytotoxic class minor in Moss, Schrama, Mutis, E., J.H., HLA E.: graft-versus-host patients Nat. Med. 5:839–842. 1999,

presenting of There recipient’s lymphocytes. the two alloantigens are on organ donor T the transplanted to 15-32 ways

tolerance. Lechler, implications spectrum R.I.: O., Herrera, transplantation Jiang, S., of pathways: and graft for rejection allorecognition and New Curr. Opin. Immunol. 2004, 16:550–557.

Afzali, alloimmunity R.I.: dysfunction. and allograft B., Atalar, K., Safinia, T-cell and G., N., Lechler, chronic Lombardi, Int. Kidney 2010, 78(Suppl 119):S2–S12.

transplants Lakkis, Y.: lymphoid vascularized Immunologic organ the Konieczny, tissue. secondary F.G., and of in B.T., absence A., Inoue, Arakelov, of ignorance Nat. Med. 6:686–688. 2000,

graft endothelium rejection. react 15-33 with cause that hyperacute Antibodies

hurdles A., immunological Griesemer, tolerance. and toward progress Yamada, M.: K., and Xenotransplantation: Sykes, Immunol. Rev. 2014, 258:241–258.

L.J., Warren, D.S. West, R.A., E., and Montgomery, Cozzi, immunity in : organ antibody-mediated transplantation. rejection solid Humoral and Semin. Immunol. 2011, 23:224–234.

G.M., Jr, D.M., in and R.P., Kano, rejection Hudson, Milgrom, F.: Hume, Morris, ‘Hyperacute’ renal-homograft man. Williams, K., P.J., N. Engl. J. Med. 1968, 279:611–618.

to is organs graft. failure chronic injury transplanted 15-34 caused of Late by the

R.N., R.B. Colvin, Smith, and mediated : Chronic alloantibody rejection. Semin. Immunol. 2012, 24:115–121. and J.S. Libby, P., Pober, Chronic rejection. : Immunity 2001, 14:387–397.

routinely in are of organs medicine. transplanted variety clinical 15-35 A

M., M., Cooper, van Windt, and D.K.C. Ezzelarab, R., B., Wijkstrom, der Trucco, Bottino, D.J., Hara, Ekser, H., M., : revolution? next Clinical medical xenotransplantation: the 379:672–683. Lancet 2012,

has M., much promise of Sykes, the transplantation—how L.A.: Thomson, realized? and Turka, Lechler, been A.W., Organ R.I., Nat. Med. 2005, 11:605–613. and T.B. Strom, C., Ricordi, transplantation: immunological Clinical islet advances and challenges. : Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2004, 4:259–268.

The of 15-36 converse graft-versus-host rejection graft is disease.

in graft-versus-host Murphy, biology and Abedi, M.: B.R., and Advances disease therapy. Blazar, W.J., Nat. Rev. Immunol. 12:443–458. 2012, W.D. Shlomchik, disease. Graft-versus-host : Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2007, 7:340–352.

Regulatory in are responses. involved alloreactive cells T immune 15-37

and Hester, A., Bushell, Wood, K.J. I.R., Ferrer, J., of tolerance : through mice from men. Induction cells: to regulatory transplantation Immunol. Rev. 258:102–116. 2014,

Cobbold, H., J., Elliott, S., Davies, Kioussis, D., J., transplantation tolerance. Qin, Waldmann, Pope, S.P., H.: and “Infectious” Science 259:974–977. 1993,

Bluestone, J.A. Tang, and Q., clinic. Regulatory transplantation: : the T-cell moving to in therapy Cold Harb. Spring Perspect. Med. 2013, 3:1–15.

is fetus is an that 15-38 The allograft repeatedly. tolerated

T cell of fetus. tolerance towards Mechanisms the allogeneic A.: Erlebacher, Nat. Rev. Immunol. 13:23–33. 2013,

Josefowicz, and S.Z., Samstein, R.M., Rudensky Arvey, P.M., A., A.Y. Treuting, regulatory in mitigates conflict. generation T maternal-fetal placental : mammals cells Extrathymic of Cell 2012, 150:29–38.

Immune Response Manipulation of the

immune graft can protective rejection, system or allergy, in In stimulate chapter, in manipulated immune to various immune and autoimmunity, suppress form of this ways to which responses. the the responses the be consider we unwanted as the smallpox. the a measure 500 of over protect of system use back years to date variolation immune manipulations to against Intentional infectious agents. and development 1800s other greatly antisera with measures vaccines against late the of these numerous the In advanced important Later of a of now-conventional reactions, came of unwanted agents; over with relatively the nonspecific immune responses, control medicine. allow against remain only pharmaceutical introduction immune progress, unwanted an these clinical although number component they standard derivatives these or by such cytokines, products, biologics, fusion natural been versions produced hormones, as artificially of have which and engineered therapeutics joined these of biological are antibodies, or recently, proteins. as therapeutics, monoclonal More such so-called and immune allowed type new have advances extraordinary some system. for of patients used possess of biologics very the insulin such precise allow with the hormone cell a engineering 1 that recent have of diabetes, decades, the in for These and biology specificity, been broad manipulation for though as introduction in array biologics target system Finally, immune to and against to power protective efforts responses have of advances, stimulate major medicine. cancers regulators made that impact adaptive the biologics have of clinical tumors deploy negative immunity the a long-standing against significant in made are listed categories of The used to agents manipulate in responses immune Fig. 16.1. with chapter discuss clinical approaches, beginning used these will practice. in agents This pharmaceutical to In part of immune efforts focus treatment and in therapies. on the on advances immune-system the chapter, responses, based first on unwanted relieve we cancer application. their and to consider and part and chapter, to strategies design against approach how the discuss efficacy the widen promises development of the usefulness rational increase we last a their of vaccination vaccines current In infectious diseases, and more

Treatment of immune responses. unwanted

challenges. Unwanted therapeutic rejection, autoimmune responses many in different transplant settings, and occur such as disease, present allergy, which immune goal and function. treatment the all tissue tissue disruption damage of cases prevent of avoid is in The to taken, allograft anticipated rejection. may can preventive be Some the measures case so immune as unwanted of that in responses be they established, undetectable after as with Other reactions. is the autoimmune be case unwanted may until responses allergic or become it once induction autoimmunity, could seen of established of animal it of immune the responses is in generally prevented treatments to are halt suppressing established. disease which difficulty have relative is unable models The in that

Treatment responses. of unwanted immune

response tumors. the immune attack to Using

with diseases vaccination. infectious Fighting

categories 16.2). (Fig. or drugs (sirolimus), and bacterial T (FK506 fungal within prednisone, There as such such the noncytotoxic rapamycin fujimycin), derivatives corticosteroid are of and such A, which and as cyclophosphamide, cyclosporin inhibit the the as powerful lymphocytes. cytotoxic tacrolimus the drugs and signaling pathways azathioprine intracellular anti-inflammatory family controls 1-phosphate fingolimod, from reaching cells preventing by the signaling that B a drug, with thus lymphocytes tissues. receptor peripheral Finally, sphingosine lymphoid from T introduced interferes the egress of recently and organs, effector as suppress drugs helpful as well of broad immune harmful exert inhibition of system, and responses. these the Most therefore therapy. Opportunistic immunosuppressive common a drug infection complication of is

affect agents immune such while the as of response attempt Newer of wholesale immunosuppression, can response cytokine damage, action, the avoiding aspects that target disease. but therapeutic cause tissue to components to infectious even the these treatments important by specific response secreted directed most of particular specific cells. proteins expressed usually against immune immune The a of way inhibiting and/or antibodies, highly the is part immediate via the Approaches book of of at now were established practice. of type this that of this experimental previous time medical are editions part drug responses. rheumatoid antibodies, as such mechanisms treatment immune or neutralize the chemokines unwanted infliximab cellular (anti-TNF-α) target monoclonal or regulatory the excesses of inhibit Anticytokine in cytokines to arthritis, local natural can used of of use control example a antibodies an in to extracellular immunoglobulin of besides protein responses, abatacept, region to consisting are Proteins Fc the being CTLA-4. also of an immune domain fused the fusion fail respond antiTNF-α of interactions is arthritis treat to who with to B7 and and Abatacept with rheumatoid binding to their cells blocking currently to molecules co-stimulation reduces by it T CD28, used therapy. patients

of the are genes. drugs many powerful alter Corticosteroids that anti-inflammatory 16-1 transcription

(see organs. are the used anti-inflammatory that as Chapters attenuate agents and against as immunosuppressive drugs or responses transplanted well are harmful widely responses immune and of 15), to 14 effects powerful autoimmune allergic Corticosteroid homeostasis; of hormone of Corticosteroids the the family crucial is widely are used most in a derivatives of synthetic body’s that play glucocorticoid hormones role maintaining of the prednisone, one steroid the cortisol. version a the plasma cross cell’s Corticosteroids

Treatment of unwanted responses. immune

nuclear receptors intracellular the to bind and membrane family. receptor of expressed 20% to of glucocorticoid regulate leukocytes. in to receptors are to Activated and the other they where bind transcription directly interact many as with transported DNA the as genes factors nucleus, response leukocytes other large therapy in number given genes steroid regulated tissues. is The to complex, of and the in to With anti-inflammatory multiple respect which effects, briefly in summarized are immunosuppression, corticosteroids Fig. exert 16.3.

macrophages and CD4 target cells. monocytes the T and Corticosteroids number the functions pro-inflammatory of reduce of and AnxaI, from encodes leukotrienes expression prostaglandins a pro-inflammatory genes, protein such and and generating induce prevents 14-7). of enzyme thereby anti-inflammatory the this A2 certain (see phospholipase can 3-3 of as They Sections inhibitor which corticosteroids genes, can suppress IL-1β the those the also encoding expression and Conversely, pro-inflammatory TNF-α. cytokines of including

effects. to with the drugs natural concentrations of The their effects of corticosteroid are higher both at responses much and glucocorticoid exaggerated hormones, beneficial therapeutic due than causing concentration presence toxic be include to retention, effects. between of gain, weight fluid careful mineral thinning beneficial skin, effects and a maintained harmful balance Adverse the diabetes, loss, bone requiring and over effectiveness also These drugs time. can decrease in Section proven corticosteroids drawbacks, highly asthma (see treatment inhaled chronic these 14-13). of the have Despite beneficial in In which doses with are autoimmunity side-effects of of treatment drugs are dose to the effective, in the they often keep high most in corticosteroids rejection, to combination or administered be needed and immunosuppressant a to minimum. oral corticosteroid allograft other as target cytotoxic more agents other specifically rapidly act dividing that immunosuppressants pathways. drugs drugs killing by signaling lymphocytes, and that These include lymphocyte

immunosuppression killing cells serious by drugs side-effects. cause have dividing and Cytotoxic 16-2

The three azathioprine, immunosuppressants most and drugs as used mycophenolate. are cyclophosphamide, cytotoxic commonly cells which their interfere DNA in tissues action with major on These pharmacological continually is are synthesis, dividing. drugs and to after treat these to dividing cytotoxic Developed found drugs be that were originally immunosuppressive to cancer, observations were they lymphocytes. with Azathioprine also CD28 cells, T promoting (see co-stimulation Section thus apoptosis in 7-24). interferes T-cell are is, and these on dividing, The their skin, marrow. all of effects in which tissues by bone gut use as the lining, limited compounds however, toxic cells such function, damage immune decreased epithelium, well anemia, thrombocytopenia, hair leukopenia, death fetal as include and as loss, to or Effects injury. intestinal As is restore transplantation drugs the to toxicity, a result their marrow hematopoietic these aim their dividing high and require are cases, of lymphocytes, of in eliminate used as only treated leukemia; the all lymphoma doses these patients in to bone treatment when function. subsequent at at used conditions, immune in as such unwanted used as autoimmune corticosteroids. other and they combination are with to lower responses When doses treat such drugs

vivo Azathioprine metabolized purine converted 6-thioinosinic acid. is to which to (6-TG), in analog 6-thioguanine is the competes and of the adenosine This inosine guanosine synthesis. synthesis de inhibiting monophosphate, monophosphate, thus blocking novo DNA monophosphate with into is also and in accumulation the of 6-TG place DNA of incorporated guanine,

Fig. Anti-inflammatory 16.3 of effects therapy. corticosteroid regulate a of effect. net many with genes, Corticosteroids the expression anti-inflammatory production inflammatory nitric reduce oxide of the mediators, and prostaglandins, (NO). they cytokines, including First, Second, inhibit to migration inflammation the by expression sites they of molecules. of cell inhibiting inflammatory adhesion leukocytes. by Third, death corticosteroids of apoptosis promote the the complexity of identified The which in are the factor (originally layers effects of named corticosteroids right. lipocortin), of has by and shown listed been a the annexin-1 corticosteroids participate on actions as induced to of illustrated by all NOS, synthase. NO

by ultraviolet mutations to sunlight. induced sensitivity radiation in 6-TG the MOVIE increases DNA’s the 16.1 of longterm side-effect with patients have increased treated Thus, of the skin cancer. risk azathioprine activity. in 6-thioguanine binds GTP place (6-thio-GTP), the Rac1 suppresses which of also generates and Azathioprine GTPase in T cells triphosphate to its small instead CD28 undergo therefore apoptosis. from co-stimulation not Signaling and the requires anti-apoptotic from cells Rac1, T and receive do signals co-stimulation acid, ester the mycophenolic works in a it azathioprine. of is drugs; immunosuppressive mofetil, fashion the of newest cytotoxic family the to similar Mycophenolate addition to 2-morpholinoethyl metabolized blocking thus de dehydrogenase, inhibits synthesis It of novo enzyme mycophenolic guanosine acid, the the is inosine monophosphate. to monophosphate which

Azathioprine less is metabolized to which mycophenolate alkylates toxic phosphoramide and which cyclophosphamide, than mustard, are DNA. developed which the mustard family of compounds, were Cyclophosphamide of nitrogen as chemical weapons. is originally a member highly induction bladder, the from effects toxic cystitis, a inflammation bladder hemorrhage and and of It hemorrhagic as neoplasia. of of including has known range

with A, 16-3 various pathways. Cyclosporin signaling inhibitors rapamycin, and T-cell JAK tacrolimus,

treat to immunosuppressants drugs noncytotoxic widely are to transplant recipients. available cytotoxic and alternatives Three used as are the FK506), rapamycin (also and A, These known tacrolimus are as as sirolimus). (previously cyclosporin known found inflatum. Tolypocladium is soil A Norway, cyclic fungus in Cyclosporin decapeptide a a derived from attached Tacrolimus more in are found from a or the bacterium which compounds is ring lactone a is contain compound macrolide one many-membered Japan; to that deoxysugars. Streptomyces filamentous tsukabaensis, macrolides drug). on Polynesian—hence (‘Rapa from the Rapamycin, macrolide, name another of the Island Nui’ in derived hygroscopicus, Streptomyces Easter found is complexes to a binding compounds All of signaling proteins lymphocytes. immunophilins, forming important the clonal intracellular the their for members expansion known pathways as exert effects by of with that family three of interfere pharmacological

phosphatase activity tacrolimus which factor calcineurin, T-cell is Section for activation A explained and the of inhibiting protein in the proliferation 7-14, transcription phosphatase cyclosporin required by of block NFAT. the Ca2+-activated the As that several (Fig. cytokine T-cell are the drugs on of induced reduce Both activation genes normally expression gene 9-16). an encoding factor (see the including 16.4), is (IL)-2, T cells for important which Section growth interleukin Cyclosporin grafts. proliferation extensively A antigens tacrolimus allogeneic or cells, either and response in in medical T-cell used inhibit of allogeneic specific are to prevent to the and practice rejection organ of and the immunological Fig. also probably a on of inhibition result other Although are effects other of of major effects drugs act immunosuppressive (see T-cell both cells variety proliferation, large the they have 16.4).

calcineurin binding and by the (FKBPs). an tacrolimus drugs to first cyclophilins, binds proteins inhibit immunophilin molecule; the cyclosporin to to A two FK-binding These the activity isomerase activity immunosuppressive is them. cis–trans Immunophilins their that but bind to isomerases, not the peptidyl-prolyl are of relevant drugs the the bind Rather, serine/threonine immunophilin:drug calcineurin. phosphatase complexes Ca2+-activated inhibit and calcium-binding In intracellular protein a the ions calcium increase the in immune normal signaling receptor in response T-cell activates to response,

Fig. responses. Cyclosporin lymphocyte some and inhibit 16.4 tacrolimus granulocyte A and

esterases decreased apoptosis IL-4, IL-2 Inhibition following expression proliferation exocytosis of granule-associated lymphocyte serine then calmodulin; IL-3, GM-CSF, Reduced of T activates calmodulin IL-2, (see Fig. Reduced production Ca2+-dependent TNF-˜ of Reduced calcineurin antigen-driven 7.18). calmodulin; calcineurin calcineurin and the the immunophilin:drug dephosphorylate bound activation is latter’s prevents to NFAT complex to unable activate by (Fig. Binding of the 16.5). than other but cells, lower much is cells levels in tissues. other T in Calcineurin are found cells besides in its T are susceptible inhibitory to these particularly T effects of therefore drugs. the cells

are immunosuppressants and are but A not effective Cyclosporin tacrolimus problem-free. immune As affect with the indiscriminately. responses cytotoxic all they agents, the can countered the response. This drug given varying carefully of be dose during by of course a decreased during high grafting, of the maintaining but the has to During established grafted residual become useful can in the once doses required immune time for response dose the to transplantation, allow order tissue. example, protective the are of while organ suppression adequate responses graft be balance requires and patient. difficult of the is monitoring achieve This careful to epithelial side-effects, broad many thus such also and as have to These can cells. tissues injury tubule kidney have effects on different drugs must periods. because taken complex for drugs with are they natural products is be that Finally, these treatment long relatively expensive, are tested are present of by that, like of graft the at immunosuppressants in being they they rejection, are in mediated especially those T choice Nevertheless, a variety diseases, transplantation, and cells. clinical also autoimmune

tacrolimus. has from a cyclosporin of A Rapamycin mode either different or action family calcineurin immunophilins, the Like FKBP rapamycin complex but not rapamycin:immunophilin binds activity. of inhibit tacrolimus, to the does involved serine/threonine Section cell kinase growth target and in which proliferation regulating Instead, 7-17). mTOR a (see it is of known inhibits (mammalian as rapamycin), by including different signaling activated upstream pathways, Ras/MAPK be can mTOR and pathway pathway The the

Fig. interfering tacrolimus inhibit serine/threonine-specific calcineurin. activation 16.5 the and T-cell with A by phosphatase Cyclosporin membrane. leads the to channels calcium in upper shown in As panel, of T-cell (CRAC) signaling calciumrelease-activated opening tyrosine kinases plasma receptor-associated the via Ca2+ and binding Fig. the calcium concentration the of (see cytoplasm This increases the in regulatory promotes to calmodulin protein 7.18). effector such downstream binding then activated target the calcineurin. by as Ca2+ Calmodulin and phosphatase is can many proteins to the and for T-cell are Binding NFAT progress. the required calcineurin 7-14), which dephosphorylate by activation activates nucleus that (see factor transcription Section transcribes to genes calmodulin enters then they and or lower with or form panel, immunophilin FK-binding tacrolimus cyclophilin As both protein, their cyclosporin when respectively. shown complexes targets, A present, are in the preventing NFAT. and thereby activated it These to from the dephosphorylation preventing of becoming complexes bind calcineurin, by calmodulin,

Fig. the activation kinase proliferation by Raptor. mTOR cell of Rapamycin 16.6 inhibits blocking by growth and selectively binds protein tacrolimus Rapamycin (FKBP), protein to immunophilin the that binds same FK-binding (FK506). blocks that rapamycin:FKBP pathways. activate mTOR, regulates a complex does two complexes kinase metabolic The inhibit instead one large that but of calcineurin, not many mTOR). signaling and proteins, and of associated Rictor downstream of two mTOR associated companion with activated Raptor protein of (regulatory is either (rapamycininsensitive mTOR) pathways, of becomes various growth factor mTORC2, cell The and migration of with complex the autophagy, cytoskeleton. controlling promotes cell proliferation, adhesion mTORC1, with proteins, translation and the Raptor, influences actin by complex and Rictor, the and mTORC1, The inhibit selectively cell rapamycin:FKBP Raptorassociated proliferation. to thereby reduces and complex growth acts

the PI 3-kinase pathway. inactivates pathways complex called These activate AKT, and TSC. regulatory which phosphorylates a mTOR phosphorylated, (see free small is inhibitor the of as complex Rheb GTPase activate normally after is Rheb; acts Fig. an TSC This to 7.22). called by formed, mTORC2, which mTOR (Fig. and complexes can be and downstream two are Raptor controlled activate and proteins respectively, different mTORC1 regulatory distinct Two which pathways Rictor, cellular 16.6). the mTORC1 that this Rapamycin Fig. pathway complex, as rapamycin:FKBP to appears Raptor-dependent (see inhibit regulates only complex inhibits the complex the selectively 16.6). reduces of cells phase pathway proliferation, arresting apoptosis. and markedly G1 the cycle of Blockade T-cell the in cell this promoting IL-2, driven proliferation perhaps pathways of regulatory cells, effector by growth such number and T lymphocyte IL-6, these as cells. from T inhibits signaling because use factors of IL-4, and cells those the different increases Rapamycin effector cells. cells selectively the formation while also the outgrowth T of enhancing T Rapamycin memory of apparently reduces rapamycin T-cell of vaccines is considered. induced memory the this, of augment being by to Because use

graft drug manipulates One migration of the disease. by responses recently sites effector regulating cells the of a introduced to immune autoimmune or of immune molecule how G-protein-coupled of the (S1P) of lipid S1PR1. by Section receptor sphingosine tissues 9-7, out 1-phosphate the lymphoid In emigration lymphocytes recognition of the we described requires newer causes Fingolimod sphingosine is preventing organs, analog, 1-phosphate in tissues. (FTY720), a in of that lymphoid the relatively drug effector mediating their thus effector target retention activities from a cells lymphocytes these asthma. approved was shown 2010 in treatment disease multiple in and of rejection the Fingolimod graft treatment has promise the of kidney autoimmune and sclerosis, for

Cytokines the in signal transduction activate cytokine many many response, immune of Janus (JAKs) and receptors (see Section use 3-16). aspects kinases cytokine of cytoplasmic transcription the The four factors. and activation JAK2, different initiate regions JAK1, receptors TYK2, of JAK phosphorylate JAK3, STAT the and and bind members, family one of more last been can have decade the members or the that kinase block JAK family. activity of Selective this developed over inhibitors development. receptors, therefore quality to JAKs specific the potentially effects Since inhibitors, T-cell Jakinibs, different can binds JAK different exert on cytokine or of treating in cancer. being Jakinibs inflammatory now investigated use are diseases and for their are for application approved in Two inhibits tofacitinib and with IL-6. For somewhat weakly and JAK3, example, by with IL-4, by IL-2 signaling more interfering JAK1, signaling interfering of approved Tofacitinib for is rheumatoid arthritis. treatment and myelofibrosis, fibrosis. JAK1 abnormal treating approved inhibits bone has for progenitor proliferation been that and cells Ruxolitinib JAK2 causes of an marrow

eliminate function. lymphocyte inhibit or used to subsets to lymphocyte

a more and have in discussed immune toxicity. severe general antibodies drugs can can specific act with manner the a inhibition responses All side exert less effects, on but and far so direct equine therapeutic late tetanus. sera back of extends of with use of to for initial 1800s the development treatment and the antibodies diphtheria The still acquired is used pooled as of intravenous IgG blood antibodies immune a Today, (IVIG), widely immunoglobulin donors, treatment and many various polyvalent primary deficiencies. for from collection a works that some in by It likely providing it neutralize also or their pathogens antibodies is toxins. certain used may infections, where acute as Kawasaki diseases, disease. and IVIG to Finally, thrombocytopenia autoimmune immune is certain treat also such inflammatory used and effect an Fc interactions cases, through immunomodulatory immune-cell inhibitory to that In operate inhibit receptors these exerts seems with IVIG activation. that

in of a of system pathogens result. targeting itself order expansion in specific achieve as the extended recent agents their the relatively regulatory immune to function targeting has use therapeutic to The components antibodies from lymphocytes, a preparation been rejection. (and horses) polyclonal human for years with to acute which the used by is immunized has potential of unwanted lymphocytes immunoglobulin anti-lymphocyte to antibodies globulin, from of demonstrated treat eliminate graft For rabbits many example, previously episodes of and however, not, the Anti-lymphocyte globulin those responses global responsible to does leads immunosuppression. unwanted for therefore useful between discriminate and lymphocytes sickness, called immunoglobulin highly (see Foreign and often human of immunoglobulins 14-15). immune formation in a large are complexes of against therapy Section used doses animal and the also antibodies resulting cause condition globulin humans, the it serum of from antigenic the in anti-lymphocyte

and would rejection, globulin for monoclonal treat the Appendix that is Section antibodies still I, effects. acute quest (see Anti-lymphocyte achieve to used this nevertheless more specifically targeted stimulated A-7) has directed One CD52 (marketed such antibody the lymphocytes. protein cell-surface which by is alemtuzumab is most expressed Campath-1H), as at has to similar long-standing actions globulin, anti-lymphocyte lymphopenia. causing It the also used of It is eliminate leukemia. chronic in to cancer cells lymphocytic treatment

one by general of Immunosuppressive act mechanisms. two antibodies monoclonal referred are as destruction lymphocytes the depleting act the vivo whereas their antibodies, killing as bears cell of protein the it. alemtuzumab, such target and trigger blocking by nondepleting in others function that to Some, without and are of or cells, target and bear respectively. to the Depleting IgG them phagocytosis monoclonal lymphocytes antibody-dependent cytotoxicity and antibodies cell-mediated (ADCC), and by lymphocytes Fc macrophages bind NK receptors kill which to part may lymphocyte destruction. a in also Complement-mediated play lysis

their humans. immunogenicity in to can engineered reduce be 16-5 Antibodies

in to I, desired species, made A-7). by antibodies with as are antibodies that has such immunizing been therapy Section mouse, readily most antibodies generate the nonhuman humans A the these major monoclonal impediment Appendix to of (see specificity immunogenic. forms since an antibodies against antibodies, Humans foreign can antibody such aggregated of may response be develop nonhuman Such antibodies, in actions to also reactions, interferes anaphylaxis but and, a (see with is result treatment may if the only continued, leads not therapeutic reaction Section 14-10). the allergic of no treatment. a made antibody, has response can an a Once be patient future it longer used to for the humanization. principle, antibodies called by are a problem system, be in as making not This by immune foreign recognized human avoided process that can,

Various to approaches been humanize antibodies. have tried human Fc regions by IgG of encoding a determinants the be regions variable from spliced manipulation. onto murine The antibody can the antigen-recognition gene of Antibodies are chimeric antibodies. called this type variable However, potentially regions the induce murine that regions within approach leaves this could

Fig. maintain decrease be treat immunogenicity used specificity. human 16.7 diseases antigen their can to to Monoclonal engineered but antibodies named suffix mice, immunogenic in that fully are with derived humans. from are -omab, Antibodies the limiting to causes time. patients generate their them, usefulness antibodies This against over be the V are regions; the the mouse such chimeric by immunogenicity -ximab. named antibodies can suffix in onto antibodies antibody reduced making from which human with are This spliced regions constant complementarity-determining process just mouse humanized named splicing -zumab. regions of the from is with the the in Humanization antibody, are suffix the further reducing antibodies immunogenicity; allow techniques humans. to treating antibodies now (-umab) immunogenic monoclonal least New be for human currently type of which derived, fully are used the antibody

immune responses (Fig. 16.7). harbor that immunoglobulin way Genetically of human the locus from engineered that immunization their one immunoglobulin inserted human mice into mice. antibodies may represent genes obtained be Newer monoclonal use or generating through methods B-cell of by plasmablasts, transformation or fully viral primary human hybridomas. cells directly are at human from human lines of generating human aimed antibody-secreting the antibodies B-cell

of whole class of a fragments, includes adoptive globulin, natural in such T new used, for which anti-lymphocyte Monoclonal cells, cells cancer called compounds transfer immunotherapy. example, belong therapeutic are in which cytokines, antibodies proteins as protein biologics, to even and other the the clinical in monoclonal Many have (Fig. and being, approved been, use the process Food of by are Administration antibodies or for Drug US of and systematic naming 16.8), antibody. the a process type identifies by such CD3. the are designated against antibodies as OKT3), antibody monoclonal called muromomab a suffix -omab, murine Murine (originally of in spliced constant anti-CD25 the an region human into approved antibodies regions suffix -ximab, antibody such Chimeric as treatment is basiliximab, entire the which for the rejection. have transplantation variable alemtuzumab hypervariable (Tysabri). have Humanized in -zumab, suffix human spliced into murine the and which have a the been regions in antibody natalizumab as antibodies and treat directed against integrin Crohn’s is latter and disease. subunit, the The sclerosis is α4 multiple used to autoimmune derived it is human sequences Antibodies the as TNF-α; -umab, have used an phage to that derived binds from entirely antibody adalimumab, treat from several suffix display diseases. in

used allograft prevent antibodies can rejection. 16-6 Monoclonal be to

organs the specific are by physiological cytotoxic development harmful prevent inhibiting being targets of various used, inflammatory to Antibodies transplanted rejection investigation, the are or for of and under responses. both and discussed is solid-organ bone for also treatment example, licensed For 16-4, certain used alemtuzumab, the in is Section transplantation. of leukemias marrow but in to solid-organ time to the be of remove the circulation. alemtuzumab mature from the lymphocytes T transplantation In may given around transplantation, recipient deplete vivo or used to In be alemtuzumab T recipient, to in into marrow before of a infusion. bone the mature infusion transplantation, following marrow cells in recipient donor used treat vitro its can bone disease T 15-36). from Section mature graft-versus-host very of effective of reducing cells (see is incidence donor marrow Elimination at bone the marrow T bone recipient In and donor response, causing the rashes, the in damaging mount which hepatitis, lymphocytes foreign recognize disease, diarrhea, this the fatal. a be as and can occasionally recognize Bone they them. so-called the cells can effect as graft-versus-leukemia a cells have a for is T foreign as destroy leukemic transplantation where graft in also and marrow the as treatment used leukemia, originally of mature donor was elimination It that thought

Fig. for developed immunotherapy. antibodies Monoclonal 16.8

are development in under antibodies, under are clinical of current additions of A list, substantial fraction pharmaceuticals writing, to as currently and trials. and development this this

disadvantageous, be is but lost, as action the seems cells alemtuzumab would be could T cells donor the to during case when depleting be T used such of not agent. the this procedures the antileukemic as

transplantation. treat T episodes Specific rejection graft occur antibodies to used against been after directed cells have of that and CD3 immunosuppression by leads antibody the receptor. muromomab murine targets the signaling The complex (OKT3) to inhibiting T-cell through T-cell solid-organ clinically been use namely, and its dangerous but of is It release, in pro-inflammatory used transplantation stimulation often is has side-effect, a the cytokine declining. with associated release intact cytokine to muromomab’s is This related

region, cells the which cross-linking these receptors. via Fc and activate receptors Fc can bear that activate or 234 antibody changed release. stimulates and alanines, no IgG1 the region called been antibody longer teplizumab, In the and amino cytokine have (Ala-Ala), OKT3γ1 this acids to human Fc 235 in

receptor) are delivered the transplant rejection, kidney growth-promoting Two reduce other CD25 basiliximab, IL-2. T-cell against and blocking activation, (a the by treating presumably directed for IL-2 signals of daclizumab subunit approved and by antibodies,

ligand humanized CD40 promising of kidney Section 9-17). expressed model against a the T cells antibody A rejection primate (see for by effects transplant monoclonal showed cells by possible is of A activation of donor that by helper cells this dendritic mechanism protection antigens. recognize antibody of the blockade T antibodies in have studies ligand performed preliminary been humans. Only of anti-CD40 the was thromboembolic also erythematosus antibody (SLE) ligand anti-CD40 but complications, administered little efficacy. different with autoimmune to complications systemic lupus a withdrawn; was of One patients associated without and with antibody disease with significant was evidence

CD28 targets co-stimulatory In rejection, co-receptor against that the receptor success have other had lymphocytes. CD4 in antibodies including monoclonal experimental some graft the antibodies models, preventing bind on also or nondepleting CTLA-4–Ig and antigen-presenting the with prevents of their arthritis. cells, CD28 protein treatment fusion molecules the approved co-stimulatory a soluble which for abatacept, is cells Similarly, binds T to on B7 rheumatoid interaction recombinant on

disease. of 16-7 autoreactive lymphocytes can Depletion treat autoimmune

in to targeted the antibodies in used use discussed sections. can next In monoclonal mechanisms the be diseases, preventing and to autoimmune few different addition transplantation rejection, their immune are certain treat antibodies We nonspecifically. lymphocytes and to remove the by use nondepleting discussing depleting start of tried certain treating treat to diseases. been but developed B-cell monoclonal was has also originally autoimmune lymphomas, The rituximab anti-CD20 antibody in cells and a (Rituxan, for CD20, apoptosis B signal rituximab depletes lymphocyte several transduces months. that By induces MabThera) ligating involve are autoimmune to autoantibody-mediated Certain believed diseases pathogenesis. autoimmune which their part presentation. anemia, autoantibodies have rituximab clinical evidence SLE, the all arthritis, or rheumatoid hemolytic of There is for with a efficacy of some cryoglobulinemia, patients of type II in as mixed expressed the cells, their substantial anti-CD20, precursors plasma population. short-lived, Although plasma-cell in reduction the not in a antibody-producing long-lived, are on is CD20 resulting B-cell targeted by not but

and transplant effect beneficial Alemtuzumab, with shown in rejection, multiple of above has its use small in sclerosis. studies discussed patients for numbers in leukemia some of treating of after potential a suffered complication their However, brief, therapy. immediately most multiple patients sclerosis although its fortunately flare-up of antibody frightening, illustrating another illness, infusion, acting as killing Fc-dependent mechanisms. Alemtuzumab by intended, cells was complementand conduction by fibers which demyelination. and transiently previously nerve nerve including cytokines, (IFN)-γ, affected interferon However, IL-6, also the stimulated release in it TNF-α, block of symptoms. This exacerbation transient dramatic caused but the of the alemtuzumab stages useful maximal, of has the is determined. disease, response may inflammatory early this yet at Nevertheless, be but to when be

Fig. measured Anti-inflammatory pain by (as objective disease and 16.9 in of effects rheumatoid arthritis. of parameters therapy activity anti-TNF-α followed a against acute-phase of respectively) was TNF-α 10 at The swollen-joint measured or of fall antibody systemic score for in count, 24 4 monoclonal a • and a the and after course dose in a patients placebo either the inflammatory clinical as response, treatment mg kg–1. weeks with The of protein. acute-phase concentration the C-reactive reduction was subjective both antibody courtesy therapy a of Data R.N. associated in with Maini.

anti-CD4 sclerosis by from disappointing or rheumatoid been antibodies with arthritis tried, results. Treating has patients multiple using but suffering depletion treatment. studies, but blood only peripheral of more T the antibodies 6 from controlled small after for In showed therapeutic lymphocytes effects years caused than missed likely delete pro-inflammatory target. CD4 for the that The have and cells already their may thus seems these to to primed cytokines, failed T antibodies secreting be explanation failure shows tale to and possible that large kill completely the matter. lymphocytes yet it This cautionary is deplete to numbers cells that of fail

or Biologics block IL-6 alleviate autoimmune that IL-1, TNF-α, can 16-8 diseases.

try response. can with immune tissue caused Anti-inflammatory depleting therapy or antibodies, the or reduce attempt immunosuppressive drugs an it injury autoimmune to response can to altogether, the as eliminate by either called anti-inflammatory as use is the or such illustrated treatment category drugs, nonsteroidal is second therapy, agents conventional anti-inflammatory low-dose of immunomodulatory aspirin, and corticosteroids. This by of IL-6. TNF-α, cytokines and illustrated antibodies is of biologics A activity that IL-1, FDA-approved the immunomodulatory several block such of pro-inflammatory powerful as by therapy using avenue newer

first clinic. therapy the the therapeutic was Anti-TNF enter to biological specific rheumatoid induced remissions striking arthritis (Fig. antibodies in Anti-TNF-α inflammation reduced and an in (see Crohn’s Section 16.9) 15-23). disease disease, inflammatory bowel in Two used clinical are established types TNF-α to biologics antagonize of practice. such type TNF-α first and its comprises infliximab antiTNF-α antibodies, activity. as which bind and the to adalimumab, The block etanercept, its TNF second TNF-α, also binds activity. p75–Fc receptor a is (TNFR) protein subunit which The called human recombinant type neutralizing fusion been are trials number performed. diseases of agents, potent they in These is which extremely clinical the effective growing be shown have to are anti-inflammatory and further as blockade to ankylosing idiopathic subset) to arthritis, well rheumatic now rheumatoid the diseases routine (other juvenile arthritis TNF-α, systemic-onset this spondylitis, psoriatic arthropathy, treatment and and many is than in addition In the respond cases. of

of a small infections, An risk in blockade carries of that defending (see is including infection increased developing of Section observation TNF-α illustration 3-20). serious patients TNF-α importance the against but tuberculosis the not been all in has successful diseases. AntiTNF-α therapy for of model a in experimental blockade human sclerosis, as anti-TNF-α, frequent, an increase possibly more because encephalomyelitis disease, multiple became treatment but autoimmune multiple with with of treated amelioration relapses of in (EAE), led a TNF-α patients sclerosis activation. T-cell to mouse the

have for powerful rheumatoid as arthritis. pro-inflammatory proteins recombinant models and against equally arthritis and not effective its IL-1 the humans, proved being animal in as cytokine receptor in TNF-α blockade treating of Antibodies despite IL-1β Wells An the clinical Section receptor use useful with blockade licensed (see moderate arthritis. rheumatoid also proven antibody recombinant (Kineret) and IL-1 hereditary severe has adults syndrome for has Muckle– anakinra disease protein against of been in the 13-9), the the cytokine by autoinflammatory to against

tocilizumab; IL-6 of effects receptor, virtue antibody the against the it the pro-inflammatory Another clinical antagonist being IL-6. cytokine blocks humanized is in use directed the of by cytokine an and arthritis in as as shows juvenile condition. promise to autoinflammatory treating systemic-onset in effective be with This anti-TNF-α rheumatoid idiopathic patients arthritis, seems also

on diseases origin its treating used (Avonex) sclerosis, attenuating Interferon to in treat its relapses. (IFN)-β is the also ability of reducing and occurrence multiple and based to severity enhance effective but of is viral course immunity, immunity. enhance IFN-β was unclear could how recently, reduce it rather than Until (see of sensors In form activate the the pro-protein inflammasome, 1 cleave we 3-9, into to active NLR the IL-1 the of Section cytokine family which described the caspase innate Fig. in 3.19). IL-1 know to production. reduce levels two We IFN-β at now acts that (NLRP3) reduces of 1. caspase also inhibits and and IL-1 of the expression substrate the the inflammasomes NLRP1 reducing pro-protein, activity It to available NALP3 the explain pro-inflammatory effects its multiple of may observed cytokine, a production symptoms on Thus, the IFN-β limits of powerful sclerosis. which the

migration can inflammation Biologic and of sites responses. block to cell agents 16-9 reduce immune

expressing those MAdCAM-1 α4:β7 (lamina bind the 1) expressing in on to on in system, bind endothelium to (VLA-4) while integrin Effector propria-associated the endothelium gut. VCAM-1 lymphocytes the α4:β1 integrin nervous central molecule the humanized and with ligands is specific for natalizumab subunit and (Fig. α4 their monoclonal both preventing interaction VLA-4 binds antibody The their integrin α4:β7, the 16.10). with in multiple Crohn’s has in This patients benefit trials with or antibody sclerosis. shown therapeutic placebo-controlled disease emigration and that successful in tissues of could and be the The continuing on illustrate depends the the monocytes, early of into in lymphocytes, this sclerosis, Crohn’s fact wall the disease. into disease multiple the treatment from circulation gut signs that brain the macrophages However, therapy, not anti-TNF and, blockade is could to like α4:β1 reduced infection. defense against lead specific integrin of multifocal progressive patients caused opportunistic treated developed an with have by natalizumab the (PML), Rarely JC leukoencephalopathy infection virus. sclerosis Crohn’s temporary 2005, the disease. allowed in June 2006 but from This and prescribed to be withdrawal natalizumab to was led market the of multiple it for again for in

led T the an to targets in by problem that States the driven multifocal this 2009 A shown market skin treating cells and pro-inflammatory efalizumab; disease in similar withdrawal subunit promise inflammatory leukoencephalopathy United had from the drug and αL the antibody, with primarily another CD11a of Europe psoriasis, anti-integrin in cytokines. produce

activate used of pathways Blockade can to 16-10 lymphocytes autoimmune be co-stimulatory treat that disease.

pathways, to with of applied above transplantation noted the (see Blocking 16-6), diseases. rejection autoimmune connection has prevention also Section been as in co-stimulatory with antigen-presenting expressed CD28 expressed by (abatacept) the interaction example, B7 of the cells CTLA-4–Ig T blocks the For by cells. rheumatoid be and also beneficial treatment treating arthritis, for in to approved is drug of This seems psoriasis. the the rash given and was evidence with of in keratinocytes, to histological cells, of skin. within dendritic the and loss damaged an was psoriasis, improvement cells When T of there CTLA-4–Ig activation patients psoriatic

CD58 T been antigen-presenting that CD2 the adhesion targeted pathway (LFA-3) the psoriasis on molecule and is has Another co-stimulatory between in interaction on cells. cells for routine now CD58, is CD2 fusion a the and and protein, and effective psoriasis. A alefacept CD58–IgG1 (Amevive), called between recombinant inhibits interaction treatment to remain vaccination cells this such by intact. antitetanus are memory therapy, responses T as Although targeted

used drugs properties. Some commonly 16-11 immunomodulatory have

the and immune animals. angiotensin-converting disease, modulate cardiovascular the Certain such response statins the medications, and also inhibitors as in experimental treatment used (ACE) of prevention in can enzyme existing widely block reducing levels. (HMG-CoA) A prescribed enzyme cholesterol widely the 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-co-enzyme reductase, that are Statins drugs very thereby II in MHC autoimmune also expression some They reduce the level diseases. increased class molecules of of influencing These lymphocyte effects alteration be of signaling. thereby an membranes, due may in the to content cholesterol more T these response also response, cause to more although this occurs cells switch whether human a In models, to TH1 TH2 to pathogenic seem drugs is not animal from a in clear. protective patients

essential bone and effects. vitamin hormone immunomodulatory exerts homeostasis, for D3, The also mineral IL-12 It CD4 cells, decrease IL-2 by and dendritic a and leads T production by in to IFN-γ cells production decreases and

Fig. with antibody monoclonal sclerosis. multiple anti-α4 integrin 16.10 humanized relapses Treatment reduces in an (VLA-4) panel: interaction cells on to VCAM-1 on expressed adhesion cells lymphocytes permits integrin macrophages and the endothelial these Left brain α4:β1 and between of endothelium. of in inflammation the cells plaques these of multiple into facilitates sclerosis. This migration the the exacerbating natalizumab chain integrin monoclonal on interactions and (blue) the antibody cells, Center entering endothelial the between panel: and thus to and of the the binds preventing VCAM-1 blocks inflammation. adhesive α4 cells tissue and the from lymphocytes monocytes a The unclear the is treatment rare because as development infection the text). side-effect of future of (see of this a lesions compared on the Right with detected reduced natalizumab imaging new the is brain (MRI) with resonance of in patients panel: number treated a magnetic of placebo. greatly Data Miller, et D.H., al. from :

Engl. N. J. Med. 348:15–23. 2003,

and Section variety as autoimmunity, as protective been of such models demonstrated animal well in effects diabetes, 15-5) as of (see have EAE a transplantation. in bone immunomodulatory of drawback humans. would and dosages at D3 The are its is that to vitamin only resorption that effects seen hypercalcemia in major lead cause under D3 vitamin analogs but search retain for immunomodulatory way not major that structural There hypercalcemia. of is do the a effects

manipulate an response. of can antigen Controlled 16-12 used of nature to antigen-specific be administration the

of response identified. unwanted can some an diseases, the be immune target In antigen eliminate its reduce use the or treat presentation drugs possible alter disease, to because then the manner antibodies, antigen the can itself, or antigen rather than can pathogenic It response and of features. to the immune be success to of this doses in to the Section very 14-13, IgE been treatment some applied low with response principle has As of discussed antigen. an caused allergies by cells T cells. IgG one of of B of to allergic individuals from allergic response and production antibodies that the doses seems with IgA Repeated divert allergen favor dominated increasing by treatment the to These to antibodies the by desensitize thought normally amounts binding and allergen to are of encountered from small it binding preventing the IgE. patient

pathogenic to peptide suppress antigens using considerable disease. been interest in T-cell-mediated autoimmune has in responses There presented a immune induced system Section is on type to (see the T-cell the it by which way in depends response of The CD4 peptide 9-18). through factor of peptides instance, cells do systemic TH1 antibody induce orally transforming not given T Section regulatory but (TGF)-β, induce 12-14). tend (see cells production For growth to or production disease. indicate in induced can Indeed, animals autoimmune protect antigens experiments that against oral respectively, myelin mice rheumatoid the Freund’s by or sclerosis Section or protein injection basic can multiple II, (see complete in arthritis collagen induced of Diseases in (MBP) be resembling adjuvant 16-29). type administration or Oral in these arthritis diseases administration but with the the protein MBP inhibits marginal patients animals, had multiple or in whole sclerosis has II of development of collagen oral therapeutic effects. of rheumatoid type no study Similarly, diabetes delay the developing of risk giving a disease. high the was whether examined onset large that people in at parenteral could of insulin protective effect in low-dose found

to effective to the humans. in autoimmune response T-cell approaches antigen response been TH2 a damaging have more Other less shift using 30%. The glatiramer sclerosis, may approved it rates multiple (Copaxone) treating which by relapse for to reduce in peptide up acetate is drug composition protective amino MBP, polymer in acid, It consisting induces the TH2-type in is their lysine ratios it a four a mimic and response. acids tyrosine, that and of glutamic alanine, that receptor have peptide antigenic altered more in (APLs), ligands been in substitutions an positions. peptide amino contact T-cell made uses are strategy which acids amino in A refined at specific the acid agonists regulatory or to designed cells. partial to T APLs induce antagonists, be can act or as APLs in for patients exacerbated success a in a TH2 allergic of response, seen. and or to remains some to despite with to peptides reaction be disease in humans associated vigorous sclerosis trial multiple treating of value EAE mice, their these led But the in

Summary.

conventional biologic responses, rejection, Treatments cytotoxic, such allergic agents drugs—anti-inflammatory, as such for as autoimmunity, drugs—as unwanted or immune and and antibodies reactions, monoclonal proteins. immunomodulatory graft as immunosuppressive include well spectrum most actions of wide of a a the side-effects. Anti-inflammatory drugs, of have the broad toxic range and potent corticosteroids, which are in they must drugs. used with and immunosuppressive are either cytotoxic carefully dose or normally Their controlled, be combination thereby work and but of dividing proliferation, by killing all kill cells The types also other dividing cytotoxic cells. immune and suppress responses prevent lymphocyte indiscriminately they drugs are somewhat drugs, specific pathways and The less still in A and are generally indiscriminately. toxic, immunosuppressive response suppress rapamycin, interfere immune the more signaling but such as cyclosporin expensive and

transplant diseases agents autoimmune types in Several now and are of treating for (Fig. rejection established biologic the clinic 16.11). have inhibit into lymphocyte receptor generally or use antibodies monoclonal either blockade, tissues. for activation or prevent migration approved or Many lymphocyte been human deplete lymphocytes selectively, through that a inflammatory also triumph proteins of of immunotherapy. antibodies inhibit the agents Immunomodulatory or TNF-α, that actions fusion monoclonal include

ways. 16.2 act in of general three one can 16.8 and act they sites, (red), cell-specific by lymphocyte integrin First causing trafficking. can thereby cells inflammatory global inhibiting blocking or depletion, from depleting interactions, block inhibit may interactions Second pathways. (blue), agents specific co-stimulatory or cellular various effector neutralization mechanisms, (green), cytokines. as the Third of may terminal various target pro-inflammatory agents the such

Fig. rejection individual tumors. are to 16.12 specific antigens Tumor irradiated tumor that cases, and in dose cells with cells tumor reject Mice challenged a (left panels). of same viable lethal of with some can, tumor immunized the to the is of an antigens. rejection result tumor This immune response with a viable is the panels). mice challenged die tumor, protection the different If cells mice of and no immunized there (right are

to response Using tumors. immune the attack

cardiovascular the is being leading disease industrialized in of Cancer and disease. causes the others one death nations, three of infectious average is expectancy diseases the life treatments disease most cardiovascular and these infectious improve, the countries. to increases, for become fatal to the continue and common disease in prevention As cancer likely of by the transformed the cells. are caused growth of uncontrolled of progeny Cancers metastasis, controlling unconnected part cancer major body to the cells treating or problem parts. of in of is spread the one cancerous from A all or without the requires patient. cells that the destroyed malignant killing be therefore cancer removed Curing would against against the viral discriminate an achieving pathogen. attractive bacterial way only a that induces An pathogen specific response in immune and immune this be counterparts, way tumor would of or the cells between tumor that response their the normal-cell against induce provides to that vaccination the a of protection that same of Immunological of is approaches treatment more cancer century, the immunotherapy cancer promise. in than decade has been that it the to shown only have past a attempted but for real reduce surgery conventional approaches or with the advance chemotherapy, important tumor such load, integration which of been substantially immunotherapy. conceptual as An has

responses mice transplantable 16-13 discovery led the protective immune of tumors development tumors. in to of The to

experiments led made the responses treatment be immune induced undertake could discovery tumors The finding of or to tumors. possible strains after mice the carcinogens chemical development to of that with in of with irradiation, key mice, that coupled it to inbred the tumor use the tumors. study experimental tumors between generally transplanted been such be on the These rejection mice, of of and has based could are cells was destroyed immune system, mice molecules If develop to are into exploited the mice. recognized the a by which MHC they the foreign fact readily they bear MHC-congenic and first that transplanted, strains tumor of the to matched for that to therefore type. tumors so studied strains, their must inbred and within MHC host tumor Specific immunity be be can

exhibit when growth into variable pattern transplantable recipients. of injected a syngeneic In tumors mice, tumors progressively kill the grow and eventually host. Most mice a cannot frequently same injection if (Fig. with of tumor protected cells with grow, of subsequent irradiated injected viable are that However, lethal against cells the normally are dose tumor they 16.12). seems be of tumor seem tumors: a spectrum against There viable to tumor challenge injection to immunogenicity distant transplantable induce protective cells immunity a injections of site. among a varying at of of irradiated cells degrees seen but by mediate T-cell-deficient These adoptive be of mice T for transfer in mice, immune need effects these to not the from showing effects. cells can conferred T cells protective are

that These can express the tumor. targets the observations antigens tumors that T-cell indicate response rejects become that a tumor-specific of individual are tumors antigens), (in tumor usually tumor-specific which are tumor. rejection murine These are termed by expressed induced experimentally specific they an often and transplantation antigens for Fig. Thus, cells one usually with from tumor a live protects not same but a challenge from mouse different that cells tumor irradiated from tumor immunization challenge tumor, with syngeneic syngeneic from with (see 16.12).

immune they are can Tumors evolve rejection ‘edited’ by many ways. the 16-14 escape in and system as

treat the his Prize work deliver 1908 perhaps propose toxins system was the received first immune suggesting tumors, that could Ehrlich, used Paul molecules be antibodies for to cancer might cells. immunology, in we the who call established that the be Nobel to to to used cells. destroy of the Prize, Frank to and hypothesis, Lewis In Nobel recipient ‘immune MacFarlane according surveillance’ 1950s, and Thomas system which would detect Burnet, formulated the the immune the of cells tumor 1960 consider clear growth. relationship hypothesis three tumor to is cancer the and considerably and the modified of it that Since this system immune between complex, has become been more has then, phases in system destroys to first cells—the (Fig. surveillance and tumor The immune potential recognizes the previously referred as phase,’ which immune phenomenon the ‘elimination is 16.13). imposed follows by undergo not the system. is changes mutations as immune completely aid in of survival or selection pressure a elimination tumor successful, an result ‘equilibrium which their phase,’ If is the cells that what a that known continuously cancer properties the survive. immunoediting cells of the During tumor equilibrium phase, process shapes the as become tumor cells immune attentions system the phase,’ that have the of the final detectable. ability to unimpeded In and elude the ‘escape clinically acquired grow

innate provided antibodies gene to and Mice tumors. immune certain components surveillance specific best have of deletions influences with or the adaptive of with targeted that evidence types treated the immunity remove of development frequency increased example, system. Section of NK of For 9-31), mechanism the killing of cells T show (see perforin, and mice part cells of cytotoxic the an lymphomas—tumors lacking CD8 lymphoid the both and tumors. develop lacking gut mechanisms, breast epithelial and deficient being Strains immune STAT1 of in thus and proteins, innate certain mice RAG adaptive skin the γ:δ 6-20) cells. epithelial induced illustrating abnormal expressing show T of a by Mice (see application increased cells to and in role T carcinogens, Section tumors intraepithelial markedly lymphocytes killing receptors γ:δ surveying susceptibility for lacking topical are directly either IFN-γ actions IFN-α/β their in cells, cells. on of elimination or the tumor and through indirectly other important Both of may immune source a of which major cells γ:δ of the system Studies importance removal cancer T in cells. IFN-γ, that effector are explain of show cells various their the the

Fig. surveillance. immune controlled cells by Malignant can be 16.13

Some of can immune-system eliminate (left types of variety cells recognized by are a them panel). cells, which tumor variants the and form to completely If the occur proliferate tumor eventually eliminated, a are that immune tumor. escape not cells system

those the equilibrium selection their that by from system. elimination or to additional tumor to cells phase mutations due According hypothesis, have acquired phase, prevent the immune equilibrium additional either changes, survive during the immunoediting that the response In tumor escape, an is at phase equilibrium the of are tumor the removes into cells the all removed. delaying continually equilibrium individual, immune quickly phase immunocompetent tumor growth; cells, turns immune no system the as if compromised, support transplants. the of of equilibrium the recipients is example phase presence excellent the An in occurrence to cancer clinical organ of two her after before melanoma the between same in who patients successfully and of treated melanoma had had who 1 a years had donor, from 2 patient study transplantation 16 received death. years the reported development kidneys malignant One time which in equilibrium easily were but in present spread transplantation cells, kidneys the melanoma known Presumably, to are immune of at with donor to the the organs, system. other were phase donor, held indicate the but simply check. would off If immune the been by had the this melanoma instead in so, killed that system completely immunocompetent cells had been of not began graft were of and melanoma recipients’ systems equilibrium were divide immunosuppressed rapidly to immune rejection, parts from and spread Because body. the cells other the to the released prevent to

tumor lymphoproliferative can for which example, after, in occur of immunosuppressed can suppression situation when post-transplant in immunity patients development to is solid-organ lead the Another are transplantation. disorder, which virus undergo Epstein–Barr of and in become expansion form (EBV) by can takes the which cells driven the It usually B-cell a B mutations malignant. immunosurveillance, immunity transformation. it form cancer antiviral leads functions eliminates normally the as as to Here, B-cell that EBV of a

means which it 16.14. immune by Fig. of occurs Tumors or when can summarized stimulating evade avoid in are it mechanisms, an response can numerous lack Fig. Spontaneous produce new antigens that tumors elicit mutations tumor-specific T-cell initially (see that may responses 16.14, panel). first them the activating Fig. is cells taken tumor-specific and rather naive antigen-presenting T to absent And will antigen even are cell signals tolerize antigen-presenting co-stimulatory and expressed (see (APCs), than is up tend when any cells by presented a antigen-specific if second panel). 16.14, unclear. as treated such are How is long ‘self’ tumors could mutations that recognized reveals many that be by cells. tumor unique antigenic genomes as 10–15 Recent sequencing peptides T of ‘foreign’ as as generate entire may 6-17). tumor is for of transformation NK MHC cells addition, are In MIC-A that by with Ib class (such cellular ligands MIC-B) and frequently associated NKG2D, Section proteins recognition induction as (see allowing thus so recognized are elimination. unstable, not response to that able escape be immune may cancer to genetically an clones be tend cells that by But

of a through cervical molecule, MHC Fig. expression (see for particular molecule selection peptide immune by colon cells a the cancers, that by class I presented as T Some I such class tumors, MHC perhaps lose specific and panel). 16.14, third I a all tumor when (Fig. molecules In expression studies, experimental loses class of MHC can NK although to it susceptible might cells (Fig. recognized longer no 16.15), it cytotoxic T be cells, become by 16.16). cells recognition might T in resistant MHC still specific cytotoxic Tumors conferring class one remaining advantage molecule that while to lose able to vivo. I CD8 cells, by selective avoid a NK be only

Tumors (see by that is immune also creating attack evade generally seem micro-environment to immunosuppressive able to a be Fig. fourth 16.14, panel). cytokines. make tumors immunosuppressive Many in the supernatant of a (TGF-β) first growth Transforming identified culture was factor-β

Fig. avoid in can Tumors may 16.14 eliminated. a recognition variety immune tumors be The ways. tumors of of instability allows genetic immunogenicity. tumors First panel: have low can can change, by which expand. one part an lacking cells Tumors cells, equilibrium have antigenic lack antigens T antigens immunogenic during or may lost recognized phase, may tumor more of or express often IDO, molecules, as tumors MHC PD-L1 inhibitory or such Fourth panel: PD-L1, molecules, such TGF-β, function. repress that T-cell molecules IL-10, that produce may as immunosuppressive cells cross-presented co-stimulatory tumor-specific Second T by may without secrete can suppress dendritic be recruit panel: immune antigens or cells that regulatory responses directly cytokines. cells. panel: Fifth inducing tolerant a cells signals, in state T tumor that secrete initially tumors molecules such form responds. physical which express can to system immune Third panel: the can as collagen barrier a antigens tumor, lymphocyte around Such access. preventing the

growth. suppress name), its immunity tumor control inflammatory responses tumor to that as tends are T-cell needed and and, (hence cell-mediated to seen, the we it have development (Treg in antigens. Recall of the inducible in cancers see variety been of cells; specifically a to cells Section found induces regulatory expand might T response and that have which tumor TGF-β 9-21), increases cells cancer more models, removal of their resistance In cancer, Treg-negative to whereas into to cells allows Treg mouse transfer greatly a recipient proliferate.

(MDSCs), called can also T-cell collectively tumor. of cells The within which of populations myeloid-derived the suppressor myeloid tumors some activation inhibit microenvironments contain cells, at and be both present. may are characterized polymorphonuclear incompletely comprising heterogeneous, and cells, MDSCs monocytic and IL-10, cytokine have activation. different also which produce carcinoma, to and activity ovarian as tissue Several shown lymphoma, can T-cell such tumors cell the of origins, B-cell been dendritic immunosuppressive reduce inhibit melanoma,

immune that Fig. responses inhibit Some (see directly cell-surface proteins tumors express 16.14, panel). fourth family programmed the B7 (see death activated for and receptor by ligand T ligand-1 PD-1 cells a inhibitory member some 7-24). expressed example, express (PD-L1), Section tumors For act that suppress produce responses. tumors Furthermore, to local immune can enzymes tryptophan, produce catabolizes to The 2,3-dioxygenase the an essential metabolite enzyme order indoleamine in kynurenine. (IDO) immunosuppressive amino acid, but phase during function can tolerance during the seems balance IDO in immune development. equilibrium between a tumor to responses be infections, of maintaining and induced cells Fig. materials system that create Finally, collagen interaction tumor can with produce cells barrier a the immune as to such of (see physical panel). 16.14, last

Fig. prostatic class carcinoma. expression Loss I of MHC a 16.15 in

of recognition cells. Some can by tumors T surveillance expression CD8 their loss a evade preventing class of by molecules, MHC I immune human prostate cancer with a that a stained antibody a section HLA against class is I molecules. has of peroxidase-conjugated been Shown brown expression represents lymphocytes cells. restricted to stromal The that HLA tissue is stain class I and infiltrating of no the The section show tumor cells that staining. most occupy G. of Stamp. Photograph courtesy

Fig. susceptible MHC NK 16.16 mechanism lose cells. molecules a all surveillance of I Tumors of immune from that being killed are as to more by escape class expression I due is the lymphocytes class to peptides on Regression panels). antigens surface to (CTLs), the MHC recognize of cytotoxic actions the largely of (left tumors transplanted of novel bound cell T which (center although cells, cytotoxic of that CD8 to cells low of less sensitive inhibitory have the receptors cells NK panels). bind become MHC levels class I tumor have that T variants to susceptible so class I, NK molecules, MHC than less lack grow cells higher normal cells, they mice NK and so tumors cells, nude sensitive T nude are than mice. in of in levels mice NK Although that to well have normal Transfection restore with both susceptibility cytotoxic cells T genes cells NK to class CD8 resistance and to (right I can panels). MHC leukemia of micrographs electron cells. The cells attacking panels NK scanning bottom show in the is cell on NK smaller cell The left both photographs. the of panel: binding leukemia the has Left and cell extensions cell. to zone established target with cell, microvillous contact shortly put the out broad numerous the after a NK long cell minutes extending can seen cell has microvillous leukemia NK cell; and up damage membrane left) plasma the the from fragmented. the mixing, 60 Right processes the extensive is and to rolled be to after leukemia there panel: (bottom Natural and Callewaert, D: from Mechanisms from Cytotoxicity Elsevier. 1985, of Photographs R., reprinted by Herberman, with permission Cells, Killer

Tumor form the antigens recognized basis be by T immunotherapies. and cells of rejection 16-15 can

are are the on peptides that rejection tumor-cell antigens T immune proteins tumor of cells MHC to recognized molecules. by system The presented also targets the normal on become response they a be tissues. of though T-cell peptides even present These tumor-specific can For in relevant can induce patients destruction autoimmune in to immunity cells induce instance, vitiligo, strategies the pigmented an to melanoma skin. healthy antigens of categories of antigens (Fig. Several rejection be tumor can distinguished 16.17). gene of that antigens that occur tumor-specific affect gene during oncogenesis particular result from mutations consists or product. point rearrangements and a One that strictly residues to I mutations I mutant they may peptides MHC already for some to or altering alter a epitope specific peptide may is in allow that Point bind the MHC in able de protein a gene novo by to particular to class T for class the bind cells molecules. the molecules, referred peptides These to are of as are as versions neoepitopes proteins. normal often newly they immunogenic against new change T-cell evoke may tumor. a response Either the lymphocytes, tumors, derived clones of are from T-cell which In Band single

to here have been with molecules type recognized by cytotoxic patients shown listed lymphocytes be tumor raised all listed. the The T from

the a antigen of tumor-specific comprises antigen class rearranged expressed clone. unique by receptor special the thus with and ensure processed peptides mutated to However, response. effective may not properly stimulate an that be MHC all they able be molecules or associate

cancer-testis is tumor second The of antigens. rejection category the antigens are are cells proteins male that in by the testis. These encoded germ normally genes only in expressed molecules, to lymphocytes. germ are peptides from express normally do not and presented cells T therefore MHC Male not these molecules show including Tumor of antigens of such antigens, encoding abnormalities as activation cancer-testis Fig. gene (see expression, the (MAGE) cells genes melanoma-associated the widespread 16.17). cells presented by from to peptides expressed now T tumor cells, MHC class be proteins molecules. ‘germ-cell’ by can When derived I these as expression tumor-specific are Therefore, proteins their antigens. in these effectively characterized the is NY-ESO-1 by expressed highly cancer-testis (New esophageal melanomas. immunogenic is variety Perhaps cell immunologically antigen a carcinoma-1), of which tumors, is York human squamous including best and

that in by is tissues. third only The ‘differentiation antigens’ encoded category expressed are types particular of genes the differentiation black pathways produce which Examples antigens include in proteins melanoma the the cells, the are and B expressed CD19 that of and the expressed by antigen melanocytes in cells. melanin, several these pigment that are of cells fourth with The in normal consists category antigens their compared overexpressed strongly tumor counterparts. example is as homologous An known to epidermal receptor. which (also factor growth HER-2/neu tyrosine c-Erb-2), is a the receptor kinase associated it many HER-2/neu prognosis. where with ovarian is overexpressed adenocarcinomas, cancers, in poor including breast is a clinical and T CD8 overexpressing capable have found tumors vivo. of in are lymphocytes such solid tumors destroying HER-2/neu been infiltrating but not consists of of The tumor fifth post-translational antigens display molecules category modifications. that rejection abnormal tumors, and several cancers. including breast is by pancreatic An which expressed example underglycosylated mucin, is MUC-1, consists a from novel when melanoma. in sixth are or in are occurs that gene, transcribed retained proteins generated which introns The the mRNA one more of category seventh the encoded Proteins tumor viral rejection of oncogenes category by comprise antigens. have are in critical they foreign, role a process can and, oncogenic the can response. they T-cell a evoke because proteins oncoviral These in E7, Section Examples are and proteins (see expressed E6 virus are papilloma cervical type carcinoma 16 human the which 16-18).

discovered technique culture. lymphocyte–tumor cells by a as melanoma, with autologous the cell were antigens irradiated tumor known culturing tumor-specific lymphocytes, In mixed were antigen. relevant peptides tumor-specific cytotoxic tumor From bearing against would were identified and cells kill that T cells melanoma reactive such the cultures, can that that melanomas have cytotoxic antigens by T be different at carry least recognized five Such lymphocytes. studies revealed priming resistance perhaps cytotoxic reactive in that T to function, or against insufficient lymphocytes not effective effector due It are mechanisms. seems to and downstream antigens vivo, deficient melanoma lymph isolated blood, and or propagated from cells can tumor from in melanoma-specific directly vitro. lymphocytes the be T nodes, peripheral infiltrating However, derived of products the recognize products at These first are detectable displayed do or recognize mutant but genes, levels proto-oncogenes tumor the proteins of cells cells genes mutant tumor cells normal protein suppressor T on not from T now by that the or other instead time. from for antigens developmental MAGE process such antigens the represent discussed early in antigens as melanoma above the reexpressed of probably antigens Cancer-testis tumorigenesis. in most or reactive these cells antigens, expressed either indicating that Only not immunogenic of cases. are have the patients are melanoma a MAGE to minority not antigens T

most gp75. enzyme three common peptides The proteins—gp100, and melanoma tyrosinase the other from are or antigens from MART1, to melanocyte the differentiation lineage. These specific antigens are them specific density complexes that peptide:MHC to makes cells in It of is over-expression immunogenic. antigens that leads this it high these abnormally likely is of an tumor and has usually stimulate melanoma patients. with to responses tumor in some enzyme CD4 been are T-cell presented MHC rejection antigens tyrosinase the complexed class Although peptides I as molecules, shown also is and II molecules. MHC by it expressing class likely ingested presented cells This is because in T likely to are and CD8 of tumors. CD4 control Both achieving be cells important immunological cells establishment of role T in while the the cells of directly, memory. kill T CD8 tumor and CD8 a cells CD4 can cells activation cytotoxic have the the as secrete, tumor that cells TNF-α. means also cytokines by such kill CD4 they of T may cells

results (CML). proteins, p53, the Other also that chronic potential such kinase from fusion tyrosine Ras oncogenes the leukemia as antigens products such myeloid and Bcr–Abl the cellular tumor and of as translocation or chromosomal tumor rejection mutated in suppressors, found include (t9;22) HLA fusion CML between I display molecule the can When derived present a the from on HLA-A*0301 Bcr Abl. peptide cells, class site and MHC was in groove eluted known detected was were by This determined sequence spectrometry. as their technique binding mass immunogenetics,’ peptides peptide by which endogenous highly a sensitive from the and ‘reverse powerful

as tumor other tumor identified diseases. MART1 vaccination peptide such has from and This infectious candidate antigens, of against peptides well HLA-bound as sequences as for the melanomas, antigens technique gp100

CML ligands HLA-A*0301 specific the peptide peripheral T-cell (see peptide using specific patients by for the the 7-24). for identified T with in of antigen-specific can Section Bcr–Abl tetramers as be blood fusion receptor cells carrying from in portions of to and kill these able fused other cytotoxic by using tumor T and be Cytotoxic peptides vitro lymphocytes these recognize T cells selected oncogenic from the antigens for tumor are or can proteins; derived specific this mutated cells.

infused can After marrow treat the patient into residual the lymphocytes donor CML, bone a from any help bone eliminate to tumor. transplant mature marrow to donor known technique This (DLI). as lymphocyte is infusion a response effect, donor a the to leukemia extent is general to expressed graftversus-host (see clear clinical what At is antileukemic present, cells due which 15-36), response or alloantigens not whether important. to the lymphocytes is responding are Section it on the in specific graft-versus-leukemia it that to encouraging been separate effect. is either It or T that effect mediate has a a possible vitro graft-versushost lymphocytes in leukemia-specific antileukemic offers of effect the risk against of to ability the while donor prospect prime minimizing the peptides disease. The enhancing cells graft-versus-host the

in are chimeric treatment some cells leukemias. expressing 16-16 an T effective receptors antigen

of infusion to T-cell tumor-specific cells the vivo therapy Adoptive numbers of into involves expansion T and those patients. large T cells ex treatment cells such antibodies, methods, vitro to provide Cells antigen-presenting with allogeneic IL-2, co-stimulatory various expanded as in signal. are by anti-CD3 and a when and treatment effective IL-2 is made is therapy immunosuppressed systemically. T-cell more administered before patient is then Adoptive the has cells T that (TCR) T-cell to excited retroviral receptor approach vectors tumor-specific transfer is the much genes before patients’ interest use Another into reinfusion. of cells derived are become there as This T because to the histocompatibility no for transfused and is cells, result the requirement can the memory effects from of have a long-lasting cells patient. ability of

retroviruses into also genes adoptive introduce T (CAR). a involves patient’s to type of Another but a expressing chimeric cells, form known antigen novel receptor, a of immunotherapy uses receptor as antigen-specific domains contain that intracellular signals domains provide co-stimulation. that for receptors and activation extracellular CARs fusion fused are to T vectors retroviral via CAR cells. to These cells introduced are receptors so-called produce into T differs use just be adoptive from complexes. the by a to almost recognizable approach therapies of molecule peptide:MHC This the antibody specificity CAR conventional as target rather any cell’s allows T than an T-cell (Fig. was aggressive in transformed Recently (ALL), target this cells approach cancer antigen tumor acute a to an lymphocytic CD19 as treating used of rejection B leukemia 16.18). in used recognizes domain an extracellular this of CAR antibody an had The that CD19. case human superfamily. 4-1BB, member of receptor from The domain ζ a intracellular TNF a ITAMs T-cell the (see co-stimulation 7) the domain of complex the three receptor from chain had fused Chapter CD3 with in expanded and a transferred vitro into transduced These cells were patient. T CART-19 combined cells have CART-19 results T case CD8 this (see Fig. of expressing with others demonstrated that The at effective ALL. patients complete in many remissions with clinical achieving are 16.18) side-effects, therefore B also normal eliminates This they however, without IVIG. in is and its patients cells with treatment it require as approach not

growth. Monoclonal or alone tumor antibodies tumor to toxins, antigens, linked against control can 16-17 destroy tumor’s expressed the requires on Using antibodies antibody tumors tumor-specific be surface, can so a cell monoclonal that antigen Fig. direct that to T expressed cells receptors specificity antigen a antitumor Chimeric (CARs) in patient’s lymphocytes. confer to 16.18 can to a chain. to extracellular panel: CD3ζ antibody binds signaling domains intracellular and receptor, that CART-19, is fused antigen from chimeric is of an that 4-1BB composed CD19 the Bottom single-chain row the cells encoding is lentivirus, of express from gene used type a harvested to with the of in T panels: a patient Top retrovirus, diagnosed ALL. a CART-19 CD19-expressing infused and activation and are against the tumor into expansion, in as B transfected actions CART-19 as cells. cytotoxic the exert nontransformed cells patient cells vitro well After activity patient encoding mediate blood T cell Anti-CD19 CAR CD19 antitumor signaling tumor anti-CD19 chimeric antibodies VH harvested tumor an CD3˜ into 4-1BB CAR CD3 ITAMs CD28 CAR CD3 chain cell a are TCR T T with VL T CD28 Anti-CD19 from receptor patient infects are T a an A domain and that cells infused CAR with cell T anti-CD19 are express Infected of cells anti-CD19 cells cells retrovirus activated to to B-cell the

Fig. been have used tumor-specific recognize antibodies Monoclonal 16.19 to antigens eliminate tumors. that help cells of (left tumor recruiting cells and activating antibodies their lyse NK panels). such cells receptors can by via as effector Tumor-specific correct Fc them the isotypes has a been Another couple powerful panels). to (center toxin antibody to strategy the and from kill can the binds When tumor the to is the and the the endocytosed, released cell. toxin tumor antibody is cell antibody tumor cell. a radioisotope of a cell sufficient tumor to coupled is binding radiation the to antibody If of antibody a kill will dose the the deliver (right to panels), tumor lethal do addition, cells could the bind radiation though they a also not receive even dose, antibody. In nearby to Antibody or started replace radioisotopes. antibodies coupling toxins fragments whole for to have

activity specifically cytotoxic the radioactive tumor (Fig. a the cell, toxin, to or nuclide of even 16.19). molecules trials cell-surface the shown Fig. Some are in targeted clinical of in and have some 16.20, treatments now licensed. been these of monoclonal antibody which (Herceptin), breast HER-2/neu. the targets treated improvements with for trastuzumab Striking have been survival the cancer patients receptor reported in is of overexpressed This patients is cancer one-quarter receptor prognosis. poor in about with a associated breast and

thought expression Herceptin of the receptor. of receptor, by the by this the (so downregulating is to act blocking the binding level far to natural unidentified) ligand of and conventional of be The this it effects is antibody enhanced can when chemotherapy. with combined responses, involve a or antitumor Beyond and as growth trastuzumab’s immune directing suggest that such tumor for of innate some ADCC inducing T-cell mice cells, in effects signal blocking experiments adaptive also responses. antitumor yielded rituximab, the cells treatment A the monoclonal apoptosis Section results of antibody their 16-7). triggers to CD20 (see in that has antibody binding lymphoma anti-CD20 excellent B-cell which is surface the of on B upon non-Hodgkin’s may which acts, its clinical in polymorphisms by linked to has been Fc activating efficacy as mechanism another be rituximab ADCC receptors.

monoclonal the penetration the into the killing agents of small (which inefficient monoclonal with as inefficient mopping soluble cells can antibody problems by and antibody, antibodies Technical up tumor antigens after antibody. target mass of antibody fragments), the therapeutic using improved binding be include an the can called a efficiency to producing be of antibody a The Fig. enhanced killing immunotoxin by linking (see toxin, reagent Pseudomonas chain toxin. are A toxins ricin favored and two 16.19): kill toxin the cleavage toxin penetrate antibody cell. the the to must from the permitting and of freed be endocytic antibody chain the in allow compartment, to The internalized success cancer show fragments in such single-chain coupled Fv as to 4-3) of antibodies have more native antibodies but promise. (see Section limited molecules therapy, Toxins had resistant toxin, whom of complete antibody with in a Fv of a of disease recombinant a group is to a hairy-cell in of anti-CD22 fragment of fused the which chemotherapy. successful patients Pseudomonas to a conventional known An immunotoxin induced example two-thirds remissions as leukemia B-cell leukemia was type

to chemotherapeutic drugs conjugated antibodies Monoclonal can to or radioisotopes. also be of of the antibody, case the tumor. the concentrates antigen a site binding antibody of the drug-linked In to drug the the a cell-surface to drug cytotoxic released is internalization, effect. its and exerts or cytostatic the After in endosomes the the trastuzumab linked the in that mertansine, antibody For T-DM1. cytotoxic called agent inhibits a to drug conjugate microtubules, a of assembly the been example, has HER-2 to tumor T-DM1 specifically overexpressed delivers cells, in Since toxin the cells. is only cancer selectively

Fig. virus antibodies HPV An vaccine infection. papilloma protect against that effective 16.21 (HPV) human against induces cancer. of development of cervical with Serotype associated (HPV-16) is highly the 16 HPV of (in a clinical purified protein sulfate). this of aluminum noninfectious hydroxyphosphate 755 highly women vaccine immunized and from case healthy with consisting trial, the an a L1 In alum were with capsid formulated particles’ adjuvant generated HPV-16 (VLP) ‘viruslike uninfected line) the L1 infected (red very titers women of received placebo titers previously developed treated viruslike (blue with uninfected antibody or In with protein. capsid the low vaccine women (green HPV placebo-treated the particle with comparison of line), antibody high women line), who in the against of by became subsequently None immunized infected HPV-16. these women girls 16, 18. anti-HPV units. from marketed a by young is as recommended HPV protection for use serotypes as 11, Gardasil now An 6, cancer available in vaccine cervical milli-Merck and women and mMU, and caused

high HPV-16 recipients The that persist uninfected with long vaccination after of HPV-16 placebo titers recipients previously of 1000 previously not specifc vaccine infected with recipients antibody induces HPV-16 placebo infected

is lymphomas. of vedotin, brentuximab inhibitor Another anti-CD30 with an and for certain a forms drug–antibody approved microtubule different antibody relapsed conjugate, links

antibody-directed therapy known an an that to (ADEPT). as a approach drug, to the nontoxic a enzyme/pro-drug technique cytotoxic antibody variation enzyme this A to metabolizes active is link on pro-drug the of in amounts this can drug generate larger localized vicinity much active cells. of cytotoxic amount small immediate With of technique, enzyme tumor antibody by a the linked Monoclonal antibodies radioisotopes Fig. (see to refractory (ibritumomab antibodies successfully linked used B-cell tiuxetan). been to lymphoma, anti-CD20 to 16.19) yttrium-90 using have treat to also tumor emissions killing advantage the or approaches those that of bind These have cells, because radioactive drug neighboring antibody. cells the adjacent can released affect the purposes and tumors diagnosis image the of for monitoring Monoclonal to γ-emitting tumor antibodies also been spread. coupled used have radioisotopes successfully to

by immune for cancer 16-18 to the prevention response and Enhancing holds tumors vaccination therapy. promise

major monoclonal In there are to and cancer T addition cells other CAR approaches two immunotherapy. antibody-based to therapies, immunogenic, vaccines idea immunogenicity. intrinsically based the on to and vaccine tumors supply are that act the Cancer should poorly are the blocked section, approach, A mechanisms, next second system idea discuss checkpoint blockade, primed been which by check the on immune be in will is held tolerance the by which can based is interventions. in but therapeutic we that called the has

infections infections, viral cancers cancer vaccines reduce can risk. associated that with these are Many and prevent 2005 of women major completion against in a clinical anticancer (HPV). tested human trial occurred with A 12,167 vaccine virus in that breakthrough papilloma involving a therapy the with a showed caused 100% This that associated preventing HPV-16 was HPV in cancer are cervical HPV-18, 70% trial of recombinant by vaccine which cervical cancers. HPV two against key strains, and effective by epithelium anti-HPV The induction of vaccine cervical antibodies of through the (Fig. infection likely HPV prevents most 16.21). vaccines have to existing treat been potential attempts vaccines trial use the Although tumors showed to this less cancer, effective. of to prevent to In in by caused the of virus. T-cell for of the show responses existing have certain are HPV, neoplasia vaccines types that immunogenicity effectiveness case treating increased beginning intraepithelial eliciting viruses. with of liver chronic Similarly, majority several associated caused cancers the by are hepatitis reduce B such cancer viruses The against to vaccine this cancers can liver C. not infections protect virus, as primary against although by by will other it hepatitis due caused hepatitis

develop. the based they to cancer immunotherapy, to Vaccines but tumor approach are are, T-cell-mediated in antigens ideal principle, on difficult the For antigens HPV, known. relevant are MHC spontaneous For the may particular patients’ be presented peptides and tumors, in relevant different only of may same tumor most not rejection antigens tumors by however, be alleles. This that vaccine antigens. include means of must tumor range tumor a an effective tumor It and vaccines such chemotherapy. when clear adequate for low, is only is after should also burden surgery cancer that the therapy as used be

cancer of removed surgery. individual antigens are cell-based tumors The sources patients’ vaccines the for at either irradiated the as as with tumor antigens by enhance to killed mixing immunogenicity (BCG) prepared adjuvants cells A-41). Appendix vaccines (see bacteria parvum, or are These act which Bacille Section tumor such of I, the Calmette–Guérin or tumor extracts Corynebacterium of the BCG receptors on has Vaccination variable their adjuvants is recent in appreciation past, interest had (TLRs). interaction based with results but using Toll-like renewed tumors. BCG melanoma solid Stimulation other has TLR-4 by of been ligands other and tested and against used vaccines. the cancer of CpG has which TLR-9, DNA, binds been also to to increase immunogenicity In cells), cases whole use by and sequences own of epitopes. based strategies the tumor antigens in dendritic presented where T experimental encoding melanomas, viruses (either recognized lymphocytes peptide candidate patient’s T vaccination or alone been by administered have included cytotoxic identified, recombinant these helper example, lymphocytes for the vaccines have and proteins, peptide on rejection

vaccination The activating potency in provides yet the antitumor T-cell another for strategy. of rationale responses cells dendritic humans cells undergone cancer. in tumors of cytotoxic useful The to trials stimulate T-cell use clinical has dendritic therapeutically with now responses antigen-loaded to metastatic for such treatment approved recently was (Provenge), One sipuleucel-T cancer. of prostate vaccine, and which therapy, expressed prostatic cells. the a induces In patient’s most (GM-CSF), cultured fusion and monocytes a acid monocytes to which protein this containing prostate peripheral is cytokine undergo dendritic are factor maturation with granulocyte–macrophage by colony-stimulating the monocyte-derived phosphatase from to cancers, (PAP), extracted antigen blood antigen. immune to response resulting the into PAP induce cells an patient The are specific the to reinfused by 22% a This relative death survival months improved group. treatment risk of the 4 about by placebo and reduced to cells clinical cells include or the antigen as encoding apoptotic derived DNA the dendritic antigens. tumor tumor with use necrotic from cells, of tumor of trials sources vivo Other loading with ex in or and mRNA methods

existing to immune responses tumors. can Checkpoint 16-19 blockade augment

strengthen against immunogenic, relieving tumor the immune the by mechanisms tumor approaches: by responses. making these two to or by of attempt Other normal that approaches itself the tumor to regulate responses inhibitory one natural a immunotherapy more tumor these T of co-stimulatory by inducing kind of explored has tumor-specific using as B7 naive cells. approach first activate cells been molecules, The molecules, on and cells expression to such the then tumor-proximal may (GM-CSF) with the of monocytes dendritic in be factor into the Similarly, transfected induce cells. maturation granulocyte–macrophage colony-stimulating monocytederived to order cells encoding tumor gene tumor-specific have the from T local tumor, these lymph they the and activate nodes may Once cells and capture cells. migrate to differentiated antigens from approaches. emerged yet these therapies have approved No dendritic GM-CSF differentiated B7-transfected less cells responses. antitumor inducing in than the cells potent seem by monoctye-derived mice, In in may of molecules to priming only molecules cells. in addition by cross-presenting cells specific be may these This B7 expressed and T be dendritic act naive types because

blockade, to the is interfere called signals which Another checkpoint normal cancer with attempts lymphocytes. regulate inhibitory approach to that immunotherapy Immune negative by controlled immunological several are checkpoints. positive and responses professional cells earlier. controlled antigen-presenting checkpoint for cells dendritic by co-stimulatory cells, the expressed is B7 positive T receptors discussed A as as by such by inhibitory as are immunological CTLA-4 such PD-1. receptors Negative provided checkpoints and

molecules dendritic potentially autoreactive checkpoint before by cells cells to signal a a on can CTLA-4 signals T delivering and T overcome by that binding become negative B7 be critical for cells must imposes activated. other antibodies T-cell with therefore for Blocking CTLA-4 may activation. the lower threshold that cells, Some surface. CTLA-4 immune their also regulatory responses eliminating anti-CTLA-4 indicates which express by evidence T may antibodies on augment in the causes a reaction, are check Whatever normally autoimmune self-reactive of instead mice. cells seen to checkpoint as that absence and held multi-tissue this T become the mechanism, CTLA-4-deficient activated in produce

immune the responses against such system are of evident, relies not challenge presenting tumors, own Since in on checkpoint blockade therapy. immediately patient’s its effects a evaluating to clinical activation immediate drugs evaluating checkpoint the the Guidelines requires based effects effects T on blockade for responses radiation, inhibition tumor. then and whereas tumor-specific clinical expanding exert or within time that of were reversing cells their immune more chemotherapeutic for with therapies. of such Once used document could considered, combination possible it checkpoint blockade traditional trials issues to effects anticancer the clinical design in that became were

antibody for has ipilimumab in this and shown recently on the based to received approval Checkpoint be blockade treating metastatic now effective anti-CTLA-4 melanoma FDA been indication. melanoma. were recognizing increase the metastatic antigen with of number a with in cells NY-ESO-1, treated ipilimumab T melanoma expressed cancer-testis by who an showed Patients and activity induce patients exhibited appeared only long-term of response Overall to but responding patients. the to 15% ipilimumab, in remission about a treatment One cells. these in of increased agreement risk tolerance seemed patients in side-effect T an maintaining autoimmune role the phenomena, ipilimumab be CTLA-4 self-reactive in to of with of of

PD-L1 the involves receptor PD-1 ligands Another checkpoint its PD-L2. inhibitory and and renal variety of poor carcinoma, a PD-L1 PD-L1 human tumors; wide is associated expressed with a on prognosis. is expression cell in vivo cells growth transfection their to In in cytotoxic mice, the into by of T increased their PD-L1 tumor cells. and gene susceptibility reduced lysis encoding effects PD-L1. antibody by reversed were These an against be antibody treated a nearly patients, humans, shown effective rate. has to 30% pembrolizumab giving previously been anti-PD-1 the In melanoma response in a after use and for treatment with in ipilimumab, FDA-approved following It with or a BRAF with inhibitor. mutation ipilimumab B-raf patients is treatment and Hodgkin’s use treatment of is in is being considered lymphoma. nivolumab, for also Another treatment anti-PD-1 of metastatic for antibody, approved melanoma PD-L2. and are to using checkpoint blockade Ongoing PD-L1 clinical trials antibodies evaluating

Summary.

tumors modify growth. elicit their or immune Some specific suppress that responses passing stages evade editing. these process in several of or Tumors various a through ways, responses known suppress immunological as has now led new growth system in cancer the and the prevents Understanding immune to how promotes deployed clinic. therapies of cancer-causing for has effective development virus. brought vaccine example, the an specific human by of strains of papilloma possibility against The cancer, been eradicating cervical closer tumor developed used immunotherapy Monoclonal successfully for an as antibodies several been antibody lymphoma. anti-CD20 such treat in also have B-cell to cases, cytotoxic and to responses. also designed generate T-cell develop being peptides vaccines Attempts helper effective incorporating made to are treatment leukemia. engineered be CD19 to effective T can acute on for cells recognize CAR cells B expressed an lymphocytic strategies developed for immune CTLA-4 biologic approved related PD-1 for antitumor to stimulate such responses. and suppress strategies and have are responses mechanisms being melanoma, for that or been blockade Checkpoint targets treating inhibitory block other present that has cancer. antigens approved One treating tumor dendritic vaccine prostate cells been using for specificity in A anticancer cancer and advantage been of therapy power the traditional current take has other the to of treatments with trend immunotherapy immune system. to incorporate

Fighting infectious with diseases vaccination.

vaccination—have leading most decreased important markedly cause in diseases and of two health deaths contributions and public the infectious infectious The past disease, from to 100 yet the death years—sanitation worldwide. remain its Edward been by and has smallpox, the Pasteur’s announced eradication against the from respectively, triumph of global cholera, Louis grew vaccines greatest itself in of Organization Modern the World success Health and 1979. Jenner’s and immunology smallpox chicken polio now under global way. A well is to campaign eradicate HIV, tuberculosis, past the immunology, immunity, vaccines hope particularly tremendous reach. decade’s With understanding now is there in for great malaria, within major including other progress diseases, are innate that in and basic infectious move current a vaccine practice design; is of ‘pharmacology of art elevate to empiric of immune true scientists it drug system.’ to their the level to generation from The to vision the modern the of an

vaccination The immunity. protective goal of generation is of long-lasting the and of this immune Throughout protective immunity and we the generate pathogens how to and the in immunological collaborate the adaptive with memory. book, face infection illustrated innate systems eliminate have immunity infection sufficient Indeed, pathogen. often protective a a (but not to always) generate is single to struck plague in of recorded important Athens. the than successive during Peloponnesian relationship this War, ago two 2000 outbreaks Recognition of of was accounts years which more the Thucydides infection during people historian the susceptible during survived that noted who second. The outbreak Greek had were first not infection to

The protection pustule that was recognition dried of from of a of of by amount smallpox, small in followed type a practice to which was an used smallpox this long-lasting perhaps variolation a infection mild against against inoculation of relationship material the prompted then produce reinfection. was has its in introduction in been itself seems to 1000 recognized Jenner. medical been centuries years; variolation before more have West practiced (some familiar than many the Smallpox and it in the India and for to time China literature into 1400s–1500s), variolation drug not safety. of of ensued cases, modern 3% always criteria smallpox which meet mild: not fatal infection about would was However, after in to there similar smallpox—cowpox—seemed Jenner. some account a protected milkmaids from smallpox infection, before suggesting virus been there had tried and even historical inoculation It cowpox seems was that exposed is to recognition bovine that one achievement people disease, the of Jenner’s not vaccinated. previously only infection risk its was against provide whom variolation he realization had However, significant but without humans with protective experimental that the would smallpox of intentional proof the cowpox in by immunity the Pasteur, vacca, and He cow), Latin extended for term his (from in the process named honor, vaccination

Fig. vaccines 16.22 for needed. Diseases still effective are which but *Current vaccines countries; being their measles difficult tropical is stability use makes which improved. heat effective are in heat-sensitive, the most data recent available are (2014). Mortality estimated figures 2000–2012. Global Health Estimates Health Organization, 2014. World June

agents. against of other stimulation the infectious to protection a are a natural subcutaneous establishes not and brief Humans cowpox, host only limited which infection. of But disease. smallpox stimulate contains thereby human cowpox against immune cross-reacts that protection the the response confers and that with antigens antigens virus an which related the century, 20th is both to virus origin vaccinia Since early whose virus, vaccinate been is cowpox used and obscure. but to the against smallpox has smallpox,

the of neutralizing protection many As we vaccines see, formation offer antibodies. will by inducing current may statement are be also for vaccines However, sufficient hidden tautology; protection. are antibodies effective pathogens for which that which current contains pathogens for a pathogens—malaria, several For HIV—even major and protective. fully robust is a antibody not tuberculosis, response requires additional are efficiently generation effector vaccine which pathogens these of strong generated elimination by cell-mediated as durable the current The of and such immunity, activities, technologies. not issues modern face These are that vaccine scientists. the

killed material 16-20 organisms. on or from be can pathogens attenuated based Vaccines

of empirical followed century approaches. the part in two the Vaccine 20th development early search attenuated for cause pathogenicity, first organisms would but the not protective with which immunity stimulate was disease. reduced The are mutations genetically in present into recombinant organism introduced approach by the desirable This the continues the design DNA which attenuated pathogens with technologies. into of are to in future malaria, idea vaccines currently for and pathogens, as for which This influenza the may for being designing such important unavailable, be vaccines HIV. important applied is and

organisms. approach as second development vaccines killed of the organisms The on be based effective components live would on that organisms of purified as and, subsequently, whole was including desirable Killed infection lethal can vaccinia, immunosuppressed because vaccine, any live people. vaccines were systemic in cause purified Evolving described antigens, (see this influenzae on 16-27). from conjugation vaccines of the based approach for were Haemophilus as Section continues as peptide This to sensors with cells ligands activate (see adjuvants Section with identify TLRs responses simple antigens. immunogenetics’ or the enhance and use 16-15) for antigens of that candidate innate to to other ‘reverse approach strategies addition T to

and be now such the immunized against most all potentially to with United is important considered several safe states children Immunization so diseases. require that so in States approaches deadly tetanus from Corynebacterium polio, viral vaccines against which used. measles, include inactivated prepared respective live-attenuated the which mumps, cough composed diphtheria vaccines (caused diseases toxoids whooping Clostridium Bordetella by the tetani), used, are the as are pertussis), for diphtheriae), and by or (caused of bacteria These (caused for by well toxins and as More rotaviruses, agents a of has of infection against a for against as by Section vaccine preventing HPV two (HiB), the well influenzae for 16-18, described type vaccine cancer. as b caused one cervical protection causative as available recently, vaccines childhood become in and, meningitis, for diarrhea H. Most children to the year life. of first within are given vaccines are 1 (MMR), the measles, between of usually mumps, against and against (varicella), years. vaccines influenza, ages chickenpox The against given 2 recommended, rubella and and when

for Impressive we these many accomplishments are, which still vaccines (Fig. there lack diseases effective are as 16.22). recurrent. seem chronic natural infection or generate infections become and not pathogens, protective many to does immunity, For more as pathogen, such tuberculosis, instead provide many to to cell-mediated full still limiting the and insufficient of to alone important be are insufficient malaria, type, to and immunity reinfection prevent infections immunity. is HIV, pathogen, this seems and eliminate antibodies In in the but to does absence the rather that immune clear of the response the reinfection. this the problem, It not an pathogen is prevent not but eliminate is or pathogen, pathogenesis, that response

obstacle problems prevent still from against that developed in such developing can can in use used economic measles effectively vaccine be its and countries, is widespread as even technical where Another mortality these a is high. countries, that diseases when countries. and of significant deployment can to poorer in costs simple use existing example, storage the barriers For vaccines be of rational host the more approach detailed important pathogenicity, regulation understanding the and response to of Tand immune a of protective analysis responses. the an on based pathogenic effective to shift vaccines of goal system B-lymphocyte an molecular Therefore, understanding saw century to of remains latter immunology, half of development 20th and a the of therefore a the the of organisms, microbial generate

caused damage pathogen infection. neutralize the stop toxins that effective Most vaccines that generate prevent antibodies by and the or 16-21

Although inducing antibodies immunity requirements currently vaccines infecting for effective against the vary of nature the the organism, by many generating pathogen. the protective work with For immunity. antibodies organisms provide extracellular pathogens, including viruses, and many can protective require by for all mediated This additional case CD8 pathogens, those such is cell-mediated the immune not cells. as T responses may unfortunately; some

damage reinfection to by altogether. time against microorganisms the the caused preexisting requires some the the or prevent immunity protective infection, by Effective the of at of either antibody pathogen to presence prevent pathogen case tetanus and manifestations illustrated Fig. are vaccines to infection powerful due clinical (see extremely effects is the of diphtheria, whose of exotoxins first against The by 10.31). necessary antibody diseases. against a these exotoxin provide the against to is Preexisting defense protected Indeed, vaccination amount consequently, tetanus the that is lead to survivors subsequent so response; tiny exotoxin tetanus to require the the risk even disease that protective can immune against insufficient cause of powerful of a be may to be attack.

time can by which viral antibodies protect of certain preventing infections. the case a in as way pathogen, same is The second by in infection second the infection, first cells place. by are cells virus during antibodies able to kill able cells infected an in already of While T the prevent to infection CD8 virally are the is called action This neutralization. pathogen activity and of its a phagocytic the cells. The complement, affinity, may of its to isotype ability on depend neutralize subclass, antibody an polio T virus, are easily within infects entering required the by For host controlled against period is intracellular has the infection lymphocytes once critical preexisting short example, antibodies established. not a been cells which after body to and protect of a seasonal influenza. chance by strain Vaccines the infection second same of the same manner, reduce provide influenza that protection in by this against antibodies inducing virus not prevent neutralize this can and always vaccination an or of virus produced antibodies further infection, spread infection For but is viruses, by case. the by the many the viral to despite can to most of generation these epitopes, neutralize bind antibodies of surface antibodies that infection, In the HIV fail virus. challenge most a for HIV presenting on addition, design. neutralize or clades, all based effective vaccine and different has vaccines do HIV that many strains, antibodies In clades, proteins not induce previously a may with crossclade some suggests after However, vaccinated boosting that activity. subjects 5–7 protein clinical antibodies immunization years induce with trial recent

of agents to responses confer involve infectious if these some antibodies only epitopes, usually multiple antibodies, Immune and protection. at any, directed recognized The epitopes also the can the particular nature response. T-cell of affect be signals, neutralization. provide that isotype for activating Section antigen-specific B T cells cells may described in switching which to affinity linked and 10-2, and maturation mutually recognition, leading In required we the typically in fact that be protein that that epitope design. T recognized within by T-cell appropriate a B process presented epitope cells by and must B epitope cells, cell, vaccine be be an region the the contained peptide This requires of for the modern considered by vigorous thus Indeed, neutralizing induces elicit causes syncytial antibodies to without a with but protection. predominant epitope recognized respiratory T response after and pathology fails inflammatory cells virus the vaccination

Effective and induce while long-lasting vaccines 16-22 protection being must inexpensive. safe

A addition to in features its vaccine to successful response protective possess ability (Fig. immune a provoke several must 16.23). safe. it must First, be prevent. the is or to given that designed of to are whom likely huge few the vaccine even numbers of be catch, people, Vaccines disease relatively of, die to sometimes must is even means toxicity a of low unacceptable. This that level must very vaccine it Second, given. able protective to to in immunity of produce is proportion whom a people the be the high populations, countries dispersed must successful ‘booster’ give where rural immunological vaccinations in vaccine poorer generate a regular to it to long-lived impracticable is Third, particularly memory. B T and lymphocytes. the that prime means both This must vaccine cheap be to are if to be Fourth, they vaccines large very populations. must administered cost-effective this cost one most health care, the rises. measures per Vaccines of in benefit dose as eroded are is the but

general population. is that an on ‘herd of the confers benefit immunity’ vaccination program Another effective it the the reduces transmission members that population, natural of individuals of of decreases lowering susceptible population vaccination By and of infected the a number of infection. the reservoir so in probability will decreased. pathogen of protected encountering is members the be Thus, unvaccinated even chance individual because their of population; around at herd is and high within only seen can is levels relatively vaccination level for be the this mumps, the effect However, below estimated necessary epidemics 80%, sporadic occur. immunity to a level marked short than in mumps combined Kingdom in measles/ of variable This the in result adults the in that MMR, use time. a at is rubella supply a rather mid-1990s in vaccine of illustrated as increase by as combined in was the the 2004-2005 a young United the vaccine

can and ‘killed’ Live-attenuated the viral made by technology. safer 16-23 potent than more recombinant be vaccines vaccines DNA are of use usually

or vaccines live inactivated antiviral attenuated Most currently use consist of in viruses. either or replicate. to viruses so Inactivated, that are viral vaccines ‘killed,’ consist unable they of treated so in by class are the viruses proteins I antigens MHC viral Inactivated presented cytosol infected from peptides therefore of produce cells, molecules. not the cannot vaccines. efficiently cells needed T virus are CD8 nor neither Thus, with generated killed more a mechanisms, cells Live-attenuated effector cytotoxic CD4 they cells. are T viral elicit number including T and far potent: CD8 greater of activation vaccines generally the of for vaccine’s effect. is response, the a shaping in CD4 protective which important help cells subsequent T antibody under protective infection while is itself to and, memory. contribute by protection virus CD8 Cytotoxic provide cells if way, the T may maintained, vaccines the mumps, viral and Attenuated include routine varicella. for use measles, in vaccines rubella, polio, childhood that live include Other use fever for in for (vaccinia), are high-risk circumstances special licensed and or virus. vaccines poxvirus influenza, viral attenuated yellow populations

cells. Traditionally, is virus by cultured attenuation growing the in achieved less grow to (Fig. are and, the cells selection, Viruses of able cells nonhuman preferential in for course in usually in human selected become growth 16.24). these but human poorly replicate hosts, induce immunity in not strains they disease. attenuated Because of strain by virus virus be encoding mutations. a strains of to series contain several it further pathogenic might possible genes attenuated multiple mutations their in a for Although reemerge proteins, 7429 Sabin vaccine wild-type strain of For differs type 3 nucleotides. the a only 10 polio from strain progenitor example, at occur, of On extremely in the can causing paralytic recipient. disease reversion unfortunate a neurovirulent occasions, to the strain vaccine rare

as often risks Attenuated particular they immunodeficient infections. virulent to viral vaccines recipients, behave can also pose opportunistic in whom fatal to attenuated are infants gut, paralytic diagnosed in associated been a of have their the polio replication gut uncontrolled cannot an who are inherited before the increased is that disease. chance the and virus live risk clear because immunoglobulin deficiencies therefore with lead Immunodeficient there virulent and vaccinated virus mutations the from virus at with they to the will virus revert form their continuing

empirical approach two but be might approaches that use is DNA by new superseded still use An technology. in to recombinant attenuation is the specific mutagenesis vitro of One genes. and in viral isolation mutated genes a virus used wild-type genes this in and replace genome, the to The reconstituted are

Fig. by for it selecting cells. attenuated in growth a in until are cells different nonhuman 16.24 poorly traditionally only grows in human of species, Viruses virus, produce To cells. an attenuated isolated result by a cells. a first growing it cultured human virus adaptation of be The is the mutation, in combination must usually several of point mutations. growth itself; made attenuated The the vaccine, difficult human viral example, which stock the the cause is cultured some was an attenuation. in cells critical to adaptation It for rubella of attenuation of to in in usually mutations are can genome to in tell way. in the will virus grow this human host attenuated An poorly will In virus growth then not disease. to the but immunity therefore general, produce however, adapted is and

avirulent. Resulting viable, immunogenic virus is but virulence receptor-binding Isolate protein It vaccine gene virulence Delete virus proteins core virulence Mutate as can a be used pathogenic virulence gene Isolate gene

Fig. rapidly DNA with and techniques. more achieved 16.25 reliably recombinant be Attenuation can growth or this gene panel) (right immunogenicity If can lower virulence multiply that in either for (left can be or be mutated but by panel) recombinant required gene identified, lower from virus DNA using deleted techniques. not the genome a is for the a as (nonpathogenic) creates vaccine. procedure used that This an avirulent be virus can The virulence gene very to mutations revert are large, so in usually to it type. the difficult for is that the wild the virus

used vaccine then be a deliberately (Fig. virus can attenuated as 16.25). advantage engineered impossible. reversion of be approach The mutations virtually this to is so can that type is that wild

be Such live an vaccines. influenza developing might useful approach in predominantly antigenic because thus times, immune same influenza host it undergoes Chapter in shift original and several virus the the reinfect As 13, the can described escapes response. is with is in of and weak protection subtype but by A influenza conferred previous heterosubtypic called children, different in adults, observed immunity. a infections not vaccination approach is the virus. strains vaccine killed to use current influenza virus to prevalent annually that is a of against on basis reformulated of The the illness vaccine healthy in moderately adults. mortality people reducing is effective, in and elderly The organism would an attenuated prevalent ideal vaccine virus the live that matched influenza strain. be The first by of protein, encoding This a gene into the mutations could attenuating polymerase PB2. series introducing created viral a be neuraminidase in relevant segment gene strain. could epidemic be virus carrying or the attenuated the the and virus current from hemagglutinin then the gene mutated of The a antigen substituted for variants wild-type pandemic be of that as the can the hemagglutinin and could vaccine. humans in Alternatively, block neutralizing antibodies generated domain a broadly used be universal receptor-binding strain. attention Public the flu possibility directed been has toward the avian by of caused H5N1 a pandemic flu recently however, would associated rate; mortality human-to-human if with transmission only is could This a pandemic a humans occur. occur birds high between and strain and passed can be used if existing introduce beforehand occurred, recombine would that give influenza it to because viruses. with only be vaccine new A virus genes live-attenuated might a would pandemic influenza

parasites (GAPs). attenuated genetically

bacterial Similar been vaccine development. have approaches used for is children, most an adult The of tuberculosis protective is in at of that example BCG, quite attenuated vaccine but protecting serious pulmonary which against tuberculosis. effective against disseminated important not is laboratory current the of at bovis BCG beginning vaccine, the from The the pathogenic century. passaged which of a used in isolate widely a obtained the 20th remains world, vaccine most and was Mycobacterium in BCG evolved. several of Since have then, genetically diverse strains protection vaccine Malawi, in is 50–80% level such as the ranging by The BCG afforded the of in some to UK. countries, none variable, extremely from

killers worldwide, for there that remains of the tuberculosis an a is urgent vaccine. Considering biggest new need one I (rBCG) recombinant BCG clinical Two recently passed individuals vaccines infection Phase intended trials. prevent to in unexposed greater overexpress an immunodominant to human was toward specificity tuberculosis, M. pathogen. to One engender of engineered the antigen MHC allow antigens passage stimulating class second expresses and the (see monocytogenes cross-presentation cytotoxic on BCG-specific The BCG cells. from to phagosomes Section of protein the cytoplasm induce 6-5) molecules, from thereby I into T L. pore-forming listeriolysin the

to used similar generate vaccines A approach for malaria. being is new stages selectively malaria, mosquito’s they different are sporozoites in first gland, human within that for major of genes fatal of cause become where identified expressed of salivary Analysis the falciparum, the infectious Plasmodium

Fig. of be protective disruption targeted parasites sporozoites vaccines as key to attenuated provide example, 16.26 [for engineered p52 with Genetically immunity. live can genes in infected mosquito early Top to establish or the infection wild-type carried and transmitted of liver. the sporozoites Plasmodium bloodstream uis3 the and enter an the are (p52–/p36–), circulate panel: a sporozoites bloodstream p36 mimic an (uis3–)], in bite cannot and productive the but through infection the do, however, hepatocytes. they produce an where mice infect The liver, and the response killing protected merozoites, by the of wild-type releasing against are Each cell infected sporozoites immune against in sporozoite subsequent sporozoites. infection a thousands and liver, the multiplies in infection. next stage the immunized in Bottom panels: mice with hepatocytes. yet P. in genes inducing of by immune of falciparum. falciparum protected infection subsequent an two mice, capable Deletion rendered infection such sporozoites from establishing P. of the blood-stage incapable that from response a wild-type genome mice on (Fig. and cell-mediated against dependent CD8 for T to on is protection protection This some this that important cells, extent immunity IFN-γ, indicating was parasite 16.26). of generate inducing highlights This immunity. the again capable are that strong able to of being vaccines once importance cell-mediated

an important route vaccination of The is determinant 16-25 success. of

vaccination the of defense of the host induces point infectious The at agent. ideal entry Stimulation through for therefore many immunity is that an goal the enter of surfaces. mucosal against mucosal important organisms vaccination vaccines injection. by are most given Still, disadvantages. several This has route uptake, and vaccine requiring are injector. they are painful a expensive, and unpopular, trained and reducing needles, syringes, Injections laborious. Mass injection is vaccination by which also of is directed. the it the entry usual There injection pathogens does response effective not the immunological of of mimic majority against may an the stimulating drawback be appropriate way route of most is vaccination immune not because that

through mucosal the body surfaces surfaces. important mucosal enter or Many pathogens infect include Examples respiratory microorganisms such as

coli, cholerae, such Salmonella Vibrio typhi, enteropathogenic rhinoviruses, influenza and and viruses, Shigella. pertussis, B. and enteric as microorganisms Escherichia infection. tract mucosal the antibodies, influenza virus vaccine more control against which respiratory live-attenuated than Intranasally antibodies administered are of systemic effective induces upper in effective However, are to tract morbidity induced is this the which disease, controlling by severe the and in lower disease. mortality antibodies systemic responsible injection respiratory due for of not disease influenza goal prevent any realistic fact a accept illness that vaccine will the the mild lower tract but respiratory Thus, is be to pandemic prevented.

vaccines. approach the the live-attenuated by effectiveness polio illustrated The power of is of mucosal highly polio virus is consists oral attenuated three of and The Sabin immunogenic. polio vaccine strains as Moreover, by individual transmitted can the just other and by pools itself from be vaccine hygiene, one failures swimming be fecal fecal–oral contamination can of polio to another the route. transmitted public of with mucosal systemic response. Infection and powerful Salmonella stimulates immune likewise a

food-borne tolerance, route 12). Chapter given important to in the of antigens and oral soluble presented results is load protein the antigens (see of which tract enormous Presentation respiratory by the and often airborne gut eliminates as to by mucosal cholera, such immune route, Nonetheless, responds oral system infections the pertussis, enter polio. and that and the mucosal interest. The that these are therefore from stimulate responses proteins microorganisms of special immune to of being proteases. cells immunogenic toxins proteins resistant bacterial group at One to that surfaces property of have is and a powerfully of mucosal the group binding eukaryotic practical is proteins, the finding these that such importance recent A of certain as of potential

to toxin even heat-labile coli the when properties. that eliminate toxin, are engineered has properties been pertussis molecule adjuvant its retained toxic E. have parent and vaccines. or be nasal molecules as oral adjuvants can for These used tetanus of the in development nasal of mice, toxoid challenge of insufflation resulted together with either these toxins against mutant protection toxin. tetanus lethal with In

pertussis illustrates of the importance vaccination of perceived 16-26 safety Bordetella vaccine. a the

the causes illustrates vaccines effective as attenuated of of pertussis, an developing against disseminating challenges acellular live public vaccination over the The and as of cough, bacterium whooping the Bordetella well conjugate history appeal that vaccine, organisms. the At century, 0.5% children age beginning the killed of 5 about whooping under American cough the of of 20th years. Faroe In the early cell effect. of whole Islands bacterial on a killed, provided trial of protective vaccine 1930s, a a the evidence cases in 1940s per during the 100,000 the resulted than of a vaccine 200 and infection tetanus DTP of fewer rate the whole-cell States, In in diphtheria vaccine) annual toxoids a 2 in combination use systematic United population. the from with (the decline to the First age months. vaccination typically with given at of DTP was 3

the causes redness, high injection; is the site pertussis commonly, Whole-cell persistent swelling at vaccination followed less crying. pain, vaccine typically temperature and and side-effects, of by fits short-lived or sleepiness ensue. a Very floppy and a rarely, state unresponsive developed anecdotal very to pertussis several encephalitis the rarely that follow leading observations damage vaccination. brain concern 1970s, During might after irreversible widespread children and no were reported. given and fewer cough Japan, pertussis 300 whooping than in the of 85% deaths vaccine, cases about were 1972, In of age and Japan years temporarily with of the deaths vaccination in at was the months. DTP of at use reintroduced after a suspended first two rather 2 1975, in of than As then 3 result vaccination cases 1979, In 41 13,000 there about whooping and deaths. were of cough injury. is brain damage and causes The pertussis been that not rarely vaccine studied a that very primary expert is of cause brain extensively, vaccine pertussis possibility has severe consensus is from whooping there doubt There is greater the that than from cough vaccine. morbidity no

The vaccination be to might whole-cell develop powerful pertussis and safer vaccines. perception public that medical provided incentive pertussis unsafe a to antigens. pertussis of pertussis Study induced B. the response components against filamentous natural toxin, four antibodies hemagglutinin, the of bacterium— showed infection immune that and fimbrial pertactin, of form challenge pertussis. Immunization with with antigens them mice in protected purified these against This engineering hydrogen acellular toxoid—that with or has inactivated chemical vaccines, formaldehyde, toxin the by purified example of to led is, the all development toxin. of pertussis treatment, peroxide genetic which or pertussis recently contain of for more by any hemagglutinin, filamentous Some antigens, in contain or either three. also pertussis alone vaccines fimbrial pertactin, combination and/or the of that minor these common vaccine as effective probably are lacking whole-cell evidence its pertussis Current as side-effects. vaccines while shows The vaccine however, acellular expensive, thus countries. in is poorer its more restricting use

but third, profession public vaccine vaccines and history the as vaccines and safer the protective and the of extremely be The to safe than of to be can that, careful acellular the study nature side-effects; must effective. response vaccination are whole-cell second, that lead must first free safe; still vaccines and of illustrates perceive foremost, immune pertussis medical of Still, about concerns vaccination remain public high. live-attenuated fears autism MMR the to a peak of of link saw and vaccine uptake England vaccine 84% in the a combined 92% between of in in 2001–2002. Unwarranted 1995–1996 fall from MMR of children Small London the vaccine to of clustered maintaining mumps herd importance outbreaks and of uptake immunity. maintain 2002 in since high of illustrate measles

been as recognition B developed a cells. result between have T Conjugate and vaccines linked 16-27 of

influenzae, and pneumoniae the speciesand for outer polysaccharides Many bacterium. strains composed bacteria, that of (pneumococcus), particular Neisseria have type-specific meningitidis of Streptococcus H. including (meningococcus), an capsule are with coat opsonization is The defense these of antibody. polysaccharide against microorganisms most effective the to these against bacteria. elicit The the vaccination capsules therefore the of of antibodies organisms is polysaccharide aim for from and a conjugate participation of fact development cells, the However, types made constituent acellular antibody single this the vaccines has of (Fig. response generation of an of effective be since of requires cannot to effective isolated led a several microorganism, vaccines 16.27).

harvested antigens vaccines. they (see be used on are polysaccharides can they be Section 10-1), can and, from own medium bacterial Capsular because as their T-cell-independent growth children age young However, the under

Fig. responses linked advantage against antigens. 16.27 B-cell boost take of recognition polysaccharide Conjugate vaccines to Hib type toxoid the influenzae is conjugate tetanus a of The polysaccharide against and bacterial vaccine Haemophilus protein. b B whole on and and binds the then class molecules. surface toxoid-derived displays cell recognizes II conjugate, MHC the degrades The and internalizes polysaccharide, peptides the T and the B-cell antibody. toxoid B cell to on in generated vaccination cells Helper against produce anti-polysaccharide earlier complex the recognize surface the activate to response infection type then antibody This b. against protect H. with influenzae can

Immune Chapter 16: of Manipulation the Response

Fig. and group meningococcal Neisseria group C (meningococcus) in of meningitidis and England group C on of vaccination B the 16.28 cases disease effect The Wales. of number against almost Meningococcal infection 5 with all the C a accounting the B 100,000 cases. people roughly UK, year in for in groups meningococci and affects cases. the of disease, about common vaccine, C of introduction disease group most of 40% for the the was second meningococcal Before accounting cause meningitis C less B cases. 10% for accounting disease now accounts more disease 80% than for of cases, group of than Group with C significant of C in the group in the the a After of there decrease disease cases age all vaccine, groups. number laboratory-confirmed introduction was of more than in of impact groups, the with groups. these was reductions immunized in 90% greatest The the in suggesting impact has An reduction seen this been age of immunity unimmunized a has 70%, about vaccine effect. herd that with also had a groups,

of cases Number

Number and effectively vaccinated (PS) of 2 be responses antibody good vaccines. cases make years cannot of T-cell-independent polysaccharide cannot with problem of way overcoming is this carriers polysaccharides to efficient to chemically protein (see bacterial Fig. An conjugate 16.27). antibody antigen-specific antipolysaccharide cells, into converting that This protein response can recognized peptides T carrier T-cell-dependent by a T-cell-independent be thus provides response. a Using type meningitis, an widely infections this meningitidis and serogroup important developed against cause conjugate N. and vaccines C, cause of an important chest approach, applied. H. b, and these childhood meningitis, now are against various serious been have of influenzae in success the United in of vaccine the The Fig. latter Kingdom illustrated is vaccine. B, with of meningitis there incidence which 16.28, comparison meningitis is markedly no reduced in currently that against been has which C shows the B to meningitis Endemic the B due B serogroup so is capsular would ideal strains, group an vaccine polysaccharide. target diverse is and these of is to poorly to antigens. human polysaccharides identical some polysialyl tolerance cells, due self on polysaccharide B Unfortunately, immunogenic group immunity a has modify instead generally against to conjugate chemically against direct vaccine endemic in noncapsular to vaccine will but development for polysaccharide which use focus disease. been B strategies group B a have the meningococcal be major in considered, effective antigens, Some been group

targeted they protective must to be appropriate and adjuvants effective. be cell can cells require 16-28 the and Peptide-based elicit compartment but immunity, to vaccines

peptide does attenuated, killed strategy the require identifies that Another T-cell epitopes immunity. or vaccine-development whole not protective the that stimulate organism, whether sequence. used immunogenetic is from in peptides predict alternatively, immunity can potential to 16-15) proteins peptide approach systematically reverse ability tested; Section ways: peptides from be (see one, genome a their are two protective can and epitopes stimulate be a identified Candidate overlapping synthesized immunogenic in to approach has genome. malaria the the using applied sequence complete to falciparum of The by been latter Plasmodium complication point fatal, the by a molecule of was class human cerebral association but and HLA-B53 between relatively starting The to falciparum. P. infrequent, usually the resistance MHC malaria, infection I peptides are thought against HLA-B53 it was malaria protect cytotoxic lymphocytes. present might that It T activating naive could cerebral particularly good because at that their eluted second nine contain from the amino acids. proline of frequently Peptides HLA-B53 as a hepatocyte P. reverse phase infection—an identified four response. of analysis in immune to early effective this expressed important target of proteins of in basis infection candidate of from an On phase the peptides information, protective falciparum the genetic in be has cells One peptide a by stage bound for been the use be useful candidate vaccination. shown to recognized cytotoxic T liver from may HLA-B53 peptides, to and when of antigen-1,

several although vaccines, promising, have drawbacks. Peptide-based a population. the not bind particular may the peptide First, MHC all present in molecules to MHC, humans highly coverage be peptides are would a the most of polymorphic Because individuals. for of large panel protective in needed of some molecules short occur antigen peptides MHC direct Second, without on exchange can processing. physiological in stimulating If tolerance than T induce directly peptides rather required molecules may cells than antigenic immunity. MHC cells, the load onto dendritic other on cells this for Section delivered molecules to but efficiently II dendritic processed in synthetic loaded class (see peptides and MHC require by are be of types proteins exogenous vaccine specific 6-5). molecules, a class cells onto by I presentation Third, MHC ‘cross-presentation’ vaccines may peptide-based to cells enhance Directing such vaccine efficacy.

in already peptide-based shown Recent clinical trials. human promise vaccines have human oil-in-water early caused HPV-16—E6 entire Patients of delivered papilloma the were vulvar of treated of adjuvant. cancer of E7—and with two peptides oncoproteins by length (HPV), covering and virus an in a vaccine established an as intraepithelial long emulsion neoplasia, consisting form with vulvar amino be using may acids delivered epitopes candidate multiple be peptide long MHC by length, peptides, very presented By can in also that around 100 different alleles. be surfaces onto molecules. These loaded seem processing to order cell class require be peptides I direct for to by dendritic peptides cells on and too exchange long MHC in with the correlated treated with half in that complete and showed remission one-quarter of in of patients patients, enhanced clinical of about cell-mediated responses induced immunity. clinical vaccine the evidence vitro This significant

Adjuvants vaccines, of approved few 16-29 for use are enhancing in for important but humans. the are immunogenicity

based immunity. peptides on how purified mimic components to Vaccines infections require or additional activate proteins real immunogenicity A-41). defined known that of are as enhance antigens I, Such Appendix as (see are components the vaccine which substances Section of a adjuvants, inorganic bind form toxoid tetanus gels polyvalently and is For in immunogenic the adjuvants, that ionic vaccines in aluminum (alum) of by of to absence tetanus the the contain not noncrystalline example, so salts toxoid toxoid interactions. its diphtheria as two properties has also mixed protects toxoid whooping adjuvant with right an for adjuvant given as but and, in tetanus Pertussis when own toxin the cough toxoids, only and a not acts additional other toxoids. against makes DTP to of in up This life. the year mixture infants the first given vaccine triple

The approved the approved antigenic of adjuvants for vaccine their own; which not use are in they only components specific on a are in context formulated. they in vaccine are and the the alum some United States human trials. by are clinical for only vaccines, is in although present, that adjuvant–vaccine approved the marketed use At other FDA adjuvant is combinations the in undergoing hydroxide most which for and is aluminum aluminum adjuvants. frequently of are as name the inorganic certain Alum common salts, used phosphate aluminum influenza is MF-59 in adjuvants, a adjuvant is vaccine undergoing to called in alum evaluation Europe, trials. oil emulsion the addition in an an used formulation of and clinical (squalene)-in-water as In response. adaptive in immune as reactions the inflammatory seems immune Section alum system’s an adjuvant for by sensor mechanisms, 3-9, the innate stimulating NLRP3, one As thus are effective the described act that we a activating prerequisite bacterial and inflammasome an to of

but in use not are approved experimentally widely other animals used Several adjuvants for humans. in are bacteria, are of of walls. constituents particularly cell Many of sterile these their Freund’s is mycobacteria. adjuvant complete an killed containing oil-in-water emulsion and the the much (TDM) dipeptide found peptidoglycan dimycolate trehalose The organism. walls muramyl mycobacterial killed of adjuvant of whole activity in contain glycolipid the cell proteins, and Other bacterial bacterial heat-shock killed pertussis, bacterial polysaccharides, include B. DNA. bacterial adjuvants of humans. marked inflammation Many for for so cause adjuvants these and use in not vaccines are quite suitable

to NLRP3 family work the APCs, adjuvants Many the sensor such activating TLRs response. 3), initiate and pathways viral innate triggering to as adaptive of receptor Chapter thereby proteins in immune (see seem and NOD-like bacterial and an via by them its adjuvant (LPS) has is The its TLR-4 use effects, lipopolysaccharide toxicity. by but limited agonist question effects. whether can separated that amounts the injected and adjuvant of inflammation its a shock induce LPS effect toxic raising state Gram-negative sepsis, systemic mimics its of Small be from can TLR-4 LPS. toxicity achieves lower retaining A, partly and ligand, than LPS an lipid derivative but Monophosphoryl much being this, with adjuvant effects associated which an Both small-molecule human is adjuvant neither activates TLR-9, TLR-7 unmethylated a acts DNA, can experimentally, provide activity in agonist, as vaccines. drug as that but a approved adjuvant imiquimod, CpG and

16-30 immunity vaccination. DNA-based induced be by Protective can

gene immune in therapy, bacterial response. used to an plasmids for express Surprisingly, were stimulate vivo were proteins some to when found DNA it a that responses injected Later, mice, subsequent could from intramuscularly that live found infection protect in was viral virus. immunogen, T against cytotoxic the induced encoding cells when antibody and peptides, of it tissue, stretch of the single infection. This a not effective, is damage only because the gene safe uses muscle does of or and, not a microbial response encoding active and to does sets carry seem antigenic DNA risk various in DNA termed can is carried ways. vaccination, out procedure be and This approaches, In one, gun, can but coated that so and a onto electroporation, metal some as administered are DNA minute be skin particles such gene muscle, by penetrate particles the underlying possible. potentially other also DNA vaccination is suitable immunization. stability, Because DNA’s of for mass is DNA-based with however, that vaccines, One comparatively they are weak. problem cytokines as in or genes makes GM-CSF much plasmids effective. antigens encoding more Mixing immunization such encode IL-12, that IL-23, with protective dendritic antigen transfected, is the T-cell that directly DNA produced but by CD8 cross-presentation cells are muscle, by skin as In antigen requires such vaccination, activation or of cells. the these how into Current best are to identifying approaches cell populations. DNA dendritic transfect influenza, infection, malaria, DNA cancer. being and breast in for tested HIV trials are human vaccines

checkpoint be chronic infections. blockade useful controlling may Vaccination in and existing 16-31

immune system in eliminate to of failure persists There which many chronic are the a of infection disease. diseases because invisible and that to and an which the be immune immune groups: response. in organism, eliminate system divided infections be immune evoke obvious a is those the those that fails can to to seem two response barely Such detectable there into

pathogenic often In for responsible effects. partly first the is the response the category, immune ova liver, Schistosoma hepatic by to TH2-type the associated of and levels to mansoni by the high in Infection harmful response tissue eosinophilia, a characterized fibrotic circulating response, a with schistosome is and leading helminth IgE, powerful fibrosis. common not as also and they patients the species, because cause effectively Other in damage eliminated parasites, many immune response. Plasmodium by such Leishmania are to The causes tuberculosis formation agents TH1 also and cause these Fig. contain response granuloma of necrosis intracellular tissue leprosy but persistent infections a mycobacterial helps a (see and infection; 11.13).

or a carcinoma. B injury, and hepatitis resulting infections hepatitis eventual hepatitis commonly hepatic from and burden C viral viruses, hepatocellular are followed death in by from persistent Among in as with ongoing Infection an also seen have 13, immune we HIV, persists Chapter response. despite were preliminary the involving a from own cells patients’ HIV-infected marrow inactivated bone In chemically loaded dendritic patients, derived trial with HIV. patients and (Fig. After the associated cells, loaded was that with robust of a IFN-γ in IL-2 was observed production immunization HIV with to response the some T-cell 16.29). was patients Viral these reduced in load by 80%,

Fig. generates immunity. dendritic loaded substantially 16.29 and HIV with cells viral with Vaccination load T-cell reduces is red the represents (pink); load strong weak response treatment a who and Left and transient for panel: a durable shown response. bar made to individuals viral response. individuals interferon-γ strong weak Right production for CD4 and made who panel: IL-2 or T-cell a response the activity, T-cell production to The indicating cytokines, correlates treatment. of these with both

suppression 20,000 of weak half vaccination dendritic-cell 5 40,000 50,000 cytokine strong a 0 days 10,000 Percentage HIV-specifc for viremia 1 these HIV weak 0 the immune strong cells function and 112 more 30,000 response IFN-˜(after response and lasted Viral CD4 load for strong on response weak IL-2 Effect of of treatment) year. response production 2 virus patients 3 expressing of response almost in 4 than response of Nonetheless, not sufficient eliminate these were infection. the to responses HIV

infection agent system. the the immune infectious chronic immune response category to of is to invisibility the relative the fails which second clear of infection, predominantly the of the In viral, because latent is example venereally, good is virus which A frequently recurrent. 2, herpes which becomes simplex tissue, causes genital transmitted in herpes, and nerve type is cells. a ICP-47, this by the 6-3) and peptide seems in that viral (see infected to the invisibility into Section TAP to endoplasmic transport reticulum protein, be binds complex The virus caused inhibits of to immune are system Thus, MHC viral I the presented not molecules. class peptides by caused cell-mediated A this a by particularly response. evoke genital chronic response, category viruses very warts, infection papilloma example certain that similar of immune is in little showed of to previously, that a recent the discussed reducing associated infection the results HPV-16 with vaccines was in strength clinical viral effective 16-28). lesions and cell-mediated responses against As antigens, using HPV long-peptide (see eliminating immune the increasing trial Section of precancerous or in are responses positive These pathogens indication increasing to directed other at results effective. a vaccines may that cell-mediated similarly be

Summary.

the virtually immunology, greatest having arguably several of diseases. success eliminated is or eradicated human Vaccination single specificity the the immune system the manipulation of it natural is immune most successful far, because takes and advantage so inducibility. system’s of It vaccines. important lack that diseases effective remain But infectious human immunosuppressed individuals. microorganisms, are vaccines effective such some based are Most potentially to but risk on live attenuated vaccines and or carry lethal immunodeficient as use and being generate vaccines, tuberculosis. pathogens for genetically developed for malaria techniques attenuated particularly New are to based of microorganism, While many vaccines the current most toxins virus, it are components attenuated that are including live produces. vaccines on bacterial the of viral on based components protein. antigens, to do by in of can responses young be which immunity, the very Protective a not carbohydrate conjugation provoke children enhanced carbohydrate to lasting the in from particularly peptides, on stage be experimental beginning based emerging and are Vaccines peptides, tested are to long very humans. just responses. that on often that of immunogenicity are antigen-presenting the immune can for or directly vaccine’s adjuvants depends initiation necessary cells to indirectly, activate A help, sensors TLRs these ligands on other and for cells activate Adjuvants immune innate providing engaging the and by cells. antigen-presenting innate system oral immunity of mucosa. development vaccines important many the the that enter to particularly for The pathogens stimulating through is

Chapter 16. to Summary

desirable responses elicited. able challenges be to immune in system suppressed responses immune unwanted so control can is of great One future to the that be and the immunology immunity indiscriminately inherently on rely, to thus suppress flawed. and Current great suppressing of that drugs responses are methods a extent, adaptive unwanted the in seen an responses to responses possible it can system competence. and studying has immune We manipulate that sparing endogenous devise strategies in book suppress general that, specific these regulatory events, manner have while been own antigen-specific its by this immune to autoimmunity, emerged selectively organs. the that of the including to treatments, suppress responses to clinically or important antibodies, allergy, many lead therapies as rejection monoclonal grafted have New possible. strategies immune about we infectious tumors the better and against more becoming system agents, infection mobilize Similarly, understand cancer to and are as To the of what more immune human this, disease. system, induction learn the learned have to need about and to we to apply biology immunity we of achieve the and all

Questions.

Choice: the has following mechanism Which azathioprine? to immunomodulators of 16.1 similar Multiple a

A. Mycophenolate

Cyclophosphamide B.

Abatacept C.

respective following Match the action. 16.2 with Matching: antibodies immunomodulating mechanism their D. Rapamycin of

receptor have order a cells T-cell receptor antigen that are False: tumor-specific True in with or (CAR) retrovirally to a leukemia. 16.3 cells transduced Chimeric T treat been

Which is 16.4 statement Multiple Choice: false?

A. own vaccine antigen-loaded Provenge is T-cell the using patient’s prepared induce antitumor to The dendritic therapeutic cells responses.

B. vaccines these Clinical of cancers) were HPV18 (associated viruses. trials 100% cancers against caused cervical effective with in and HPV-16 of 70% cervical preventing by

C. vaccines source the of as use antigens. Cell-based a can patient’s tumor cancer binds immunogenicity with enhance adjuvants can CpG, to to TLR-7. these be In mixed which order as such

16.5 is of cancer checkpoint therapy? Which against following blockade treatments a Choice: the Multiple (One may more apply.) or

Ipilimumab antibody) A. (anti-CTLA-4

Trastuzumab B. antibody) (anti-HER-2/neu

C. Rituximab (anti-CD20 antibody)

Pembrolizumab (anti-PD-1 D. antibody)

other with 16.6 into reinfused cultured phosphatase can and antigen (patient’s receptor or cells T (CAR) acid prostatic complexes. Chimeric tumor False: antigen True E. cells target molecules GM-CSF dendritic besides patient) and recognize Sipuleucel-T peptide:MHC

(T), Matching: polysaccharide (K), (A), currently vaccines live-attenuated toxin-based killed as or conjugate the of organisms used (P). 16.7 Classify following the

A. Corynebacterium ___ diphtheriae

B. influenzae ___ H. type B

___ (MMR) Measles/mumps/rubella C.

___ (BCG) Calmette–Guérin Bacille D.

E. Influenza A ___ virus

Sabin exhibited and that polio are beneficial 16.8 Fill-in-the-Blanks: Vaccines phenomena many exploited. vaccine be can have ___ F. the when a antibody T-dependent conjugated desired, to For ensuring is response thus example, is it responses. phenomenon bacterial to exploit of ____________________, against antibody an polysaccharide protein a phenomenon _____________ in subtypes virus, a vaccines different immunity. against protect In of addition, case the called of as influenza, may individuals where is immunity ______ are enough people unvaccinated are even protected vaccinated, in a from indirectly infection. achieved, When population

main Explain the Answer: three peptide-based Short of vaccines. drawbacks 16.9

or routes of responses. vaccination 16.10 All identical immune elicit False: successfully virtually True

16.11 Matching: receptor stimulates. adjuvant to it immune the Match the

A. i. Alum TLR-9

ii. B. complete Freund’s adjuvant TLR-4

C. iii. Lipopolysaccharide NLRP3

iv. D. DNA NOD2

v. E. Imiquimod TLR-7/8

references. General

Kalos, Zhao, J.A., B.L., and C.H. M., Levine, June, Maus, M.V., Fraietta, Y., immunotherapy viruses. cancer or for : Adoptive Immunol. Annu Rev 2014, 32:189–225.

M.: effective molecular Feldmann, in into insights therapy. autoimmunity Translating Annu. Rev. Immunol. 27:1–27. 2009,

Cowman, Boddey, Vaughan, Kappe, S.H., A.M., and J.A., A.F. of this agenda. time is the research eradication now: in malaria That but an : was then 328:862–866. 2010, Science

Kaufmann, S.H. the strategies against : box. tuberculosis: vaccination thinking Future outside 2010, 33:567–577. Immunity

Allison, in and Checkpoint immunotherapy. K.S., J.P.: Korman, A.J., Peggs, cancer blockade Adv. Immunol. 90:297–339. 2006,

Section references.

are the genes. powerful Corticosteroids 16-1 many that anti-inflammatory transcription of alter drugs

E.: Castanas, and steroid Membrane signaling normal cells. receptor M., Kampa, and in neoplastic Mol. Cell. Endocrinol. 246:76–82. 2006,

mechanism Brink, immunosuppression. A.P., a Verhaar, T-cell D.W.: Hommes, Löwenberg, G.R., and signaling: den M., nongenomic for Glucocorticoid van Trends Mol. Med. 13:158–163. 2007,

and J.A. Cidlowski, T., Rhen, new old glucocorticoids— for drugs. Antiinflammatory mechanisms of action : N. Engl. Med. J. 2005, 353:1711–1723.

P.,J. Barnes, current Glucocorticosteroids: directions. : future and Br. J. Pharmacol. 163:29–43. 2011,

drugs have immunosuppression 16-2 serious and Cytotoxic cells killing side-effects. by cause dividing

Aarbakke, G.B. Janka-Schaub, Elion, G., J., and : pharmacology. and biology Thiopurine Pharmacol. Trends Sci. 18:3–7. 1997,

in of chronic preventing of allograft E.M.: mofetil Allison, and rejection. Eugui, Mechanisms action mycophenolate acute and A.C., 2005, Transplantation 802 Suppl. S181–S190. :

DNA mutagenic McGregor, J.M.,Walker, Perrett, generate Montaner, P., C.M., Zhang, UVA X., damage. B., Hanaoka, Y.Z., O’Donovan, and and C.A., P.: light Azathioprine F., oxidative Xu, Karran, Harwood, S.L., Science 309:1871–1874. 2005,

Taylor, Bradley, A.L., Watson, and J.A. C.J., of agents mechanisms in organ : efficacy. action solid transplantation: Immunosuppressive and therapeutic Crit. Rev. Oncol. Hematol. 56:23–46. 2005,

Zhu, Selective Cupps, L.P., differentiation activation, Fauci, and and human cells. G., A.S.: on B proliferation, of of T.R., effects therapy cyclophosphamide Whalen, Clin. J. Invest. 1987, 79:1082–1090.

interfere signaling effective A, rapamycin immunosuppressive agents T-cell tacrolimus, 16-3 inhibitors JAK and pathways. with are Cyclosporin various that

and Keller, S.A., R.: memory Larsen, T-cell Araki, K., Shaffer, C.P., Bachmann, differentiation. A.P., S., M.F., Gangappa, mTOR Ahmed, V.O., regulates CD8 Turner, 460:108–112. 2009, Nature

A., Battaglia, Stabilini, M.G. and Roncarolo, M., CD4+CD25+FoxP3+ regulatory Rapamycin selectively expands T cells. : 2005, 105:4743–4748. Blood

Herzenberg, Schreiber, B.E., Crabtree, Standaert, P.S., Bierer, L.A., and R.F., G., Mattila, S.L. S.J., Burakoff, distinct pathways immunophilin complexes lymphocytes : and FK506 in signal T an formed either inhibited transmission are between or rapamycin. Two by Proc. Acad. Natl Sci. USA 87:9231–9235. 1990,

Crabtree, G.R. through and signaling Generic specific Ca2+, NF-AT. : calcineurin, signals and outcomes: Cell 1999, 96:611–614.

Hall, and J.L., Crespo, M.N. action: TOR lessons and Elucidating from : signaling rapamycin Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 66:579–591. 2002,

Zwillich, K.S. C.A., Bradley, Schulze-Koops, Gruben, J., R, Kanik, Kremer, G.V., Cush, Fleischmann, Connell, S.H., J., Wallenstein, D., H., J.D., al. et in Placebo-controlled rheumatoid trial tofacitinib of monotherapy arthritis. : N. Engl. Med. J. 2012, 367:495–507.

of A., M., J.J.: kinases. Pesu, O'Shea, Laurence, and Therapeutic Chan, S.H., targeting G, Zwillich, Janus Kishore, N, Immunol. Rev. 2008, 223:132–142.

Antibodies subsets to molecules 16-4 inhibit lymphocyte to used lymphocyte against eliminate or function. cell-surface can be

and A., L., the Moine, Graca, dominant S.P., role tolerance: of Antibody-induced Waldmann, regulation. transplantation Cobbold, H.: Le Immunol. Res. 28:181–191. 2003,

Kuijpers, S.Q, T.W. Nagelkerke, and role receptors: all? Immunomodulation the : of action of by classic and after IVIg Fc-gamma mechanisms Front. Immunol. 2015, 5:674.

I, F.S., de Dekkers, Rispens, G., Geissler, Wuhrer, Nagelkerke, R., S.Q., Bovenkamp, Plomp, van Kustiawan, J., den T., M., Vidarsson, G., Berg, T.K. van macrophages. IVIg independent et is of Inhibition FcγRIIb FcγR-mediated IgG-Fc of by human phagocytosis and sialylation in al: 2014, 124:3709–3718. Blood

from concept clinic. and Hale, H., Waldmann, G.: to CAMPATH: Phil. Trans. Soc. R. Lond. 360:1707–1711. 2005, B

their reduce humans. to in be 16-5 can Antibodies immunogenicity engineered

and Park, S.J., Hong, Y., Kim, H.J. the for antibodies. Antibody engineering therapeutic : development of Mol. 20:17–29. Cell 2005,

Vitetta, L.M., and E.S. Liu, Pop, X.Y., Engineering : therapeutic antibodies. monoclonal Immunol. Rev. 222:9–27. 2008,

Ahmed, R., Capra, Wrammert, J.D., Smith, J., Garman, L., N.Y., Zheng, K., and Wilson, P.C. a vaccinating to monoclonal : specific of generation fully human Rapid antigen. antibodies Nat. 4:372–384. Protocols 2009,

of M.R., method Traggiai, Uematsu, Subbarao, from S., A.: An SARS Y., monoclonal make efficient potent memory Murphy, K., R., to B.R., L., antibodies coronavirus. B and cells: Gismondo, neutralization E., Kolesnikova, Becker, Rappuoli, Lanzavecchia, human Nat. Med. 10:871–875. 2004,

R.E., Winter, Griffiths, A.D., H.R. and G., Hawkins, Hoogenboom, by phage technology. Making antibodies : display Annu. Rev. Immunol. 1994, 12:433–455.

antibodies prevent allograft 16-6 used rejection. to be can Monoclonal

Kampen, R.L., Patterson, J.D., D.S., Fechner, Kirk, Berning, et N.B., Burkly, Jr, L.C., J.H., al. R.L., Batty, Germond, Baumgartner, K., A.D., Buchanan, R.E., prevents in antibody acute CD154 against with Treatment allograft : rejection monoclonal humanized renal primates. nonhuman Nat. Med. 1999, 5:686–693.

and Wells, Li, L.A., T-cell death transplantation tolerance. A.D.: Strom, Turka, T.B., and X.C., 14:407–416. 2001, Immunity

R.M., P.J., Carrington, Cowan, E.M., Londrigan, J.L., Lew,A.M. Brady, Sutherland, d’Apice,A.J.,O’Connell,P.J.,Zhan,Y.,and S.L., : situ allograft rejection islet CTLA4Ig protection In against transduction. by 90:951–957. 2010, Transplantation

diabetes. and 1 Becker, U.B., Masharani, for Teplizumab type J.: therapy Opin. Expert Biol. Ther. 2010, 10:459–465.

P.C. Kawahji, Pham, P.T., Pham, Lipshutz, Pham, P.T., J.S., and G.S., J., Singer, (Campath-1H) alemtuzumab evolving renal : in role The transplantation. of Drug Des. Dev. Ther. 2009, 3:41–49.

Ciancio, G.W. L., and Burke, Chen, J., G., Sageshima, receptor rejection of the daclizumab—for : prevention and renal antibodies—basiliximab transplantation. acute Anti-interleukin-2 in 2009, 3:319–336. Biologics

Depletion disease. autoreactive of lymphocytes 16-7 can treat autoimmune

E., Morel, P., J., Herbrecht, al. Neste, Bouabdallah, Lepage, E., Den et Coiffier, Gaulard, Salles, R., P., R., B., H., Briere, G., Tilly, Van plus lymphoma. diffuse rituximab alone chemotherapy CHOP CHOP : with in large-B-cell compared patients with elderly N. Engl. Med. J. 346:235–242. 2002,

References.

Coles, sclerosis: and Campath-1H of multiple the Compston, A., treatment lessons A.: bedside the Deans, for from J., bench. Clin. Neurol. Neurosurg. 106:270–274. 2004,

targeting arthritis: rheumatoid CD20. G.: Edwards, M.J., Leandro, Cambridge, and depletion B in J.C., lymphocyte of Curr. Dir. Autoimmun. 8:175–192. 2005,

Yazawa, T.F. Hamaguchi, Poe, J.C., Tedder, N., Y., and in models animal for malignancies using monoclonal CD19 : B unconjugated Immunotherapy autoimmune lymphocyte and antibodies disease. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 102:15178–15783. 2005,

D., of safety Michelutti, Fanin, in mixed II Ferraccioli, S., Mazzaro, G.: A., Vita, Efficacy rituximab M., Marchi, cryoglobulinemia. Sacco, De Damiani, S., De and type C., F., R., G., Zaja, Baccarani, and Blood 2003, 101:3827–3834.

16-8 block TNF-α, can that IL-6 diseases. IL-1, or agents Biologic alleviate autoimmune

Decker, Guarda, et I., P., M., G., Farlik, Tardivel, Förster, M., F., A., C., T., Staehli, Mattmann, Pasquier, Romero, Braun, R.A., Du al. interleukin-1 interferon activation. I Type inhibits inflammasome production and : 2011, Immunity 34:213–223.

Feldmann, and R.N. Maini, M., Clinical Medical : Research Award. Lasker as and rheumatoid defined diseases. for TNF a other autoimmune therapeutic arthritis target Nat. Med. 9:1245–1250. 2003,

Weisman, M.H. and D.S., Hallegua, diseases. 1 human uses : Potential antagonists therapeutic in interleukin receptor of Ann. Rheum. Dis. 2002, 61:960–967.

A., A., D., Vaiopoulos, P.P. Kaskani, Rapti, G., Andrianakos, Karanikolas, Sfikakis, D., Karras, E., and G., Charalambopoulos, patients 48-week, despite anakinra : Adjunctive study. arthritis leflunomide, active with rheumatoid or prospective or a comparative, monotherapy: in methotrexate, cyclosporin-A 2008, 47:1384–1388. Rheumatology

C.R. Mackay, New avenues : therapy. anti-inflammatory for Nat. Med. 2002, 8:117–118.

cell migration Biologic sites and immune 16-9 of inflammation can block agents responses. reduce to

Y.Y., Boster, natalizumab. multiple and multifocal J.A., progressive Pitt, B., Topalli, Lessons leukoencephalopathy patient C.F., treated D.: from with learned in I., a Kirsch, sclerosis Morgan-Followell, fatal Pei, Racke, Kisanuki, W., with A.L., M.K., Nicholas, Neurol. JAMA 70:398–402. 2013,

D.M., from Giovannoni, Luca, leukoencephalopathy Simpson, D.B., Natalizumab-associated Clifford, sclerosis: multiple lessons Nath, De G., in and G., cases. Arendt, progressive patients A., A.: with multifocal 28 Neurol. Lancet 2010, 9:438–446.

J.G. Cyster, Chemokines, secondary in and : cell organs. sphingosine-1-phosphate, migration lymphoid Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2005, 23:127–159.

M.A., M., D., T., Soullie, Lambrecht, Idzko, van Hijdra, M., Hoogsteden, Hammad, Nimwegen, Kool, H.C., Willart, and H., M., T., B.N. Muller, of dendritic FTY720 experimental application cell abrogates the altering by Local lung function. asthma to : J. Clin. Invest. 116:2935–2944. 2006,

Calabresi, Radue, O’Connor, P., C., et K., Leyk, L., P., R., al. L., C., Selmaj, Agoropoulou, Polman, Zhang-Auberson, Kappos, Hohlfeld, E.W., M., in : A multiple placebo-controlled oral trial sclerosis. fingolimod of relapsing Engl. N. Med. J. 362:387–401. 2010,

D.K. Podolsky, therapy Selective : bowel and of Janus? adhesion-molecule disease—a tale inflammatory N. Engl. J. Med. 353:1965–1968. 2005,

to pathways autoimmune disease. be of activate can lymphocytes treat Blockade that used 16-10 co-stimulatory

J.A. B.T., Bluestone, Fife, and tolerance and via of T-cell pathways. and autoimmunity the CTLA-4 PD-1 peripheral : Control Immunol. Rev. 2008, 224:166–182.

C.N., Ellis, G.G. and Krueger, T effector selective psoriasis memory Treatment targeting plaque : by chronic of lymphocytes. of Engl. N. J. Med. 2001, 345:248–255.

status severe of psoriasis. A.: biologic moderate in Menter, therapies of to the treatment The Cutis 2009, 84:14–24.

A.W., A.Y., A.K., Dinant, H.J., and J.D., van Vaishnaw, de Smeets, Kraan, T.J., B.A., Rie, Kuijk, M.C., M.A., Bos, P.P. Tak, Dijkmans, Goedkoop, in peripheral and the with clinical of psoriatic cell signs tissue reduction associated improvement arthritis. in T population Alefacept arthritis: treatment blood of of is : effector synovial Rheum. Arthritis 46:2776–2784. 2002,

R., T., al. S.L., J., Fuentes-Duculan, Chamian, M.A., Novitskaya, M.V., H., I., Cardinale, Nussbaum, et Carbonaro, I., F.,Abello, Kikuchi, Lowes, Lin, nitric reduction and oxide and Increase in synthase-expressing cells in dendritic efalizumab TNF-α (anti-CD11a). : with psoriasis inducible Proc. Acad. Natl Sci. USA 102:19057–19062. 2005,

16-11 immunomodulatory commonly properties. drugs have used Some

Vitamin modulator D: C.: immune Baeke, Gysemans, T., Korf, H., and F., of C., Takiishi, the system. Mathieu, Curr. Opin. Pharmacol. 10:482–496. 2010,

Goodridge, and Datta, Liu, G.Y., Okwan-Duodu, Shen, Fuchs, K.E. D., Bernstein, Bernstein, V., X.Z., S., H.S., E.A., Angiotensin-converting myelomonocytic mouse and resistance : Listeria methicillin-resistant aureus. augments to cells overexpression in enzyme Staphylococcus J. Biol. Chem. 2010, 285:39051–39060.

Pfeffer, L.M., Pravastatin after Rose, 22 Evaluation and Rifai, Investigators: levels C.P., and Therapy-Thrombolysis Infarction in E: Infection IT-TIMI M.A., Ridker, therapy. Atorvastatin Braunwald, N., Morrow, Cannon, McCabe, or outcomes P.M., C.H., 22) C-reactive statin Myocardial protein D., (PROVE Engl. N. Med. J. 2005, 352:20–28.

M., Ruiz, R.A., Hur, P.J., O., al. Radosevich, J.L., Youssef, J.C., Bravo, L., S., Sobel, D.J., et E.M., Mitchell, Patarroyo, Steinman, Stuve, The atorvastatin, Th2 autoimmune HMG-CoA a : and disease. promotes in bias reductase reverses nervous central inhibitor, system paralysis 2002, 420:78–84. Nature

be 16-12 antigen-specific of of response. administration antigen the nature can to manipulate an Controlled used

relatives Study patients in Effects diabetes insulin Group: Diabetes Prevention of 1 type of with Diabetes Trial: Type 1 mellitus. N. Engl. J. Med. 346:1685–1691. 2002,

Kay, and Haselden, Larché, responses M.: specific A.B., B.M., Peptide-mediated immune in immunotherapy. Int. Arch. Allergy. Immunol. 122:229–237. 2000,

and overview Parker, H., Beacock-Sharp, tolerance: A.M., historical F.: perspectives. Chirdo, O.R., Oral Mowat, and Millington, L.A., Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 2004, 1029:1–8.

and Robinson, L., Utz, Steinman, P.J., W.H. via of autoimmunity Suppression of : ligands. altered mimics peptide microbial Curr. Top. Microbiol. Immunol. 296:55–63. 2005,

Quintana, and Cunha, H.: da H.L., Oral Weiner, Wu, A.P., tolerance. F., Immunol. Rev. 2011, 241:241–259.

development discovery tumors. in of immune led mice tumors protective to 16-13 responses to of the transplantable The

and Jaffee, D.M. E.M., Pardoll, : search? is the it antigens: worth Murine tumor Curr. Opin. Immunol. 1996, 8:622–627.

the antigens G.: (TSTAs). tumor-specific road Klein, to strange transplantation The Immun. Cancer 1:6. 2001,

and they many system can as 16-14 evolve the ways. escape in Tumors by ‘edited’ are rejection immune

Schreiber, and Old, R.D. L.J., G.P., Dunn, : The of immunosurveillance immunobiology cancer immunoediting. and 21:137–148. Immunity 2004,

Harlin, the Meng, Immune microenvironment. Brown, I., tumor Blank, H.: Gajewski,T.F., Kline, C., resistance J., orchestrated and by Y., Kacha, A., Immunol. Rev. 213:131–145. 2006,

E., Regulation B., P., R., Filler, cutaneous A.C.: cells. Hayday, Hobby, by Lewis, γδT R.E., C.R., Girardi, and malignancy Glusac, J.M., D.E., Tigelaar, M., Sutton, Oppenheim, Steele, of Science 2001, 294:605–609.

and S., S.M., antigen class von Gebert, M., Ferrone, J., Immunoselective pressure machinery Becker, human antigen Benner, Doeberitz, leukocyte and Woerner, Kloor, colorectal C., defects A., in unstable M: microsatellite cancers. I Knebel Cancer Res. 2005, 65:6418–6424.

E.W., P.J., P., Bowman, al. R.B., Hansbury, Neilan, Yue, M.J., Haley, K.J., Waeltz, Koblish, et Sparks, H.K., G., Burn, T.C., C.L., Yang, tryptophan inhibitors of systemic and catabolism Hydroxyamidine tumors. IDO-expressing : of growth the indoleamine-2,3-dioxygenase potently suppress Mol. Cancer. Ther. 9:489–498. 2010,

M.J., W., Swann, Old, R.D. Schreiber, S.J., L.J., Vermi, Smyth, N., Zerafa, C.M., Rodig, Koebel, and J.B., cancer immunity occult state. an equilibrium : Adaptive maintains in 450:903–907. Nature 2007,

Slik, Corver, W.E., der A.R., Fleuren, L.A., Koopman, Giphart, G.J. and van M.J., cause antigen loss frequent cancer. alterations heterogeneous in and leukocyte human genetic I Multiple class : cervical histocompatibility Exp. J. Med. 2000, 191:961–976.

A.L. D.H., Mellor, and Munn, tumor-induced Indoleamine : 2,3-dioxygenase tolerance. and Clin. J. Invest. 2007, 117:1147–1154.

B., Hengartner, Hermans, Ochsenbein, J., H., and S., Hemmi, Pericin, A.F., R.M. Zinkernagel, S., Karrer, Sierro, M., Odermatt, U., in signals second priming localization, : cytotoxic tumour Roles of induction. T-cell and cross Nature 2001, 411:1058–1064.

application Cell Quezada, intrinsic Peggs, K.S., inhibition to and cancer T-cell therapy. J.P.: mechanisms of S.A., Allison, and Immunol. Rev. 224:141–165. 2008,

and heterogeneity S., and Zanovello, I., Bronte, subset cell L., definition. S., V.: Peranzoni, P., Dolcetti, Marigo, Zilio, Mandruzzato, suppressor Myeloid-derived E., Curr. Opin. Immunol. 2010, 22:238–244.

Old. R.D., Schreiber, Cancer Smyth, suppression roles integrating L.J., immunoediting: M.J.: and in immunity's cancer and promotion. Science 2011, 331:1565–1570.

The Rees, disorder—a L.: lymphoproliferative review. literature Shroff, and post-transplant R., Pediatr. Nephrol. 2004, 19:369–377.

H.Y., E.M., D.A., Y., Z., Kiniwa, Shevach, Lee, Li, Peng, Guo, R.F. Wang, Y., Wang, G., and T human : and Tumor-specific CD4+ their implications ligands: regulatory cells for immunotherapy. Immunity 2004, 20:107–118.

cells recognized 16-15 antigens T by rejection and be basis can immunotherapies. the of form Tumor

Clark, G., S.C., Hill, Bonner, J., P.L., Bourdon, R.E., Wang, L., et Rojas, Aubert, A.R., J.R., Macintyre, Dodi, I.A., A., al. Lill, HLA-associated that peptides Direct the BCR-ABL from : protein. b3a2 fusion present derived leukemic evidence cells immunogenic 2001, Blood 98:2887–2893.

S., R., Secondino, Labirio, Perotti, C., al. M., C., P., Pedrazzoli, R., Carminati, Frasson, et P., Basso, Maccario, O., S., Comoli, Schiavo, with T Epstein–Barr virus-targeted carcinoma IV of therapy nasopharyngeal Cell : autologous lymphocytes. Stage cytotoxic J. Clin. Oncol. 2005, 23:8942–8949.

Disis, the trials: M.L., translation of Davis, peptide-based Knutson, D., model. HER-2/neu K.: D.G., and Schiffman, McNeel, vaccine Clinical K.L., Crit. Rev. Immunol. 2001, 21:263–273.

Sherry, J.R., Topalian, Yang, al. White, Restifo, D.E., J.C., S.L., Mavroukakis, Wunderlich, Kammula, et R.E., U., Dudley, N.P., Royal, S.A., R.M., M.E., therapy for Adoptive chemotherapy cell lymphodepleting the : patients with following but treatment metastatic transfer melanoma. refractory of non-myeloablative J. Clin. Oncol. 2005, 23:2346–2357.

et V.J., White, Magrini, L.K., Y.S., H., D.C., Chen, Shea, J.M., C.D., Uppaluri, Arthur, Matsushita, C.G., al. M.D., Rickert, R., Vesely, Koboldt, T-cell-dependent analysis of exome : Cancer reveals mechanism immunoediting. a cancer Nature 482:400–404. 2012,

Vaclavkova, R.H., H.P., P., J., Durrani, E.S. L.E., Michalek, and Douek, Ruff, D.C., Vitetta, Collins, cells of T graft-versus-host-specific sequences. their virtue loci β by Definitive separation CD4+ : of receptor graft-versus-leukemiaand Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 2003, USA 100:1180–1184.

Tsallios, G.M., Stauss, A., Bendle, Morris, S.A., H.J. E.C., and Xue, helper cell I-restricted A : protection. in tumor class T T receptor-transduced critical antigen cells of MHC role Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 2005, 102:7934–7939. USA

Thielemanns, in cell E.S., Bruggen, T.G., Schuler, B., Schultz, analysis responses Th Schuler-Thurner, dendritic tumor-specific melanoma Stroobant, patients G.: P., V., Functional Jenne, immunotherapy. cell-based der and of van Berger, L., detected after K., Immunol. J. 2004, 172:1304–1310.

treatment in expressing an 16-16 some T antigen chimeric effective are leukemias. receptors cells

Chew, antigen Porter, D.T., S.A., Rheingold, D.L., Grupp, R., Wright, Kalos, J.F., Hauck, Chimeric receptor-modified Aplenc, A., cells for leukemia. Barrett, acute lymphoid B., D., S.R., et Teachey, T al: M., N. Engl. J. Med. 2013, 368:1509–1518.

I.M., Chapuis, Greenberg, T.M., S.R., A.G., and Schmitt, Hingorani, Stromnes, P.D. cancer Re-adapting T : for mouse from cells therapy: clinical models trials. to Immunol. Rev. 257:145–164. 2014,

toxins, 16-17 control Monoclonal alone to antigens, or antibodies tumor can linked against tumor growth.

and Devine, Bradley,A.M., M., DeRemer, antibody-drug D.: vedotin: anti-CD30 Brentuximab an conjugate. Am. J. Syst. Health Pharm. 70:589–597. 2013,

Hortobagyi, G.N. cancer. in : treatment Trastuzumab of breast the N. Engl. Med. J. 353:1734–1736. 2005,

FitzGerald, and hairy-cell I.: chemotherapy-resistant immunotoxin Wilson, recombinant of K., Efficacy R.J., M., anti-CD22 Bergeron, Raggio, in BL22 D.J., Kreitman, leukemia. M., Pastan, Stetler-Stevenson, W.H., the N. Engl. J. Med. 2001, 345:241–247.

Yang, Wang, S., Mortenson, al. L., Y., Z., Jiang, E.D., Brown, X., N.K., O., et Sattar, Park, Radkevich-Brown, Greene, M., Deng, H., adaptive effect antiHER2/neu : antibody of on immunity. both therapeutic and The depends innate Cell 2010, 18:160–170. Cancer

Punt, C.J. and Tol, J., a metastatic treatment Monoclonal : in colorectal cancer: the review. antibodies of Clin. Ther. 32:437–453. 2010,

Jacobus, Knutson, S.Y., S., A., Weiner, G.J. S., L., C., Button, Blackwell, T., and B.K., Wang, Dahle, Veeramani, Link, activation high-affinity with the patients infusion induces polymorphism. lymphoma : CD16 Rituximab in NK Blood 2011, 118:3347–3349.

Baselga, Diéras, D.Y., M., E., D., M., et Krop, Miles, S., Pegram, al. V., Guardino, I.E., Welslau, Oh, Verma, Gianni, L., J., Trastuzumab breast cancer. advanced HER2-positive : emtansine for Engl. N. Med. J. 367:1783–1791. 2012,

S.: and Ferrone Weiner, MV, Monoclonal L.M., for Dhodapkar immunotherapy. cancer antibodies 373:1033–1040. 2009, Lancet

is Fc of Weng, with with and IgG clinical Levy, lymphoma patients W.K., outcome receptor not rituximab. inhibitory FcgammaRIIb in the Genetic associated polymorphism treated R.: follicular with Leuk. 50:723–727. Lymphoma 2009,

prevention vaccination cancer by immune therapy. for tumors Enhancing 16-18 and promise response the holds to

P.W., C.S., D.F., Kantoff, Penson, Small, Sims, Berger, Redfern, Dreicer, R.B., et Higano, N.D., C.H., Shore, A.C., E.R., E.J., R., Ferrari, al. Sipuleucel-T : cancer. immunotherapy prostate castration-resistant for N. Engl. Med. J. 2010, 363:411–422.

Essahsah, Offringa, Valentijn, G.G., der A.P., R., Drijfhout, A.R., Welters, L.M., Meer, D.M., Lowik, M.J., Fathers, F., J.W., et Kenter, al. Berends-van Vloon, M.J., HPV-16 against vulvar for neoplasia. : intraepithelial Vaccination oncoproteins

N.Engl. Med. J. 361:1838–1847. 2009,

References.

D.R., vaccine D.J., Wiley, controlled Alvarez, Bautista, a C.M., Jansen, Efficacy and Ault, K.A., O.M., Brown, Barr, cervical L.A., K.U., E.: intraepithelial F.B., prevent Koutsky, Wheeler, randomized papillomavirus-16 Mao, neoplasia: trial. of C., human to Obstet. Gynecol. 107:18–27. 2006,

Palucka, cells J., cancer. Fay, Banchereau, J.: immunity against K., Dendritic H., and Ueno, and Intern. J. Med. 2011, 269:64–73.

Melief, and J.W., G.B., Vambutas, C.J. DeVoti, Bonagura, Drijfhout, S.H., A., Nouri, van Lipford, Burg, J., der M., V.R., control model. sites in latently E7 cottontail peptides a and Therapeutic papillomavirus rabbit virus-induced established : with both pre-clinical papillomavirus of in the and long E6 infected results vaccination lesions Vaccine 2005, 23:5271–5280.

immune Checkpoint to existing tumors. 16-19 responses blockade can augment

S.M., G.J., Gutierrez, Schuster, A., M., Freeman, Lesokhin, Borrello, Ansell, D., al. Cattry, M.M., A.M., I., S,J,, Scott, Millenson, E.C., Halwani, et blockade : refractory PD-1 with in nivolumab relapsed Hodgkin's or lymphoma. Engl. N. J. Med. 372:311–319. 2015,

C.W., Sternas, B.L., al. Gause, Watson, C.B., Pennington, C.D., F.A., Reynolds, M., et R., P.L., Bendandi, Kobrin, Duffey, Benko, L.A., T.M., Gocke, lymphoma. : Complete molecular by induced factor patient-specific against remissions plus granulocyte-monocyte colony-stimulating vaccination Nat. Med. 5:1171–1177. 1999,

M.S., tumor and into CTLA-4: Allison, in use and J.G., J.P.: biological new Egen, Kuhns, immunotherapy. insights function its Nat. Immunol. 3:611–618. 2002,

Wolchok, Daud, Weber, R., Robert, al. Hersey, O., et A., R.W., P., W.J., Hamid, F.S., Hodi, C., Hwu, J.D., Kefford, Joseph, J.S., melanoma. (anti-PD-1) and Safety with : in responses tumor lambrolizumab N. Engl. J. Med. 369:134–144. 2013,

C., S.J., Robert, Weber, et F.S., al. O'Day, Sosman, Schadendorf, J.C. D.F., J.B., Haanen, R., Hassel, McDermott, J.A., Gonzalez, Hodi, D., R.W., survival with metastatic Improved in melanoma. patients with : ipilimumab Engl. N. 363:711–723 Med 2010; J.

L.: and Newby, CD48 K.E., tumors. immunogenic S.A., by Li, Y., Hellstrom, poorly immunity Chen, B7–1 and Costimulation induces against Exp. J. Med. 183:639–644. 1996,

Seipp, et Schwartzentruber, D.J., Freezer, N.P., Phan, Topalian, Hwu, Haworth, R.M., L.R., L.J., S.L., Restifo, Sherry, J.C., G.Q., Yang, al. P., C.A., and melanoma. : antigen autoimmunity 4 by regression induced with blockade metastatic T patients lymphocyte-associated cytotoxic in Cancer Proc. Acad. Natl Sci. 2003, 100:8372–8377. USA

Ritter, J., A.A., Gnjatic, G.Y., Powel, al. N.H., Yuan, E., Rasalan, S., Ku, S., Gallardo, H.F., et H., T.S., Li, Segal, Jungbluth, responses polyfunctional NY-ESO-1 melanoma enhances patients specific T with CTLA-4 blockade cell : clinical metastatic benefit. in Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 2008, 105:20410–20415. USA

or pathogens organisms. be can killed material Vaccines attenuated on 16-20 from based

Vaccine Donnelly, infectious for agents. and Gupta, use design, community-based and C.A., Anderson, R.M., S.: variable antigenically evaluation, 350:1466–1470. 1997, Lancet

its B of Dermer, Lee, A P., United Few, streptococcus history C., rates and morbidity States. with J., mortality Eggert, neonatal B.: and the related in group J. Pediatr. Nurs. 19:357–363. 2004,

B.F.: future. Klein, the D.L., Vaccine McInnes, technologies: Rabinovich, view P., and Hall, N.R., to Science 1994, 265:1401–1404.

and or effective neutralize caused by antibodies prevent that pathogen generate damage toxins that the stop the infection. vaccines 16-21 Most

M.M., Levine, O.S. and Levine, of Influence on use. burden, vaccine perception, factors and implementation, continued and development, disease new public other : Lancet 350:1386–1392. 1997,

Scheid, H., Mouque, Pereyra, M., Krogsgaard, Zoller, M., Connors, M.N., J.F., Ott, Artyomov, S., J., Pietzsch, F., et Shukair, al. M.J., R.G., the affinity of by apparent : increases antibodies heteroligation. anti-HIV Polyreactivity 467:591–595. Nature 2010,

Margolis, Lind, A., Garcia-Sastre, Nichol, Hauge, Palese, A.: P., M., McFadden, present K.L., M., vaccines: Murdoch, and Influenza future. K.L., R., and J. Clin. Invest. 110:9–13. 2002,

being while inexpensive. safe induce and long-lasting Effective 16-22 must protection vaccines

2005. and Gupta, E.: J., and epidemic MacMahon, R.K., UK Mumps Best, the 2005, BMJ 330:1132–1135.

K.: and Mumps. Mlemann, A., Hviid, Rubin, S., 2008, 371:932–944. Lancet

M.: effectiveness of against Magnan, influenza The and adults. S., in Drake, vaccination working healthy, Engl. N. J. Med. 1995, 333:889–893.

use be viral vaccines 16-23 technology. usually DNA ‘killed’ by vaccines and more recombinant can safer the than Live-attenuated are of made potent

Mueller, memory Immunization express A., and S.N., Langley, and with that in potent Ahmed, altered attenuated viruses proteins responses. E., CD8+ García-Sastre, W.A., results R.: influenza NS1 T-cell live Carnero, protective J. Virol. 84:1847–1855. 2010,

Collins, and Murphy, B.R., P.L. virus syncytial genetics. applications of vaccines and reverse parainfluenza : for Live-attenuated respiratory viruses: Clin. J. Invest. 2002, 110:21–27.

Ye, Pena, J.R., J., D.R. L., Perez, A.L., Lorusso, Vincent, Janke, Ciacci-Zanella, and C.L., P.C., Gauger, M., A., Angel, B.H., Loving, to pandemic the vaccines H1N1 Modifications : polymerase generate 2009 triple-reassortant influenza live attenuated swine-like genes of a against in viruses. virus Virol. J. 2011, 85:456–469.

A.S.: against Development pandemic effective vaccines B.R., Subbarao, K., Murphy, of influenza. Fauci, and 2006, 24:5–9. Immunity

H.M., J.R., al. L., D., Wu, M., J.W., Yassine, Whittle, G.M., S.R., S.S., Frank, Yewdell, Narpala, Wheatley, A.K., Kanekiyo, Ma, et Lingwood, Ig that from elicits stem-directed heavy-chain cytometry Flow antibodies reveals H5N1 vaccination multiple cross-reactive lineages. : Virol. J. 2014, 88:4047–4057.

parasites (GAPs). attenuated

C., Bandermann, L., A., al. P., Hess, Mann, S., Baumann, Nasser et D., Brinkmann, S., Smith, V., P., Seiler, Goosmann, Grode, J., Eddine, tuberculosis : that Calmette–Guérin bacille Mycobacterium recombinant efficacy mutants bovis against of vaccine listeriolysin. secrete Increased Clin. J. Invest. 115:2472–2479. 2005,

Jacobs, R.A., Jr, Guleria, W.R., Teitelbaum, and R., McAdam, G., Kalpana, Bloom, I., B.R. tuberculosis. vaccines Auxotrophic : for Nat. Med. 2:334–337. 1996,

S.H. Harupa, Mikolajczak, R.F., Coppens, A., I., M., and Dumpit, Labaied, Kappe, S.A., P52 deletion Plasmodium and yoelii confer and P36 sterile against simultaneous immunity : attenuated sporozoites with are of infection. completely Infect. Immun. 75:3758–3768. 2007,

C.: a or new tuberculosis; of against vaccine The BCG? improving vaccines replacing Martin, dream Eur. Respir. J. 26:162–167. 2005, S.H. Thaiss, and Kaufmann, C.A., tuberculosis: obstacles. : hopes novel against and vaccines current Toward J. Yale Biol. Med. 2010, 83:209–215. A.M., and Kappe, R., S.H. Wang, Vaughan, malaria. for : engineered, Genetically whole-cell approaches attenuated vaccine Hum. 6:1–8. 2010, Vaccines

determinant of success. route of an 16-25 The important vaccination is

Hinrichs, Wilschut, vaccination. Frijlink, Needle-free Huckriede, W.Lj., and Amorij, A.: influenza J.C., H.W., J.P., Lancet Infect. Dis. 2010, 10:699–711.

I.M., and Ahlers, Belyakov, J.D. immunization in does play of protective : mucosal of What against pathogens? the the immunity route generation role Immunol. J. 2009, 183:6883–6892.

Dougan, R., of site-directed derivatives toxin. Fontana, and Intranasal and M., cholera adjuvanticity of mutant G., Rappuoli, M., G.: Pizza, Douce, immunogenicity Infect. Immun. 1997, 65:2821–2828.

immune D., S., in at S., bacterial Dougan, Ghaem-Maghami, Clare, Dunstan, Frankel, Simmons, surfaces. and responses vivo antigens G., to Pickard, mucosal The encountered M., G., C.: G., Douce, Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. 355:705–712. 2000, B

advances and Recent vaccines K., mucosal Eriksson, in J.: adjuvants. and Holmgren, Curr. Opin. Immunol. 14:666–672. 2002,

the Bordetella pertussis a the illustrates safety importance perceived vaccination of vaccines. of 16-26

K.M. M.D., Edwards, and Decker, Acellular vaccines. pertussis : Pediatr. Clin. Am. North 2000, 47:309–335.

and mumps, autism. Olsen, Thorsen, P., of Melbye, Hviid, and Wohlfahrt, vaccination D., and population-based J., measles, rubella Madsen, K.M., M., Vestergaard, A., A Schendel, study M.: J., Engl. N. Med. J. 347:1477–1482. 2002,

E.A. Mortimer, S.A., vaccines, and Mortimer, in Plotkin, : E.A. Pertussis ed. Vaccines, (eds): 2nd W.B. Philadelphia, 1994. Saunders Co.,

G.A. Poland, vaccines vaccines: for disease. old pertussis an : new Acellular Lancet 347:209–210. 1996,

and of vaccines developed cells. B 16-27 Conjugate have result T between linked recognition been as a

C.H., Lee, D.S., Lynn, F., C.E., and Berry, Bash, Frasch, M.C. polysaccharide capsular of of acetylation A O : on immune Neisseria responses. serogroup of meningitidis development functional Effect Infect. Immun. 70:3707–3713. 2002,

is all Chemistry new Costantino, Rappuoli, M., a at P.M., investigational that quadrivalent R., and vaccine of immunogenic P.: Dull, ages. meningococcal Brer, conjugate 2009, Vaccine 27:5574–5580.

Z.: A., type introductions. Global Risko, vaccines: and b Gilani, M.D., conjugate and status Jones, O.S., Levine, N., of pneumococcal Knoll, D.G., and evidence, influenzae Walker, Haemophilus policies, Curr. Opin. Infect. Dis. 23:236–241. 2010,

Peltola, T., meningitis routine with and influenzae immunisation childhood after of Kilpi, Anttila, Haemophilus b disappearance M.: Rapid conjugate vaccines. H., type 340:592–594. Lancet 1992,

bacterial reverse to and eliminate Rappuoli, meningitis. Conjugates vaccinology R.: Vaccine 19:2319–2322. 2001,

be must to cell they and to and but cells 16-28 compartment appropriate immunity, the Peptide-based be can protective require elicit targeted adjuvants effective. vaccines

Aide, Bassat, Macete, P.L., Leach, E., Q., J., A., Milman, Sigauque, Aponte, P., Sacarlal, J., B., J.J., Mandomando, I., Alonso, et al. with prevention of RTS, children: extended follow-up in controlled randomised falciparum protection vaccine a in trial. of single-blind Mozambican disease : S/AS02A Duration malaria of Plasmodium 2005, 366:2012–2018. Lancet

J.A. Berzofsky, design selection synthetic : vaccines. Epitope of and to engineered and vaccines. of enhancing cross-reactivity approaches Molecular immunogenicity Ann. Acad. N.Y. Sci. 1993, 690:256–264.

A.V. Hill, M.P., and Davenport, : HLA-disease vaccine candidates. from to associations Reverse immunogenetics: Mol. Med. Today 2:38–45. 1996,

A.V. Hill, towards Pre-erythrocytic malaria greater vaccines: : efficacy. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 6:21–32. 2006,

a as model W.O., Venter, From vaccines: system. J.C.: S.L., Rogers, Carucci, and genomics D.J., malaria Hoffman, to Nat. Med. 4:1351–1353. 1998,

P.: shows Ottenhoff, safety tuberculosis-specific a and Th1-cell Dissel, like J.T., First I., long-lived Lingnau, strong T.M., excellent in vaccine induction molecularly T.H., of Andersen, and P., defined Mycobacterium humans: Doherty, new K., Kromann, Bang, responses. Hum. Vaccin. 2010, 6:1007–1015.

Burg, Mota, Melief, Nouta, R., G.B., Ferreira S.H., Johnson, M., Zwaveling, Offringa, van der S.C., J., and S., Lipford, C.J. 16-expressing long peptides. following : human tumors papillomavirus are eradicated with effectively vaccination type Established Immunol. J. 169:350–358. 2002,

the are Adjuvants enhancing for approved in are use immunogenicity 16-29 of important humans. for but few vaccines,

innate Coffman, to and Sher, adjuvants: R.L., Vaccine A., work. R.A.: immunity Seder, putting 33:492–503. 2010, Immunity

CpG and growth, and Weiner, potent Krieg, G.J., cells. DNA: dendritic A.M.: G., signal Hartmann, activation, a human maturation for of Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 1999, 96:9305–9310. USA

J., cell Designing on I.: of K., Palucka, Banchereau, human dendritic vaccines subsets. based and Mellman, biology 33:464–478. 2010, Immunity

and R.N., S.G.: Johnson, Lacy, Baldridge, mimetics Reed, Hershberg, M.J., D.A., as Coler, A R.M., toll: Persing, lipid Taking and J.R., adjuvants D.H., immunomodulators. Microbiol. Trends 2002, 10:S32–S37.

Toll-like receptors. Pulendran, B.: vaccine with dendritic and cells responses Modulating Immunol. Rev. 199:227–250. 2004,

Takeda, K., S.: and Toll-like Akira, Kaisho, T., receptors. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 21:335–376. 2003,

by be DNA-based 16-30 Protective vaccination. can immunity induced

and Ulmer, Donnelly, J.W., J.J., Liu, Shiver, J.B., M.A. DNA : vaccines. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 15:617–648. 1997,

D.M., optimization. R.A.: application, Gurunathan, S., DNA vaccines: Klinman, immunology, Seder, and and Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2000, 18:927–974.

T.P., L., Gillanders, A.T., S., Goedegebuure, and Satpathy, W.E. B.A., Belt, P., Li, T.H., Kim, J.M., Murphy, K.M., Fleming, Herndon, Hansen, cells prime following CD8α+/CD103+ dendritic cells Cross-dressed : T CD8+ vaccination. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 109:12716–12721. 2012, USA

M.C., Hannaman, O., Kuroiwa, Park, et Trumpfheller, Oks, al. Schlesinger, Mizenina, Nchinda, C., G., D., J., C.G., Huang, M., S.J., Nussenzweig, Y., of dendritic to encoded the by vaccination : The is efficacy enhanced targeting cells. in protein DNA mice Clin. J. Invest. 2008, 118:1427–1436.

The DNA expression. Budker, uptake J.A., naked of mechanism and and Wolff, V.: Adv. Genet. 54:3–20. 2005,

checkpoint be controlling may 16-31 existing and in blockade infections. chronic useful Vaccination

Burke, R.L. virus. to herpes simplex Contemporary approaches vaccination against : Curr. Top. Microbiol. Immunol. 1992, 179:137–158.

Stanford, J.L. Grange, J.M., and : vaccines. Therapeutic J. Med. Microbiol. 1996, 45:81–83.

P., I., J., Hill, the immunity. Yewdell, A., to off turns and Jugovic, G., simplex TAP host H., Russ, Ploegh, Johnson, Herpes virus J., York, D.: Bennink, evade 375:411–415. Nature 1995,

Andrieu, Ferreira, J.M. Lu, W., W.T., L.C., and Arraes, chronic Therapeutic dendritic-cell infection. : for HIV-1 vaccine Nat. Med. 2004, 10:1359–1365.

Modlin, R.L. Th1–Th2 leprosy. insights from : paradigm: J. Invest. Dermatol. 1994, 102:828–832.

G.: malaria-endemic M., use for design V., and Coppel, Immunogenetics in R.L., Plebanski, Plasmodium populations. falciparum Apostolopoulos, O., Flannery, vaccines Pouniotis, of the Proudfoot, and D., J. Clin. Invest. 110:295–301. 2002,

Locksley, and R.M. S.L., Reiner, : regulation major. to The Leishmania immunity of Annu. Rev. Immunol. 1995, 13:151–177.

J.L. Stanford, The immunotherapy vaccination future for : history leprosy. and and of Trop. Geogr. Med. 46:93–107. 1994,

Toolbox The Immunologist's

A-1. Immunization.

pathogenic borne by directed are Natural at antigens immune microorganisms. responses normally simple these in the the developing on simple to can to be immune understanding antigens, induced response. also The responses system and to immunologists experimental immune have our respond of nonliving antigens focused immunization. response as of known deliberate is induction an immune The are human the out routinely immunizations antigen subject. Experimental the by test into or injecting animal carried route, form is a The produced. is administered in response which response the can and of and type affect dose, occurs whether antigen that profoundly protective by humans pathogens vaccinia. immune The induction the cross-reactive responses this although immune of induction to vaccination, common against microbial responses smallpox in often is the virus, originally of referred called term against with immunizing

has an course, response immune and for its whether is appearance individual the of determine the immunized follow occurred reactants. to immune monitored To cellular and as Immune antigens include soluble as specific specific responses most cells. the such and of to T cytokines such responses, effector generation factors, antibodies, the antibody preparations of antiserum and of (plural: cytokine relatively involves analysis usually antisera). responses crude Monitoring the clotted blood, Serum antiserum. antigen, phase is a taken against from an immunized if particular which, the fluid called individual is of studied or T by more from blood spleen in experimental are responses such in study animals To lymphoid immune commonly are responses the mediated cells as organs humans. tested; T-cell lymphocytes than cells,

simplest the will with antigen slightly the to that by in antibody contain different even molecules immunogen many immunization Antisera bind different generated ways. individual the to they because present immunizing addition, were immunization. all prior to not many do contain the that in In antigen, bind antisera antibodies at These often for immunogen. antibodies difficulties antisera using to technical lead an detecting nonspecific in chromatography this problem, circumvent (see to that antigen by the To A-3). affinity purified be Section immobilized can antibodies bind immunogen using by these Section (see monoclonal can Alternatively, avoided antibodies problems be A-7). making

an immunogen. an called is substance response can be is immune and that said immunogenic elicit Any to and operational an distinction between antigen. an a There clear immunogen is as substances an whereas defined bind antigen a elicit response, substance adaptive that antibody. to specific are immune any Immunogens an is that can elicit however, the therefore antigens antigens potential to are antibodies; have All all immunogenic. not specific protein this considering antigens. is of distinction evident An example when proteins immunogenic. purified utility not and biology are that fact against of enormous antibodies the spite are proteins In medicine, in generally experimental of molecular response. lack This and innate elicit not patterns proteins do purified is (MAMPs), because an therefore microbial-associated immune purified an provoke to (see adjuvant protein, below). together administered must response To the a protein be with an immune

initiation to have by of molecules and responses properties antigens antibody that Certain adaptive natural to response antigens, organic studying favor defined been structure. as the such simple of polypeptide lysozyme, small proteins immune hen simple to an of synthetic egg-white to in such responses of as essential molecules, The was study defining nitrophenyls, antibody small immunological organic early and arsonates phenyl principles. These by when do antibodies provoke not injected molecules themselves. chemical reactions, carrier. against attached if antibodies to simple a molecule raised protein the them can be covalently, by is However, immunologist in Landsteiner, early small the Such to termed (from molecules by haptens century. haptein, the them Greek studied were who Karl 20th the fasten) first distinct found conjugate that produced of (Fig. immunized animals three antibodies hapten–carrier He with a sets A.1). carrier, hapten-specific any hapten free the with same well set on hapten. One as comprised with that antibodies as reacted The carrier by to specific set carrier the for the hapten-modified was as ability antibodies their unmodified shown bind of second and protein. protein, both with carrier for reacted Finally, the immunization. conjugate of specific some hapten and only used antibodies could related molecules many antibody as synthesized closely the be studies focused these small the primarily in to forms. response on hapten, Landsteiner’s antibodies He bind very a against bind hapten even general, but, fail that that chemical in structures. to raised hapten particular observed related closely binding of by haptens played molecules. in an binding has antigen by important defining of precision part the antibody antibodies The anti-hapten are self antibody also important that they they reactions because and 14-10). compounds Anti-hapten antibodies allergic elicit when medically proteins attach to to mediate Section other penicillin (see responses

Fig. Antibodies the haptens when to only can is an be immunogenic protein carrier. chemical groups hapten linked called small elicited by A.1 with produced. three antibodies of are a immunization hapten–carrier conjugate, types Following carrier called carrier-specific. (blue) is set alone and binds One protein the is hapten hapten-specific. in to (red) One or hapten set to on binds and free called carrier solution any the is binds at binding conjugate joins (purple) conjugate-specific. the sites only apparently used hapten hapten the of to and which and for carrier immunization, specific carrier, the set called One each the of original sum conjugate-specific binding of antibodies in shown anti-hapten binds antibody the at of in additional of anti-carrier bottom; is antibody. result as the the amount antigen more serum a graphs and note of The that antibody this than schematically the type

which and is response The the affects route the type magnitude administered by obtained. antigen of both by routes or introduced body by fatty most into (s.c.) common which dermis vaccine antigen is a tissue The into intradermal experimentally just the subcutaneous or layer the the by as are into injection below (i.d.) intramuscular (i.m.) or directly (i.v.) the injection; into intravenous bloodstream by respiratory administration; into by by and (i.n.) the into tract intranasal the injection tract gastrointestinal oral or transfusion; administration inhalation. or

and is specific used presented generally dendritic cells subcutaneously or antigen. antigen the and probably in strong Antigens injected most against object lymph the taken elicit to this is is when efficiently most commonly method resident up skin of so in responses, by antibodies given T elicit the local the a the experiment because cells nodes, aggregates tend tolerance up cells antigen-presenting Antigens immune transfused that induce bind taken are into bloodstream or directly cells. of or the form to host unless are in by readily the unresponsiveness injected or they to

allergy. in mostly via Antigen is tract the used administration of study the gastrointestinal that systemic of response effects, in a propria, as immunogenic local response if frequently same administered has lamina elsewhere 12). the antibody to the antigen distinctive in producing body manifests (see state eliciting tolerance in intestinal It diminished a form subsequently while a Chapter the antigens the important IgE are tolerance’ (see food, allergy food inhibition Chapter ‘split cause the body, allergies prevents of the helps antibodies, from because in 14). response local while to This be systemic antigens may in prevent entering the of formation of to which immunity the avoiding such

The influenced immune antigen is the an immunogen administered. response also dose by to of proteins elicit not response. threshold immune dose, certain any a most do Below (Fig. is increased, the decline broad a plateau until in high the Above at dose of as gradual a threshold doses antigen the followed is is dose, a reached, by there very increase level response antigen A.2). achieve In memory. at subsequent general, higher antigen is and which values, a immunological secondary immune and of responses plateau sign lower doses occur

when Most poorly immunogenic or by are proteins administered nonimmunogenic themselves. adaptive to responses adjuvant. almost known as antigen the protein that injected antigens a in be require always immune an mixture Strong substances of that any adjuvant the it. An immunogenicity mixed substance is enhances with in Fig. adjuvants are Commonly used listed A.3.

generally ways. immunogenicity enhance Adjuvants different in two more antigens such readily which antigen-presenting cells protein convert First, soluble macrophages phagocytic dendritic ingested as by is adjuvants particulate material, and cells. into immune on colloidal of the adsorbed as by oils, mineral emulsification the the incorporated of For into can antigen (ISCOMs). example, particles be particulate or be be adjuvant made complexes particles in stimulatory (such alum), more and innate Second, a adjuvants contain PAMPs elicit important, immune strong that response. induce taken inflammatory and the the When the in phagocytic PAMPs production cell. activation up adjuvant cytokine antigen-presenting cells, the by of stimulate antigen-presenting co-stimulatory cells of upregulate molecules T that are activating important The cells. activated for levels abundant proteins MHC cells antigen-presenting class many important class and of for antigen II levels (see efficient the upregulate processing Activated also and 3-12). proteins, high I Section plus of presentation the adjuvants contain by in PAMPs, most induced not in humans. local for that responses of adjuvants used animals use are approved to commonly the strong experimental Due inflammatory

of on by arbitrary of dose mass produced dose–response expressed influence and both arbitrary the the units) the antibody (amounts dose antibody primary in used dose of response here antigen units. illustrates a of shown a antibody The typical curve for of response priming secondary 103 elicited effect on a antigen an Very response low not immune of doses all. at do antigen cause an effect specific seem higher Slightly low-zone to as inhibit production, known tolerance. antibody doses response range optimum an response of doses a there Above antigen steady a in broad doses. is is reached; this dose response persists the with increase these across until tolerance. a antigen immune doses inhibit as phenomenon known high high-zone a challenge, to also responsiveness Very of subsequent

Fig. their use. and Common A.3 adjuvants antigen particulate, the the to mixed uptake by are in helps body the and macrophages. Adjuvants render usually with promotes which antigen and it retain the bacterial macrophages cells, dendritic Most the adjuvants aiding bacteria immune that stimulate and of in induction or include response. components the apparently are allowing to when are antigen in Quil the small they ISCOMs micelles, the these A; micelles placed with of antigen-presenting cell, cytosol. viral fuse detergent proteins enter the would infecting cells antiviral a a viral the stimulate protein, an much cell can the response. stimulate as virus Thus, these antigen-presenting response to receptors, Toll-like or often stimulate C-type proteins receptors include compounds receptors. recognition elicit lectin to pattern to designed purified responses (NLRs), receptors such that as (TLRs), NOD-like Vaccines

antigens human as also act contain effective adjuvants. vaccines can naturally microbial some Nevertheless, that used of the are example, cough, adjuvant vaccine. and which Bordetella purified causative is DPT constituents pertussis, the (diphtheria, tetanus) in as agent whooping antigen triplex both pertussis, the For of bacterium are lipid modified monophosphoryl polyI:C, as ligands, currently included such human as of or In of LPS, A, components poly(I):poly(C12U), TLR of several addition, vaccines. derivative derivative a a

responses. A-2 Antibody

analyzing cells the adaptive produced the response and of to by in immune immunity an antibody B to usually measured antibodies, a immunogen injected specific cells contribute B is humoral by secreting response. the or the are as such known most in accumulates of phase plasma; assaying conveniently circulating antibodies that blood, fluid achieved This antibody the antibodies. is by measured Circulating serum is to blood. allowing and collecting antibody it from isolating the clot, the clotted blood, usually then by assays The antiserum below. characteristics of the described using and in are the then determined amount antibody the resulting from for antibodies to use antisera the assays assays, they individuals, antibody referred in were such using Because immune of is serological as commonly often conducted originally and serology. called testing are

of the antibodies of amount, an response produced. are isotype important or most characteristics the affinity class, antibody The and specificity, The antigens. determines antibody the specificity immunogen from of the ability the other to distinguish antibody and of of in ways a number the The antibody rate can of and of antibody function amount their cells, determined is production. the persistence different many synthesis, B responding the after be of different in its vivo. each an in isotype of determined The (see and bathing antibody isotype and 5-12 tissues 10-14); persistence extracellular the plasma Sections by fluid or class has the mainly a half-life is sites The of the biological and response these functions perform the also antibody isotypic determines in antibody found. be will which antibodies an can composition binding monovalent binding in site of to a antigen a binding the affinity; the terms a one to than with its strength strength avidity. of the site single is total more its molecule Finally, antigen is termed antibody antigen-binding binding of its called of antibody the lower required antibody antibodies important: for because higher higher at strength with eliminate the antigen, the its is to affinity concentrations. affinity antigen, Binding less will is of bind the the antigen the these the response of immune protect host response capacity to the infection. of help from that humoral parameters determine All to

chromatography. A-3 Affinity

alternatively, a antiserum antigen:antibody of binding complex containing specific the for mixture, the specificity antigen interactions be from of of exploited antibodies different of mixture can for purification a from specific purification or a The antibodies. The employed technique called chromatography affinity is (Fig. A.4). of beads, often are antigen-specific into antigen, column. which to small, For an are bound, a covalently, loaded antibodies chemically reactive purification beads. allowed mixture pass over is antigen The the to the all then The binds; mixture can away. be in washed antigen other specific components the or it The then eluted, greater to is 2.5 lowering by 11. antigen than raising the specific typically pH to the Antibodies stably pH, are under concentration, the physiological reversible because is salt but bind conditions and noncovalent. bonds of binding temperature, Affinity using beads complex used coated antisera antigen. can specific purify be chromatography from to with by antibodies also technique The known separates affinity affinity of is as it molecules on the basis another. their for because chromatography one

competitive Radioimmunoassay assay. (RIA), immunosorbent enzyme-linked assay A-4 (ELISA), and inhibition

(or is assays but work on for (ELISA) antibody binding same immunosorbent both enzymelinked means binding antigen); and principle, specific (RIA) Radioimmunoassay assay different. the of are direct the detecting the ELISA diagnostics, example, which AIDS. (HIV), commonly the hormones to used blood are assays human while are used Radioimmunoassays cases in and levels for in of frequently with tissue of viral of the immunodeficiency in infection detecting fluids, measure is virus cause standardize of the antigen a or For preparation of a both to pure methods, antibody, needs these known one or in assay. order both, of the is assay the describe patient’s amount determine of to antigen the a used for in HIV a We protein that will a p24 in specific serum. sample, amount instance, this, is antigen preparation a pure of the required. For for specific antibody as mixture, also this case, antibody of needed in a in serum; to starting the preparation or is pure can a determine ELISA antigen use as amount point. such of RIA One a specific

125I; determination antigen the linked ELISA, antibody. is is concentration an enzyme antigen for against pure radioactively to with For the chemically antibody labeled, using RIA, usually of the unknown is unlabeled containing attached to a amount would the case solid this be component, wells a such of multiwell The adsorb plate, of certain amount an which of protein. a plastic antigen, which in solution any will support, the as the labeled Following antibody this,

Fig. Affinity to uses purify antigens chromatography A.4 or binding antibodies. antigen–antibody molecules, antigen is chromatography matrix, monoclonal over of from mixture is a specific beads, such a molecules passed complex to To a of insoluble an and matrix. as the attached purify the antibody mixture washed away. are antigen the specific binds molecules antibody The of other interest; antigen by which disrupt antigen then pH, is bonds. altering Specific eluted antibody– the can usually (not on purified beads same coupled can in shown). Antibodies way antigen the to be

2 anti-A (antigen Wash added from colorless A) product substrate 1 light product linked colored (antigen colored covalently unbound by Add Measure antibody Enzyme enzyme sample makes B) away antibody of to sample absorbance

Fig. the A.5 (ELISA). principle of enzyme-linked The assay immunosorbent

antigen To an chemically purified antibody for is to A, enzyme. A linked antigen detect specific on blocked plastic the The by irrelevant of are sticky be bind tested to adding shown). onto sites coated samples they the nonspecifically; residual proteins plastic which surface wells, (not to are labeled then antibody only is to be to The added that conditions the wells causes under to retained antibody binding, binding on the nonspecific surface. the A that labeled antigen prevent so removed washing, an wells and enzyme-dependent detected by antibody all labeled is color-change from is antibody bound by Unbound reaction. read multichannel fiberoptic microtiter be speeding allows spectrometers, This assay in greatly plates wells known to as the of arrays assay. assay or basic antigen in antibody samples shown of as Figs. allow in to measured Modifications unknown be this A.6 A.25. and

blocked, is and to unlabeled added proteins bind the well under to nonspecific and are washed any adsorption is conditions unbound which allowed antigen the other to antibody away. in and the converts binding ELISA a that product of a radioactivity a of retained is Antibody terms the detected substrate reaction of by is in coated RIA by directly reaction the in amount binding a into measured wells, (Fig. color different whereas in A.5). concentration; read quantitative providing reaction the change very in data furthermore, collection product also can measurement and avoids directly a The easy of color of making radioactivity. tray, reaction the ELISA be hazards ELISA most direct-binding method This the assays. preferred for makes to antigen-coated a or second unlabeled binding unlabeled antibody of antiimmunoglobulin plates. RIA can assay, layer, used the be variation a following also in antibodies as In this labeled of ELISA least are layer antibody. able signal, amplifies the at of antibody labeled each because a use such unlabeled molecules bind to The second two anti-immunoglobulin to the of in can and unlabeled to added, antigen goal is amount plates, the carried labeled antigen the RIA out be reverse the and of in case, washing labeled also to is this determine solution; is antibody when adhered mentioned bound of the above, is amount antibody ELISA after As measured. in a

of used a as known antigencapture (or as commonly cytokines. to products as secreted ELISA capture an generally ELISA more A detect or assay) modification sandwich is such antigen antigen-specific directly Rather bound plate. a to being than the the antibodies plate, attached to are plastic antigens surface thus These present initial are on low high to plate, with able in very the mixture. it that the with the bind even affinity, concentrations antigen in concentrate of and are by bound separate from to different antigen. used epitope first is recognized the A recognizes labeled detect then that that a antibody immobilized the antibody

of variant antigen-capture in to of as a assay, the antigens often single to has Another quantitation sample. been multiplex developed multiple a referred assay, allow cases experimental to of feasible from This cytokines in or cytokine levels examine in assess the of in utilized interest samples, multiple it animals, each not individually. sera technique serum is which clinical often to is their are that distinct with can fluorescent emission be differentially this small assay, distinguished based microspheres For on spectra. of type dyes labeled conjugated dye instance, single for Microspheres antigen, fluorescent specific with cytokine. are for a one antibodies to labeled a given capture identifiers—are the 100 sample microspheres to different with antigen. up microspheres— to The to unique the added binds antibody second antigen that at distinct a is detected a using antigen site. the Bound then and the its is a dye, measure of antibody is a second to magnitude This bound fluorescence conjugated antigen. of the fluorescent different of quantity multiplex fluorescence analysis, then The machine of the that microsphere. labeled amount differentially performs analyzer, this measures associated the each with Luminex®

illustrate of all assays aspects These serological assays. crucial two pure, information. quantitative in at First, in the of form order to least must one reagents be detectable a available obtain be reagent of percentage a of the unbound, Second, must the bound specific the labeled means fraction from there so separating determined. the of that free binding can fraction be achieved this by having the separation trapped partner solid unlabeled on Normally, is a support. away, then can just washed that leaving the bound. do be labeled not molecules Labeled bind that has partner Fig. In trapped and is the A.5, the attached well unlabeled the to binding is antibody labeled by to antigen it. The separation free reagent that the an essential of antibodies. assay is fraction in bound every from uses step

binding one to antibody antibody. allow or a because the sample measure do pure depend on not both in directly amount of antigen antigen the ELISA RIA a or composition, of and unknown labeled of There ways around various are

antigen A less low 2 standard Mixture inhibition of concentration Known 50 100 0 control + A unbound Amount antigen bound bound unlabeled A labeled Compete antibody curve concentration A Anti-A containing 2 of Add with Wash away antigen standard labeled added 1 competitor curve label Count antigen binding Percent antigen 1 curve Add curve of antigen

Fig. A.6 unknown for in inhibition assay Competitive antigen samples.

and a labeled preparation to is reference fixed attached A of of antigen of wells, it. amount bound standard set unlabeled antibody a is a to standard labeled Unlabeled then various of in measured, amounts characteristic samples or generating added antigen inhibition displacement test the and are is curves. with A and unlabeled antigen curve amounts amount standard known be calculated. in samples of the used this allows the is species, by to unknown curve that of labeled obtained as antigen to comparison using identical antibodies. green lacking with The represents any substance line anti-A graph the sample a that on reacts

which shown one to problem, use a of as this in is assay, inhibition Fig. competitive A.6. sample antibody ability compete this to presence In for reference of of attached particular to binding by the assay, a unknown a the an determined plastic type labeled are an antigen amount antigen and antigen’s a to well. with in the a in standard with assay A the comparison first samples curve is of unknown then adding by constructed the amounts amount various preparation; unlabeled by antigen standard. known, standard measure can of by and competitive binding the the of The ability a antibody attaching assay appropriate sample a inhibit test of unknown binding in for measuring can the specific composition used the the also measuring plate of sample to labeled be antibody. antigen to

blood and Hemagglutination typing. A-5

measurement to assays. of antigen binding in is most antibody direct The used quantitative serological state the binds. binding antigen which antibody antibody important assays the some the to to However, ability of physical on the based are alter of can ways. of interactions secondary These detected variety in be a For surface instance, displayed such can particle agglutinate. bacteria as antigen clump, large antibodies or a of is cause when the to the bacterium, the on a to the the only the here surface cells in caused on typing, the same antigens (from blood Greek The reaction blood). the hemagglutination target red blood them clumping and principle of called against reactions is by antibodies are used applies haima,

Fig. and for is to A.7 blood Hemagglutination type recipients groups match transfusion. compatible donors and used blood neither. have not bear column); or are individuals these have against to bear red and lack on who that in anti-B antibodies, similar own whereas blood-group gut A and individuals, cells stimulate thus, the who anti-A AB antigen do (left identical B, type the their individuals these of corresponding bacteria antigens, both antigens antibodies blood formation and antigens type O Common the The individual’s and ABO anti-A of transfusion donor antibodies agglutination red anti-B cells reveals the of group. recipient a or blood of with pattern blood a may the versa, blood the a vice cells agglutinate blood are potentially antibodies other cross-match, groups serum donor, not which of red detect ABO Before also called of part of that the procedure system. recipient is transfusion, tested for and that the harmful the antibodies against

recipients. ABO group is determine to donors blood blood the Hemagglutination of used and transfusion anti-B substances, to antibodies the A or induced or Clumping respectively anti-A B blood-group by or that agglutinins (Fig. is bind agglutination called or A.7). in surface arrayed many the blood antigens are to by blood-group when antibodies. causing the cross-linked the cell, cells agglutinate copies These red of on of simultaneous identical molecule on the to least involves blood Because molecules have cross-linking antigens antigen-binding cells, this identical of reaction cells each sites. hemagglutination that two binding antibody by also the must antibody demonstrates at different

the tests rhesus and A-6 detection incompatibility. Coombs of

anti-immunoglobulin use detect antibodies to newborn, the cause fetalis. antibodies or that tests hemolytic Coombs of the erythroblastosis disease by the were first Coombs, developed the called antibodies test is Coombs and Robin still for disease test. Anti-immunoglobulin this specific Hemolytic mother makes a disease rhesus IgG occurs newborn her cells the fetus. of on the Rh antibodies antigen or for blood when bloodgroup expressed of red the mothers Rh-negative cells Rh exposed antigen. fetal these are antibodies the bearing to they at inherited when red paternally Rh-positive delivery make blood across antibodies pregnancies, fetus. During to placenta these the transported subsequent the are newborn This normal protects is beneficial, generally process against it infants as infection. which newborn coat in a and cells the destroyed anemia red fetal liver, phagocytic by causing anti-Rh the then are IgG However, cells, the blood fetus hemolytic infant. antibodies in

cell blood are so lysis the do of antibodies spaced red and anti-Rh in cause the on blood surface, in fix correct to Rh not bind widely complement IgG conformation not so cells antigens do red the and vitro. the red against not do Furthermore, blood-group unlike not antibodies are against that for agglutinate antigens. fully cells, ABO antigens Rh understood, antibodies blood reasons developed. was immunoglobulin Thus, were anti-Rh until antibodies difficult antibodies detecting anti-human maternal that can remove cells after serum. IgG unbound is to washing the be cells antibodies bound immunoglobulin detected fetal blood in the fetal to the red these, present With cells any Adding antibodies antibodies immunoglobulin anti-human maternal which are red fetal to cells bound. the blood washed agglutinates against direct Coombs (Fig. is the test This surface to cells. directly A.8), the because called so blood it red antibody the bound of fetal detects in incubated antibody the which test cells, the which Rh-positive are then Coombs with maternal with after and washed serum anti-Rh blood to to agglutinated antibody unbound nonagglutinating An antibody, remove red is antiimmunoglobulin indirect bind antibody-coated serum: Fig. cells (see first used are anti-Rh the is immunoglobulin detect A.8). the prevented to disease of to (see test 15-10). disease The be detected, allows this that might Rh allows indirect hemolytic to the and Section newborn lead incompatibilities Coombs be knowledge blood drugs and cells Coombs cause commonly used to also anemia. red detect bind that to test The antibodies hemolytic against is

antibodies. Monoclonal A-7

are The of natural a the affinities. molecules mixture a generated or and specificities response antibodies immunization after different of in laboratory in immune a single can results shown even determinant antibodies Some the from this as that but antibodies such of a be at different antigenic antigen, heterogeneous, directed hapten heterogeneity on bind of the immunizing epitopes focusing. markedly production isoelectric as by to the which of isoelectric point, at proteins zero. net the charge technique, is their this separated on their basis pH In are pH is which (focused) proteins and it the molecule gradient for a electrophoresing point. the that long migrates along By pH thus is enough, at reaches at concentrated neutral in until gradient pH it each anti-hapten by paper, to support be ability this such can antibodies labeled a detected then to and antibodies hapten. transferred their containing solid way treated the is in nitrocellulose bind When anti-hapten as antiserum the binding antigenic can heterogeneous. hapten shows isoelectric be The determinant to that points antibodies bind antibodies that of even various of the same

many to they are inherent purposes of valuable have they the contain. but biological antibodies Antisera that disadvantages relate the for heterogeneity certain if by raised different preparation and immunization the from of other a identical antiserum even same each all the First, is antisera, genetically in antigen identical animal using protocol. complex identical be antisera limited the Second, of to in is only thus clinical long can serological a or series use and it produced in or volumes, experiments impossible tests. reagent give the purified include Section of analysis (see can antibodies of that Finally, unexpected cross-reactions, affinity chromatography which antibodies experiments. by even A-3) confound populations minor full potential was and to the antibody making a of of specificity. supply problems, necessary homogeneous develop these antibodies, it unlimited molecules To known an avoid of of way to structure harness and of antibody-forming or, the has recently, cultures from monoclonal more antibodies by been genetic cells engineering. hybrid production through of achieved This

search plasma biochemists tumor they multiple by homogeneous of to in detailed 1950s, the of chemical common cells. of preparation antibody produced turned analysis in to that patients Starting a myeloma, subject could proteins with a by known called it normally the gamma a homogeneous is a presence It amounts produced large that associated proteins would are myeloma for in because models protein the of cells, globulin this patient’s antibodies disease and was as of likely with seemed myeloma that serum, plasma serve

Fig. red against anti-globulin Coombs tests blood direct for cell antibody and antigens. indirect A.8 The can Rh– of blood that time to delivery. the enter red become mother fetus Rh+ of An at maternal the fetal circulation an cells immunized IgG pregnancy anti-Rh damage the cross red with a subsequent fetal and an fetus, antibodies blood cells. the placenta In Rh+ can contrast and cause placenta, anti-Rh In cannot do IgM the of the antibodies to anti-ABO maternal harm. isotype cross not so and antibodies, are adding which away their fetal antibody shown then cell the not against can cells. human do by antibodies red Anti-Rh immunoglobulin surface agglutinates on washing antibody-coated and but agglutinate red presence the cells, unbound blood be immunoglobulin, blood as mother’s is serum in indirect in the test; Rh+ has the Coombs direct once with red the in blood antibodies an antibody serum treated blood the cells, can Anti-Rh test. incubated cells detected red Coombs the and bound, be are

Fig. The of antibodies. monoclonal production A.9 days to A order an a large with immunization 3 in and are specific immunized of antigen antibody. spleen they killed, population produce cells booster are given intravenous before Mice secreting Spleen die culture. few a in days after cells produce using hybrid cells a myeloma To of called by immortal line source hybridoma. fused they are produce cell antibody continuous (PEG) glycol a a to with polyethylene cells. unfused secreting ensure hypoxanthine–aminopterin–thymidine which to cells medium, they is lack The transferase select are this are used sensitive (HAT) hypoxanthine:guanine they not beforehand phosphoribosyl to without antibody the hybrid the selected cells to and enzyme themselves enzyme, that are myeloma (HGPRT); that myeloma gene and potential with continuously in hybrid of of cells cells. cells cells HGPRT spleen allows can survive combined unfused in contributed grow myeloma hybrid to medium, malignant because finite by contributed by the the the life-span the The cell spleen the only culture, HAT cells by medium, cells die in shown cells and myeloma HAT here Unfused spleen dark, nuclei. irregular with the therefore as unfused and are can antibody Individual single and make specificity isolated cell hybridomas obtained single screened dilution be and clones antibody by of for that the production, grown. then desired hybridoma bulk amounts produce grown to in of culture cells large are antibody. cloned The a hybridoma cell antibody antibody. same line which make is As hybridoma monoclonal single cell, of descended all is the the a called thus cells each a from molecule,

normal molecules. antibody on the structure much knowledge came antibody of studies myeloma from early proteins. Thus, of antibodies that be could cells. monoclonal These obtained studies plasma from immortalized showed objects the was proteins study or usefulness most tools. antigen their of as specificity of immunological However, limited myeloma unknown, as which

by antigenic problem known a This of Georges was technique Köhler solved producing a specificity. for and population César homogeneous Milstein, antibodies of devised who myeloma cells donor. did produce fusing to mouse hybrid spleen immunized the to antigen and for spleen used that a by proliferated secreted They specific an immunize to cells from indefinitely both cells cell of this mouse the antibody the secrete the and provides ability myeloma continuously. spleen in ability to cell specific The while cell culture indefinitely immunoglobulin make the provides to grow antibody, by antibody that produced produces cells partner hybrid cell partner. cell the the no myeloma proteins itself, from the antibody a By immune using comes only spleen die, so parental cell myeloma After lines, unfused kill only that hybrid survive. myeloma parental cells the selected using drugs are cells spleen while that hybridomas, cell, life-span the and have the or hybrid fusion, a limited soon cloned desired are specificity cells hybridomas producing cultures antibody by the (Fig. and regrowing of from Those then the single identified A.9). from produces are each identical site hybridoma a antibody structure, Because all and their is fusion including B a molecules the single with cell, isotype. it derived clone antigen-binding in Such called are antibodies monoclonal antibodies. revolutionized and by specificity. of known single use the technology supply providing antibody This of a of a has antibodies limitless most diagnostic agents. assays, antibodies therapeutic in as and used Monoclonal as are probes, serological now make and far, limited efforts only So this have to are way, to mouse monoclonal approach use same with produced in monoclonals however, success. the met human antibodies routinely genes. DNA antibody in human’ currently transgenic (described mice are recombinant antibodies or (see by monoclonal from ‘Fully human A-34) display carrying to Section Section using and technology therapeutic technology plasma by human express phage using by A-9), antibody immunizing clone cells genes Section (see made A-8),

antibody production. libraries A-8 for display V-region Phage

a genes the to antibody-like fused antibodies are V, bacteriophage. of antigen-binding segments the coat variable, or producing encoding In gene of technique domains encoding a protein molecules, for Bacteriophages

rise V with VH bacteriophages— a variable protein bacteriophage VL Isolate VH of DNA Cloning gives Construct regions antibody a phage population display phages Select fusion of random by of to VL of coat regions genes variable protein encoding mixture antigen binding specifc V desired protein population a region antibody regions with library to a

Fig. production genetic by of engineering. A.10 antibodies The

of immunoglobulin library a the regions sequences to variable Short DNAs with PCR, by material. light-chain V-region genes in heavyand primers to starting consensus of light-chain (V) are used spleen as generate DNA heavyand one each that and properties. genes filamentous one into V-region protein fusion a expresses light-chain heavyand as are phage region heavy-chain with light-chain surface randomly cloned V These such phages antibody-like are then in and is bound to coated phages resulting surface antigen. the bacteria, display with phage The a library multiplied antigen. unbound to are The recovered, and multiplied away; are bound phages in washed bound bacteria, phages again the are high-affinity antigen-binding After only phages specific left. few cycles, a and shown). engineered genetically produce like genes molecules, their to antibody recovered antibody antibody can or can be genes be used V molecules (not engineered These into used antibodies, monoclonal hybridoma DNA. humans as and This the advantage the of for that replace has can source be producing technology the may technology

antigen-binding displayed and with coats bacteriophages. infect the containing resulting particles such the the to antibody-like protein, express the fusion have bacteria, the on of are gene used domain outside fusions phage that known display a domain surface, A different a is phages, recombinant displaying of on library. each as phage the collection antigen-binding a phages (see Section chromatography a way for domains the by be mixture a A-3), isolated antibodies particular by complex particular antigen. the in antigen-binding same antigen expressing phages much In the that specific can affinity to for that for library selecting binding can antigen isolated specific from be The recovered particles bacteria. used and that phage infect bind are to fresh Each (Fig. isolated in will antigen-binding particle a phage way antibody analogous produce monoclonal a to this monoclonal A.10). the immunoglobulin that the can each encode an encoding parts them unique of recovered a parts molecule antibody. to of the are antigen-binding The by to from phage, complete for to genes DNA construct which be used genes antibody genes phage and site, invariant then joining all from host-cell such are non-antibody-producing these a reconstructed antibody as used introduced for cells transfected cells hybridomas. myeloma When of produced antibodies the hybridomas, with the desirable characteristics suitable line, antibodies secrete monoclonal can the into genes

vaccinated human from Generation of individuals. antibodies A-9 monoclonal

sequences cells be isolated antibodies In made plasma by some gene light-chain cases, cloning monoclonal rearranged antibody the vaccinated from individuals. human can heavyand from from individuals 1 be immunized were can cell-surface CD27 of such Based the week the and on who human earlier. isolated as molecules expression plasma CD38, approximately cells peripheral blood of cells are sequences microtiter cell heavyand are the antibody from cloned sorted variable-region PCR. plates, and plasma by of wells into light-chain each Individual antibody into constructs full-length heavyand heavyand the inserted human are introduced light-chain are vectors paired then cell immortalized light-chain genes, into sequences recreate the These and an line. that proteins immunizing screened to are bind antigen. the to secreting cells that Human those then identify antibody cells permanent specific antibody protein. human become source the a immortalized These of

imaging A-10 and fluorescent Microscopy dyes. using

identifying are specifically their to as molecule antigen, particular a they in bind invaluable corresponding and antibodies fluids. stably probes for tissues, Because or cells, biological of sections be to different accurately techniques. molecules labeling tissue cells locate Antibody single or can used variety molecules their in in by target a or detected is as microscopy, labeled a technique the is detect fluorescent dye or with to it, antibody known (a used itself, When fluorochrome immunofluorescence anti-immunoglobulin fluorophore) the the then by and antibody microscopy. in As be unbound antibody antibody the by its stably to techniques, binds allowing removed to serological all thorough washing. antigen, using are or fixation folded only be either has techniques usually the chemical sections against performed. gentle been using to protein antibodies sought of proteins native, needs the the of being by preserved, that protein, frozen fixed the only the Because native antibody the most recognize structure by after features surface reaction tissue to they such Some bind if even are denatured, sections. protein fixed in specifically proteins bind will and however, tissue antibodies antibodies, even

anti-immunoglobulin, antibody a is bound can fluorescently labeled however, the indirect by detected commonly be immunofluorescence. technique covalently as fluorescent The dye antibody; known specific the to more attached directly a wavelength visible of green, in the light chosen The blue light for wavelength, different emit are dyes or excited usually by immunofluorescence and spectrum. one of light; (PE), and The fluorochromes (Fig. emit fluorescein, are emit (PerCP), protein Texas phycoerythrin most red which commonly and which green light emits rhodamine used which orange/red Red chlorophyll peridinin and light; A.11). coming used (Fig. microscope light fluorescence the filters, from in fluorochrome using only the detected By the selective is A.12). this Although devised to technique Albert Coons first

Fig. microscopy. Immunofluorescence A.12 the Antibodies triangle) tissues. a presence of antigens fluorescent as (green such corresponding labeled or in with reveal dye to cells fluorescein used are their stained them excite green cells light to dye. blue or a fluorescent that are microscope using The the exposes to examined The wavelength, a through light excited by captured emits which viewing a is the at filter. characteristic sample dye selective in This the in cells widely determine and applied tissues. location biology technique to of molecules is antibodies of can antigens with detected color. by tissue be dyes distinctive Different sections labeling in stain glutamic dye are Langerhans. β to islets of a to antibodies against Here, shown the cells acid decarboxylase (GAD) coupled of pancreatic green the protein fluorescent dye. α this against enzyme hormone the not labeled orange do coupled and are cells with an make The antibodies with glucagon self an 1 an the GAD a attack (see type β of important cells Langerhans insulin-secreting is disease antigen which islets by 15). diabetes, Chapter immune destroyed tissues the in on of are in Photograph courtesy M. Solimena of and Camilli. De P.

identify of protein. cell any be the source can it detect of the to used plasma antibody, the as distribution or (see dyes of or be section Fig. two in antibodies, same to the different more distribution the attaching tissue different cell determined By can molecules A.12).

elaborate a preparation. which gives uses sections produce microscopy tissue, microscope, fluorescent very of fluorescence cell need techniques high of without The (sub-micrometer) for resolution ultrathin development the the computer-aided sample optical confocal to or from light a (a desired out-of-focus only The through removing plane. light refocused excitation a specimen, the is thus is focused particular ‘pinhole’ light for the above plane laser) that or below source the detector, onto reaches from so emitted emissions in the and the plane conventional optical can image microscopy, fluorescence a sections than axis. the successive built sharper gives from This up ‘vertical’ along be taken picture a and three-dimensional antibodies proteins cells can fluorescent cells microscopy fixed or naturally stained with with on on tagged fluorescently Confocal used living proteins. be expressing tagged use from fluorescent protein jellyfish come isolated first victoria. Aequorea was (GFP), The green wide into of proteins these fluorescent the to proteins now in use fluorescent emitting routine The or of list yellow includes blue, those fluorescence. red, cyan, visualize it other with molecules, Fig. genes different as cell adhesion molecules, that place target has takes co-receptors, of transfected contact receptors, to possible T-cell been (see fusion encoding when such using signaling By and T with redistribution the a cells a cell CD45, makes proteins, 9.37).

80 a the tissue, will can and around for the fluorescent label damage specimen. however, into light soon μm source wavelengths bleach microscopy, used excitation, only the the at penetrate typically and Confocal time example, a cells technique the This suitable of period tissue. a not to sufficient, in that the a live imaging for specimen is means of over movements track for these developed twophoton some limitations. more fluorescence overcomes microscopy of recently scanning technique of The used these are of of for In fluorophore. the are longer ultrashort lower-energy pulses laser simultaneously of this wavelength required (and photons two technology, and lower nearly light thus photons excitation, energy) excite of much arriving with to focus most is high-contrast Excitation so the of restricted intense, the be at image. microscope, beam focus, very emission the the where fluorescence region in therefore of light a sharp, to only small occur a producing will will of plane and blue than in typically to microscopy, infrared) over so wavelengths out less longer tissue near confocal and and can the the a damaging imaging ultraviolet The in is be longer-wavelength (typically carried used period. light living also micrometers) confocal in within fluorescence depths the the tissue haze, (several photons light hundred of than and possible. cause to because imaging single collected is microscopy, emitted and scattering consequent background is cannot More greater sections optical confocal a from built microscopy, thin microscopy image three-dimensional up. produces Like be which can two-photon

video digital using two-photon the or combined molecules cameras. is time, track or with movements sensitive over timelapse cells To of confocal microscopy imaging tracking two-photon 10). interact immunology, cells movements fluorescence observing where of cells (see time-lapse In and proteins individual the intact fluorescent they particularly has organs for T B and imaging been in valuable lymphoid expressing Chapter

microscopy. A-11 Immunoelectron

technique a detect structures Antibodies microscopy, electron proteins microscopy. immunoelectron intracellular as high by the known resolution can of at particular be or used location to then the are with the against labeled transmission required particles antigen and ultrathin sections, which in gold examined are applied then to electron Antibodies microscope. particles or gold (see different diameters labeled two with of enable be Fig. simultaneously more studied proteins Antibodies to 6.12). of section. with in ultrathin the antigen each present few technique because staining adequately, are The difficulty this section in is molecules

Immunohistochemistry. A-12

into that A-10) sections which a (see chemically reaction colored Section tissue in a detecting an in coupled the is a immunofluorescence to to situ. in for specific enzyme substrate An antibody is colorless converts immunohistochemistry, product alternative protein antibody under microscope. product a can directly be observed localized deposition colored The has the where light bound of by antigen, antibody to be removed its stably unbound thorough antibody washing. to allowing binds The insoluble frequently Section are coupled uses This in the detection is the analogous where at precipitate A-4) site the ELISA being are immunohistochemistry enzymes, products method to (see formed. of that in the they bound antibody and colored difference same detecting primarily and and phosphatase two peroxidase are used commonly these enzymes Horseradish the alkaline applications. most in substrates tetrazolium on brown the (BCIP/NBT), a phosphatase peroxidase alkaline substrate is dark plus which a to or blue purple can diaminobenzidine blue Horseradish used; produce produce to dyes while stain. gives the oxidizes precipitate, or substrate phosphate common 5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl nitroblue rise a depending red needs As the the preserved by the of structure native immunofluorescence, will with it be that protein antibody. recognized sought so be being to usually are has techniques, antibody gentle after sections tissue or reaction been that most Tissues fixation frozen performed. fixed only the used by chemical are the are fixed

and co-immunoprecipitation. A-13 Immunoprecipitation

with structures crude purify, membrane immunized cellular or to are other raise are often difficult whole that and antibodies cells against cell To mice proteins extracts. hybridomas type making are immunization. (see monoclonal cell then to used these by produce immunized Antibodies for molecules Section bind that mice antibodies the individual A-7) the to obtained using against do type the not and disrupt but labeled by that detergents characterize the the cells identified same in dissolved of are interfere radioisotopes nonionic molecules antibodies, cell with To with interactions. antigen–antibody membranes the by binding to This protein immunoprecipitation. antibody as in reaction be to allows known a labeled isolated the wall protein as of such from is are to beads chromatography derived usually solid binds to to in Staphylococcus a used that or attached that Protein the the aureus the Section antibody affinity A, Fc support, region a IgG of The antibodies. tightly (see cell A-3), immunoprecipitation Cells labeled for two analysis. in can ways main be metabolically cell the labeled the a radioactive that in (Fig. acids cell be cellular proteins amino proteins are incorporated into a then medium containing in All growing by can A.13). is detected reaction plasma proteins by with prevent found that labeled under conditions high biotin, in a membrane only readily that that binds a avidin, label only can by Alternatively, very crossing iodine affinity. the small membrane labels from a with radioiodination proteins one whites and the proteins biotin that protein labeling cell, the inside egg by molecule cell-surface or

been labeled ways. several have proteins in the antibody, can characterized by be the Once isolated they a dodecyl in proteins have (PAGE) (SDS), they ionic after technique most dissociated electrophoresis the been strong from common gel polyacrylamide The antibody the sulfate of detergent sodium is

Fig. dissociates coats immunoprecipitation protein also it cell a reacting with A.13 an Cellular lysates. from antibody the proteins antibody characterized with be the and labeled of can by to its to can gel labeled size migrate in be negative actively allowing according electrophoresis proteins charge, All synthesized it strong metabolically cellular polyacrylamide (PAGE). proteins one methionine; or radioactive here X-ray by The determined using of positions amino by autoradiography acids for incubating are proteins the label can cells just cell-surface labeled film. the 35S-Met), with (shown protein. molecular composition radioactive the in of a to the a be SDS-PAGE used that iodine cannot of cell form determine cross subunit by using and weight can This technique by of metabolic shown). molecule usually protein reaction detected with with its avidin biotin, more labeling bands the with or are membrane by Patterns a observed (not reaction labeled small detergent forms to the of the individual proteins presence be by of are Cells those can lysed with and cell-associated radioiodination, than owing complex labeled revealed panel). protein precursor (right monoclonal precipitated antibody mature a to with The beads. attached shown). washed be been detected of the surface (not away, identified as a or protein that bound same biotinylation iodination can size protein form have as the surface being After proteins unbound by sulfate eluted in detergent generally is dodecyl sodium SDSPAGE. abbreviated which as the (SDS), that proteins, conferring gel. migration electrophoretic the allows field homogeneously the a to through charge to relatively drive SDS protein binds by mainly protein Fig. controlled The migration of rate is (see size A.13). (see of be focusing differing Proteins charges using can separated isoelectric Section A-7). This a gel electrophoresis. technique be can SDS-PAGE known as in combined procedure twodimensional with urea, a in the in agent, a this, is focusing and run immunoprecipitated narrow tube For an on gel protein nonionic of polyacrylamide. isoelectric solubilizing eluted gel, slab of This run then separate by the which isoelectric placed an SDS-PAGE focusing molecular top then (Fig. across is is vertically to first-dimensional weight gel proteins the A.14). Two-dimensional hundreds mixture be powerful gel proteins distinguished a to electrophoresis one another. allows many technique complex a is from that of in

the as technique as whether, it weight of within result and Immunoprecipitation for undergoes of protein isoelectric useful (see processing for molecular molecular Section abundance, cell. a well of immunoblotting point isoelectric example, A-14) as are and and the its weight and in a changes point related the distribution, determining

interacts is technique of is physically and the given extension protein determine a to whether Coimmunoprecipitation immunoprecipitation an used

Fig. II of gel A.14 electrophoresis molecules. MHC class Two-dimensional have labeled mouse Proteins in spleen (see been Fig. metabolically cells direction II against a and electrophoresis). the in class the in second focusing right (hence mouse a one precipitated H2-A, with monoclonal separated by isoelectric angles and the direction A.13), at two-dimensional term molecule antibody to SDS-PAGE first MHC gel one the weight distinguish allows molecular their of the of to basis This charge. on molecules same are proteins autoradiography. The separated detected by MHC II β, points chains, upper and different panels). The and two these (compare MHC class molecules the composed have molecules lower different class of α and are in isoelectric II mice MHC superscripts indicated (k, of by p). lowercase genotype The is Actin, a. common a is marked contaminant, of courtesy J.F. Photographs Babich.

another given protein. with with extracts immunoprecipitated the containing interaction antibody complex are presumed against one proteins. of first Cell the is specific protein. tested protein for the other antibody the presence means second material then by of isolated a against immunoblotting this with the by The

A-14 blotting). Immunoblotting (Western

is given quantities problem to having but used large a cells it immunoblotting with identifying of Section radioisotopes. avoids protein of A-13), (see cell lysate, a in of immunoprecipitation Like the presence the label for cells A-13). run detergent placed cell is in lysate solubilize to (see proteins, all proteins the SDS-PAGE separate Unlabeled are to the on and Section a proteins gel such are to the stable nitrocellulose The size-separated transferred membrane. a from support as then denatured bound labeled treatment those an by to enzyme. proteins detected able are antibodies with (mainly are revealed react anti-immunoglobulin react sequences); that antibodies antibodies SDS-solubilized by with proteins Specific with with the specific comparable proteins. DNA as The of synonym blotting, provoked because name and size-separated turn for blots arose detecting as size-separated ‘Northern’ in of Southern, Southern Western technique Edwin term immunoblotting for is sequences RNA, ‘Western’ a which the who for blotting for the known after it, devised blots basic have applications blots many research in Western diagnosis. and clinical for to detect often test constituents used example, specific proteins, to antibodies against the of presence of HIV (Fig. They sera different antibodies against for are A.15).

and of A-15 by antibodies complexes multiprotein in the mass of spectrometry. isolation Use characterization

that complexes. of in are the immune proteins cells function Many components of multi-protein as cytokine death. gene signal as receptors, T-cell is well antigen involved B-cell in as the intracellular and receptors for cell-surface and transduction, most proteins such receptors, case and cell the This expression, the one blotting Western of a of the by to complex member bind identify mass such a other of to be can spectrometry. process that Antibodies members by used followed or complex co-immunoprecipitation

masses of precise a molecules. preparation spectrometer of A the of can measurements in extremely mass constituents provide in subjected SDS-PAGE sample, To individual in the is for two-dimensional to complex separate co-immunoprecipitation, sample as to identify proteins that A-13) (see electrophoresis or the acquired the analysis. proteins by first such one-dimensional Section unknown gel a often of from excised with easily proteolytic enzyme, series Gel and treated gel. a peptides into as the the digest trypsin, slices can such protein are that be a to eluted ionizes subjecting to by peptide the transfers mixture magnetic into and mass phase, introduced The them the a them field. then vacuum separates spectrometer, gas then them which to peptides, the is under high is on based the separation mass/charge (m/z) The

Fig. virus is infected Western antibodies in human blotting from against the A.15 serum individuals. identify used immunodeficiency to (HIV) SDS, and its proteins proteins SDS-PAGE. dissociated detergent is treatment with constituent separated using by are the into its virus The sheet with are serum. transferred separated nitrocellulose a reacted proteins The and to the test with bind from enzyme-linked substrate. antibodies the deposits HIV detected colorless immunoglobulin, serum colored which Anti-HIV a various anti-human to are material proteins in and the reliably and antibodies the antibody although denatured. with will widely, denaturing methodology antigen SDS when means used that general antigen recognize technique detect of any it the is works is that combination most the effect of This and

Fig. in charge mass on multiprotein ratio subjecting Characterization complexes by differences mass by (m/z) A.16 to of spectrometry. their to them multiprotein Following a vacuum field. magnetic a of immunoprecipitation under high using intensity peptide for ion one information A individual of electrophoresis. on proteins separated the each component the antibodies for and by complex, displays are gel specific signal complex detector collects the a histogram. as information the usually This spectrum, and histogram, protease band containing compared a trypsin. one database An potential is as isolated with referred individual protein to with representing a such is a digested as of into in sequences, proteolytic protein in injected the used The sample ionizes digested identification (ID) mass cleavage sites for spectrometer, protein the allowing enzyme the sample. peptides, for the known all which is the protein and a gas ratio histogram of and ion, the for them each intensity them each ion on and the (Fig. collects based data detector displays separates to transfers phase, a signal then as information the A.16). compared can referred histogram, sequences. cleavage sites proteolytic in all to a protein known a potential be spectrum, with containing used) database This as usually enzyme (for the derived assigned often these unique protein, to the information the from initial the of and can spectrum the the measurements, database. comprising to a unambiguously precision be Due in peptides multiple protein

analyzed peptide be ions sequenced (MS/MS) allow by mass well spectrometers Modern as to as multidimensional mass. their by instruments, N2), separated in resultant ions separated a In an section inert with such collision are with a in (Fig. the sector fragments other peptide (often molecules these third as second fragmented in one sector gas A.17). primarily in Fragmentation occurs the

Fig. (MS/MS). A.17 amino Determining by mass multidimensional the acid peptide sequence of a spectrometry with middle Multidimensional fragments mass (MS/MS) ions. but in two tandem spectrometers an spectrometers consist of linked mass sector that interceding spectrometer peptide first separates shown ions, as in sector, Fig. mass first the In the A.16. separation the in such the peptide inert by other ion an collision molecules then first (often N2). is fragmented with sector middle of this Each from apparatus as gas amino each primarily the one generated residue. a peptide acid the occurs fragmentation by Since is mixture in fragments which backbone, fragments in of differ The second final in sector. then spectrometer, are fragments the separated the mass resultant The read sequence spectrum. directly from of second the the be mass can peptide of residues because of acid possible each knowledge can measurements order in The of each amino with the the exquisite the be mass deduced the peptide ion amino acid of exact together residue. precision of of

directly the from read backbone, mixture the to of mass peptide be peptide of the of the allowing spectrum sequence fragments. a peptides can employed mass upstream sequenced place mixture of to complex and In to run. (LC-MS/MS), mass separation chromatograph provide single allow be separation to the electrophoresis, in a gel of of prior peptides additional a of liquid thousands very of be analyzers technique identified was cells repertoire It Chapter the bound antigen-presenting studies that molecules role an in MHC of on surface of the that 6). peptides this latter to played (see early the essential

A-16 of blood fractionation. peripheral density-gradient by Isolation lymphocytes

analyzed vitro. is first them so their can The in be behavior to studying that isolate lymphocytes step in readily iodine-containing be and from can centrifugation the isolated polymer Human peripheral Ficoll-Hypaque™ over most consisting compound of gradient blood carbohydrate mixture dense a step density by lymphocytes the a of metrizamide. and cells) a centrifuge for preparing a by density a step tube. at of solution of Ficoll-Hypaque layer solution precise (1.077 placing this A a g/liter the gradient is at of bottom made human layered mixed (heparin sample saline clotting) top prevents of Ficoll-Hypaque on of heparinized the A carefully blood is solution. with for blood their based Following on separated 30 the centrifugation the minutes, of about components have densities. short the which remain layer during centrifugation. upper the in the and contains top platelets, plasma blood The layer the solution tube. density the Red than and granulocytes at and cells of bottom Ficoll-Hypaque a the blood higher have collect Ficoll-Hypaque blood interface blood mainly The at and layers lymphocytes cells monocytes peripheral resulting and the mononuclear between consists of (PBMCs), (Fig. population, the the collects called and A.18). necessarily not system, can blood. is isolated readily lymphoid Although of only from lymphocytes is accessible, representative it population this recirculating because be the

various in ranges The of of of cells are with antibody ‘normal’ in blood, the blood the along types classes, numbers white normal concentrations in the given in different Fig. ranges the A.19.

tissues from than Isolation lymphocytes other A-17 of blood.

In commonly lymphoid marrow, isolated organs, animals, lymphoid from are humans, (see spleen, as humans, in mucosal-associated or thymus, lymph Fig. most such occasionally palatine the tissues—in nodes, and tonsils bone lymphocytes experimental 12.6). lymphocytes population isolated in are by fractionating specialized resides A these the surface cells of epithelia;

panel) Diluted anticoagulated Ficoll-Hypaque™ blood is layered (left over centrifuged. and consisting and panel). blood Red recovered Ficoll-Hypaque™, over be or are monocytes band interface (right and the polymorphonuclear granulocytes the it lymphocytes denser cells together at through travel while cells some of mononuclear with and leukocytes can

Fig. be blood cells from by blood A.18 mononuclear whole isolated Peripheral can centrifugation. Ficoll-Hypaque™

diluted (specifc gravity blood =1.078) Ficoll-HypaqueTM centrifugation

Fig. The A.19 cellular human and of major humoral components blood. high well of proteins. cells, as antibodies cells, complement cells, and T myeloid and blood contains Human B concentrations as

after detachment epithelial the its membrane. basement from layer can prominent, itself. of local response responses isolated site lymphocytes the the situations be in Finally, immune where from are For the fluid the be joint in that reaction arthritis, are from joints, order autoimmune aspirated inflammatory isolated example, inflamed to is to in study for an the responsible lymphocytes from response space. rheumatoid thought

light cells used to after or specific microscopy. by isolate microdissection is an histological intact technique sample populations cells the tissue visualizing from specimen of a Lasercapture the discrete the sample melt in of an ‘captured’ to by the cells slide, be microscope onto on laser a and interest polymer locations. polymer using The can the infrared over placing sample the isolated (Fig. from or RNA, be Once the completed, be proteins dissected lifted polymer–cell cells DNA, can composite can and A.20). A rather makes than of of laser, ultraviolet an approach infrared. variant use this (UV) intact unwanted area and interest. leaving of In be even the a or as cut to of tool, UV portions the away this the can tissue, laser molecular the cutting ablate acts case, used

Flow FACS cytometry A-18 analysis. and

stream laser individual in flow An counts cells is passing enumerating powerful of tool and through which cytometer, for a the and immensely cells detects immune populations a defining beam. flow A cells called identified to separate sorter cytometer a is equipped fluorescenceactivated cell the (FACS). intracellular are used antibodies by cell instruments monoclonal cell-surface the of properties identified proteins. against These study to that or subsets are using population cells within first a are mixed labeled by Individual

Fig. microdissection. Laser-capture A.20 visualizing the after Specific microscopy. light or specimen an cells from intact cells of can populations be histological by isolated sample tissue is discrete is placed to the locations. called melt onto infrared in on slide, microscope the the over laser the an polymer used and A sample the polymer transfer sample film composite lifted and the are then cells of The isolated. polymer–cell interest is prepared the RNA, be from can dissected or cells. proteins DNA,

antibodies. tagged coupled specific antibodies or treatment by followed specific dyes, antibodies with monoclonal by fluorescent anti-immunoglobulin to fluorescently stream mixture The liquid each in volume labeled containing then suspended composed larger of a creating forced a cell. saline single of of is much and a a droplets, small nozzle, cells fine of through fluoresce. light, molecules passes laser a cell through excited cell beam bound any As and dye scatters the to are the laser each it and cell-surface gives and intracellular Sensitive the of labeled cell and fluorescence granularity which photomultiplier the which about and (Fig. emissions, of about binding size antibodies or the detect about both the each light, cell, the proteins expression hence give information scattered monoclonal of the the information tubes by A.21).

can charged from droplets no plate, at negatively stream charge, the passed plates of a as stream stream each they versa. which charged are the attracted to pass main between droplets cell; droplets containing through into the then up a and vice that more droplets, is of breaks opposite to single back charge positively a the the In so precise liquid signals containing are the nozzle the passed electric be time computer the used than charge, an cell that to generate from deflected sorter, deflected, cells in Once containing are collected droplets tubes. of specific distinguished by binding a cells, the can way, be of this the In antibody, mixed subpopulations purified from of labeled cells. population Alternatively, of the expressed can label by types. undesired marker cell population to deplete various fluorochrome be proteins to at used directed cells, same the different antibodies a a to cells can unlabeled be labeled to cells. retaining waste direct sorter only the The cell used channel,

single intensity numbers. a in cell the form are a usually the of fluorescence cells a are flow labeled of When histogram versus displayed with one-dimensional antibody, data fluorescent cytometer from a coupled more data fluorescent different to If antibodies or then are used, two the dye, are usually each

Fig. cells allow Flow cell-surface be to A.21 be antigens to sorted. cytometers and identified by individual their first dyes by Cells are cytometry fluorescent be to (top with panel). analyzed labeled flow shown specific cell-surface uses here), for unlabeled labeling (as indirect cell-bound detect to uses antibodies Direct labeling dye-coupled while antibody. dye-coupled immunoglobulin antigens a through nozzle laser cells (second The a passes in a panel). through forced that are stream beam a single-cell of dyes. from a of sign scattering the (PMTs) the detect emissions which different fluorescent and as tubes granularity, cell as size well Photomultiplier is light, computer information (CPU). analyzed This is by a molecules proportion with examining number these of of By and of cells, on can levels characteristics be cells of specific set be determined of expression measured. large can the cells a various IgD, represented, being IgM spleen. these case of data surface the in expression on be the lower a The B from this shows cells how part of figure two example mouse of can immunoglobulins, sample and a the two been dyes. with immunoglobulins different-colored labeled have The just usually as (IgM are the of of IgD), analyzed data displayed panels. one in to is type molecule a left-hand the as the histogram, When be expression or the distribution granularity, fluorescence example, expressing a of Histograms parameter cells display intensity). (for single size, measured in panel. as plots each right-hand two-dimensional of IgD), parameters types the used measured display or and shown (IgM the are can be more two various to for When data, cell IgD the data, represent axis the intensity and in four IgM plots the of represents axis of fluorescence, and case, intensity vertical each horizontal All same fluorescence. the for negative that both, for on. for plots one provide are colors, both, and of bright information more the dull for both cells for ‘dull’ than ‘bright’ and for other, histograms; they example, so allow Two-color recognition, portions mostly lower immunoglobulin, do and plots cells. not cells either T left in the For that are extreme dots the of cluster of the represents example, express The is whose measured. standard plot left) (upper fluorescence places single each dot for a dot cell cells to well containing cells identifying in large format of saturate the type. same tends the for but works of that lie number areas a main outside This groups, A which color data areas. plot uses of dot left), high-density density to color these presenting (lower the second is indicate means best provides the plot low regions with indicate contour contour each 5% the and visualization of A successive population; monochrome (upper right) density. draws lines ‘probability’ to high format 5% of contours, this of drawn dots. which as also outlying is 5% plot shows probability The a right cells contour lower map,

result two-dimensional the a displayed or labeling plotted population can the (see in diagram, diagram antibody that of as contour against its a by is scatter further second, that Fig. A.21). antibody a with where form with of with dye-labeled labeled be of antibody subdivided a one the the cells one of second fluorescence of give on characterizes bearing such distinguish T-cell cells; surface the receptor-associated major CD8 known co-receptor molecules cells large the as data cytometry proteins quantitative proteins, flow subsets. different that examining and can as percentage and the CD3; of cells, immunoglobulin, numbers By B which T-cell the CD4 analysis in early in instrumental cells. stages development Likewise, FACS and of B has been defining the T the selectively T 13). cells a in of CD4 which role (see as depleted identification a technology bearing played in This AIDS early vital also disease Chapter are more FACS labeled distinct time. dyes be with fluorescent same antibodies permit Advances used to at technology the in progressively currently at simultaneously can dyes For fluorescent lasers cell available. measure 18 are different that cell experiments aimed rather sorting, four with analysis, than machines its limit. However, may coupling constrained antibodies, dyes analysis technology and the fluorescent used of for the spectral by have properties to FACS is this reached

with scatter 0.1 1000 Contour 10 1 IgM 1000 1000 cells 10 Dot PMT probability 1 CPU 10 1 IgD fuorescent 100 10000.1 cells 10 10 1 labeled fuid of Analysis 100 Mixture 1 100 0.1 1000 scatter standard 10 antibodies of 1 tube 0.1 cells antibody 100 IgM 0.1 is green with 10 0.1 of 1 1000 color 100 side density 5% 100 containing red antibody-labeled plots 0.1 stream maps 1000 photomultiplier 100 Laser 1000 labeled IgD 10 outliers stained 0.1 100 with forward (PMT) 1

releasing cells washed over a coupled Heterogeneous is mixed the wool; unlabeled is cells mesh N of and coupled coupled lymphocytes the the The are removed, or stick poured wool to iron paramagnetic to iron beads an out magnetic ÿeld applied, with population is magnetic cells N particles When antibodies ÿeld

coupled a are on technology is based detecting An atoms antibodies. to FACS to alternative that heavy-metal a liquid combines heavy antibodies CyTOF™, called mass machine spectrometer. analyzed Cell labeled with with metal-coupled a fluidics a populations on are which quantity of that each is measured. antibody, metal associated with abundance of of and cell each target the each is cell, analyzed, As thus the heavy the have is to the estimated to distinct metals, by currently In range measure technology possible is expanding the greatly 100 heavy capability total, FACS. analysis this that of the However, process the are the sorter. the this spectrometry required so function as cell ionization analysis, cannot for with destroyed cells mass technique, a by CyTOF

A-19 isolation antibody-coated using Lymphocyte beads. magnetic

preferable superb means of FACS form, cells numbers is must mechanical isolating quickly. numbers in be when lymphocytes pure of small for are cells prepared Although separating large of and molecules. of that lymphocyte antibodies to way beads A isolating powerful couple cell-surface populations is distinguishing efficient paramagnetic monoclonal to recognize paramagnetic containing placed column column a mixed with be when beads the the separated and antibody-coated field. are are material the to attracts a is magnetic run beads that strong cells These in through are cells the (Fig. antibodies be magnetically the washed surface can appropriate lacking Cells away binding labeled retained; molecule A.22). the retained recovered magnetic column field. cells the removing from by are The are the of for cells cell-surface the cells selected its for particular molecule, positively bound expression unbound the case, negatively absence. selected In while this are

A-20 lines. homogeneous Isolation T-cell of

lymphocytes. of on T cells analysis and T function of specificity of depends effector populations monoclonal of The the heavily study T-cell obtained can distinct be ways—T-cell tumors, four hybrids, cloned T-cell in These lines, and

Fig. using physically paramagnetic to particles be can subpopulations A.22 beads. separated by antibodies Lymphocyte or coupled paramagnetic a molecule beads. particles cell-surface antibody mouse coupled for specific particular or to A monoclonal is is population mixed a in mesh of a wool column. an and poured with It iron heterogeneous lymphocytes over washed said field wool iron the while so out; question. stick lack is in are that cells bound the negatively selected be applied to A that the cells antibody antibody-bound magnetic of to molecule not for are have cells these positively removing presence be for by said are are the recognized bound the selected cells the released magnetic to by of field; antibody. they antigen The

limiting-dilution culture. with hybridomas A-7), can proliferating response (see to in to By Section be Tcell generate T antigen fused malignant to analogy hybrids. B-cell T-cell normal lymphoma lines specific cells state The owing the express proliferate the of parent. to cancerous receptor indefinitely lymphoma the hybrids normal but the of T cell, having T-cell same can T-cell all the be cells a yield population hybrids receptor. to of cloned specificity the When factor cytokines the specific by as cells hybrid. assess their the assay the growth used release an of of antigen T-cell (IL-2), these T-cell production interleukin-2 and antigen, is to such stimulated cytokines as

because suspension excellent T-cell readily grow hybrids T-cell the tools they for culture. in analysis specificity, are of to cannot in the because they to response dividing. antigen be specific regulation of continually However, analyze proliferation used are T-cell they transferred to to in because for hybrids into give function vivo cannot test rise an animal also would T-cell they be tumors. confounded fact also cell Functional in T-cell functional hybrids assays. malignant that by the the their affects partner analysis is of behavior T of studied cells Tcell T-cell of regulation effector clones. the and using Therefore, functions the be growth must from with clonal antigen the on whose of of which growth addition on dependent T Tcell is specificity, T-cell heterogeneous These frequently, type growth and, cell derived called cells, T-cell are lines, cultures and factors are antigen lines a single (Fig. restimulation periodic of specific A.23). antigen they in T-cell is lost grow also T-cell specific restimulation clones often antigen tedious to hybrids. with are more which on periodic because hybrids, growth specificity, their require depends maintain than but T-cell recognition, antigen and for lines can used function studies of T-cell Cloned be in vivo. in effector both and vitro proliferation a selection, addition, critical recognition. aspect antigen growth only T cells, in on T-cell lines, such can the In where of clonal be cloned of characterized is dependent of both antigen-dependent T-cell lines, hybrids monoclonal Thus, types and T-cell

experimental have in clones, studies. valuable T-cell applications

identified. T-cell have clones cells been on because suitable making a T-cell largely Studies hybrids has partner T fusion human relied not for of a T-cell been lymphoma monoclonal antibodies. is Jurkat, called cross-linked antigen anti-receptor with IL-2 receptor has its secretes characterized extensively it because However, human line, when signal in simple transduction system about cells. T assay information has This much yielded shared receptor Jurkat that growing cross-linked. when its is stops line’s hybrids, One interesting of cell features, the antigen T-cell is most with it to transduction to in having This selected has by mutants pathways and antibody cells be anti-receptor lacking receptor with continue selecting the the defects or simply allowed those culturing grow. that signal applications T-cell and immunology. cloned Thus, valuable tumors, T-cell hybrids, lines T-cell have experimental all in

in then can Section deriving cells be dilution T-cell isolated from first a cells A-21) rather source a than of limiting subpopulations. by primary establishing clonal mixed T line T population Finally, as and any single, by as antigen-specific cells (see culture the a cultures number clones lines, of growth false give dominate the During specificities and to sample. the of T-cell can in picture particular and original T-cell the come T of artifact. cells primary this Direct avoids cloning

culture. Limiting-dilution A-21

an many with order example, which been lymphocytes, occasions in On especially individual important efficiency the responds know which has established. is a for the antigen, immunological the memory measure it cells, to to of T antigen-specific particular or to to specific degree frequency There are a

and placed antigen. The cells are antigen-presenting cells with culture into T Antigen-speciÿc antigen do while T cells recognize not T the proliferate cells proliferate, that not do

Fig. cloned Production lines. T-cell A.23 of an and donor, cells specificities, from with of mixture cells. with different comprising cells antigen-presenting T activated are a antigen immunized are cultured factor stimulates limiting responding growth cells Section Single A-21) to T-cell the in (see responding proliferate. the by dilution which selectively cells IL-2, antigen these From culture cloned IL-2. cells, specific with and cells, lines identified can be by antigen, and are propagated single antigen-presenting for

Fig. The assay. frequency of be A.24 using lymphocytes can determined specific limiting-dilution antigen of added numbers factors. (APCs) normal or with cells or antigen-presenting mice and from wells stimulated individual culture and Various immunized to polyclonal lymphoid are added cells mitogen growth and as cytotoxic a wells response to such are target for several specific killing tested of cells. antigen, the After days, well well specific are at one of cell contained negative, Poisson T cell the initially wells and one response culture. a the T contained, will determine distribution the that its when can make that on of the average, specific 37% target, each beginning from a to Each in example 160,000 of negative the for well; have 1 each frequency unimmunized the cells T to 160,000. antigen-specific T cells In when been of mouse thus the shown, wells are is 37% the added after immunization is when added; T of in When mouse is 1 1100, cells have responsive specific hence negative increase only the an the frequency immunized, 1100 cells in 37% cells are the wells 150-fold. of of T been

the to receptor, secretion cells directly function, such of activation detecting cytokine or specificity or cells as detecting either of their cytotoxicity. some methods particular the doing for provide by by the number this, of by

the response limitingdilution lymphocytes a can measure able of to The to by of population overall is respond but the a be culture. given of a lymphocyte response, frequency determined antigen how use random. statistical of objects are distribution, distributed makes This Poisson the that at function a assay describes For culture of receive of so will equally T distributed two, wells and a a specific given instance, heterogeneous antigen, is some one when a receive will specific wells, for some T series sample some into T cell, cells on. cells no specific cells T factors. antigen-presenting in the and with The growth antigen, wells activated are cells, their response each target to are and the allowing several kill for release cells as the cells cytokine well differentiation, or tested specific days ability such a for antigen, (Fig. to growth in After A.24). is replicated different samples. with of T cells numbers the in assay The plotted the proportion logarithm is against initially is The no of of wells to each in response the cells number which well. there added of of because a response, limiting line antigen-specific cells their T type, then If obtaining factor straight a are only cells one is rarity, obtained. for the of typically on it 37%. cell the one is From there antigen-specific per that average, the of is, Poisson well is proportion negative when known distribution, wells when to each reciprocal of number added the in are cells equals frequency of of negative. population the the cells antigen-specific the well 37% wells the of Thus, specific priming, cells. substantially, cells frequency the antigen-specific of the up antigen-driven goes proliferation reflecting of After against measure the make limiting-dilution cells to be antibody assay given used of The can frequency also antigen. can that a B

Fig. cytokine-secreting frequency ELISPOT of A.25 T cells can be assay. The the by determined bound are by ELISA assay to which variant plastic in individual is assay the a cells. antibodies ELISPOT The to used capture surface of a cytokines secreted T bound are cytokine-specific panel). tissue-culture removed the Usually, are antibodies and the well (top a surface to unbound antibodies plastic of cells (second Activated added the are onto T then the surface and well settle to antibody-coated panel). the secreting panel). plate cell If by antibody cell will this (third T is the be surrounding a on then molecules captured the T cytokine, appropriate the specific using a enzyme-labeled presence the T specific removed, the the the and time an period of cytokine. of is cells After second antibody same detected are cytokine for this antibody (fourth a binds, panel). product formed can Where colored be reaction color, to a that assay. of single originally hence cytokine the of the T rise name the cell secreted gives Each spot are panel. an response for in in T last secreting to such results the The different assay stimuli of IFN-γ shown ELISPOT cells with control two stem-cell peptide were two from example, a from a transplant In panels) T a (top treated cells recipient (bottom peptide or cytomegalovirus panels). this of to that able two the clear there cells the spots in patient’s bottom IFN-γ. a peptide can a to are viral seen, As and T produce respond the panels, number are greater indication be courtesy S. Photographs Nowack. of

A-22 assay. ELISPOT

assay, assay antigen-capture is of about the responses A-4), ELISPOT a frequency T-cell called modification cytokines powerful Section A the measuring (see of information tool the also the for produced. provides ELISA and be with to cytokine allowed cells that (Fig. antigen are plate a settle of and Populations T assayed the against of stimulated then the interest, to antibodies onto coated plastic with are is A.25). T cytokine, activated cell secreting If by is is plate. the that antibody the on an captured plastic the cytokine the is second to ELISPOT and that it added of period assay its name. (‘spot’) removed, After position of a cells the the reveal circle to against are antibody a the of each cytokine give these a surrounding circles plate the time cytokine is bound cell; activated T the T the cytokine. one each added to and frequency cells spot counting By of cells calculate T particular can that plate, originally of knowing number easily secreting the cells, detect by using anti-immunoglobulin in antigen-coated B to labeled trap used also ELISPOT be to this surfaces case antibody bound detect by antibody. specific to secretion can and specific antibody the

expression. production cells Identification T on transcription cytokine of A-23 factor subsets based of functional or

cytokine lost. the a association that cell detection and the on the the is problem are One by single-cell cells T into level secreted any surrounding production medium, is with of with the cytokines originating allow to cytokine devised have the Three be produced cells individual by methods profile that determined. been The staining first, of cytokine intracellular (Fig. that protein export cell. poisons from that of A.26), the relies inhibit on metabolic the use cell. reticulum within the network cytokine and thus vesicular The accumulates the of endoplasmic fixed mild use intracellular and of by gain are and detect antibodies cells subsequently permeable the the the If to cytokine. access rendered can these compartments detergents, thus CD25+ can The can the T for easily frequency cells and of obtained. T be simultaneously, be for other example, stained markers cells, IL-10-producing CD4

analyzed not capture. cytokine that being advantage cells which the are in method, the is second killed A has the called process, hybrid uses separate heavyand the which antibody a give from which technique antibodies are different in light-chain two This antibodies, mixed pairs in combined to molecule

antibodies plastic of Cytokine-speciÿc well the bound surface are a to

added cells to the well. T are Activated T cells effector mixture cells of different functions are a These with

bound secreted some captured by the Cytokine is cells antibody by activated T

to cytokine colored an antibody, coupled to precipitate rise a second The enzyme, which of captured revealed cytokine-speciÿc is insoluble is a spot by giving

Fig. A.26 intracellular cells cytokine can be Cytokine-secreting identified staining. by the cell. have be cytokines been inside allowed used the Fluorochrome-labeled after cells T activated detect antibodies to secreted accumulate by to cytokine the can molecules molecules of export. with enough accumulation by detection activated the achieved is efficient protein treating concentration T cytokine cells to The high for of a inhibitors reticulum the cells, secreted such be endoplasmic (left are to treated destined retained In proteins within instead panel). a permeabilized fixed, the are then cells so that in dissolving mild inside the (center by proteins lost treated not cross-link detergent they to is the membranes, and membrane cell cell when are panel). cell in These the the cell and cytokines panel). the now can permeabilized cell inside bind enter antibodies Fluorochromelabeled to (right the the cell with to labeled determine labeled subsets that proteins cell-surface Cells also cells in which particular T this cytokines. bind secreting way are of can be to antibodies

mild the to The protein the antigen-binding the permeabilized accumulate inhibitor molecules blocks cell two (Fig. T the penetrate detergents is cytokine cell treated to in ER antibodies an ligands ÿxed intracellular are bind Cytokine-speciÿc cells recognize export, and with that allowing with sites Activated cytokines different A.27). for question. cytokine to specific in while the used the sites is antibodies of the marker, cytokine In other one T-cell the for detect antigen-binding bispecific a surface specific production, is cells cytokine-binding site cell-surface binds to the The bispecific free. antibody for the binding marker, through the T the site leaving captured the the bound it the is before the is cell. cell diffuses by secreting it from that T cytokine, antibody If particular away of surface specific be the antibody detected to by cytokine. fluorochrome-labeled the adding then second cells It for can a

a population which mice. produce in particular A cells for reporter cytokine gene utilizes a T identifying cytokine method third of (the a entry inserted downstream protein as of protein) 3ʹ known cDNA a mice, site (IRES). into In sequence gene ‘reporter’ untranslated ribosome an encoding internal region lines cytokine the the a of detectable targeted clone these is readily mRNA encoding same cytokine is expressed that sequence (Fig. allows produced the when of translation is thus, only reporter the from IRES reporter the protein cytokine; protein mRNA the the as The A.28). Common as fluorescent application (GFP). fluorescent for protein reporter green this proteins, proteins such are used the In for contains this commonly GFP purpose fact,

Fig. and assay cytokine-specific binding cells purify by used Hybrid secreting living cell-specific particular sites A.27 antibodies cells containing cytokine cytokines. can secretion and to to be an specific from MHC cytokine an antibody as IL-4 of an heavyand together a pairs antibody specificities, antibodies and Hybrid class antibodies made example, for be molecule against by panel). mixing different such (first light-chain I can for are T cells, via each hybrid class the of binding (second arm cell antibodies and then The population MHC a to panel). added bind activated to I If of this IL-4, in population are captured the (third hybrid some cells the panel). the by cytokine-specific the of secreting appropriate arm cytokine, antibody is the binding for same a by different antibody a the The cytokine to be presence panel). hybrid by one second from cytokine example, used then the using site revealed, of fluorochrome-labeled the specific (last can the but for antibody using cells by or (FACS). a sorter labeled isolated fluorescence-activated cell The flow analyzed cytometry are are beads, be magnetic isolated cytokine-producing can to the magnetically. coupled second and cytokine-specific antibody the cells Alternatively,

the properties greatly element IRES sequences codon cytokine gene coding experimental inserted eGFP of purposes. An the downstream stop a and mutation that spectral for its are point improves to for This ‘enhanced GFP as is referred version or commonly ‘eGFP’ short. of GFP,’ FITC. eGFP the the detect be to dye FACS fluorescent detected or designed settings used by by microscopy fluorescent using commonly can protein. GFP of original a host broad the utility fluorescent by engineering of to developed genetic proteins, GFP these been have Due of derivatives to time same about to Each these has other used proteins be with fluorescent information uniquely multiple at properties the and in allowing each be provide derivative therefore cytokines combination can identified, distinct (Fig. A.29).

method these and expressed of by Several an expression the for identifying subsets. by other subsets cells transcription functional lymphocytes, been to for providing T-cell techniques factors T measuring alternative examine cytokine lymphocyte have adapted transcription approach, In to one label antibodies permeabilized used for are factors cells. specific lineage-defining intracellular examined can or then assay, described microscopy. staining the cytokine the be cells above As flow immunofluorescence for was by cytometry factor also gene generated, eGFP. modified have the a which of been is reporter such mice fluorescent locus transcription as protein, to in a encoding Lines express is lymphocyte protein factors or to identify approaches, by both no lineage-defining prior assessing using need the there transcription cells. constitutively stimulate advantage these is For expressed to reporter to transcription the cells of of are as factors to antibody expression, staining that subsets the lymphocyte is intact subsets other used Therefore, T-cell and widely microscopy. identification this the more for approach tissues of in by

Fig. using reporter cells can vivo be gene Cytokine-expressing in knock-in A.28 cytokine tracked mice. modified encoding Fig. animals, cytokine the is expressing in the To recombination (see by cytokine cells locus identify intact homologous specific a A.44 Section A-35). and the as termination signal and stop for protein eGFP the inserted a gene last the are 3ʹ and transcription codon the such of poly-A cytokine downstream polyadenylation cytokine of and the An mRNA internal fluorescent ribosome site site). exon entry gene, (the (IRES) upstream of protein of a the site the at element IRES second translation to internal sequence on allows mRNA. of ribosome protein-coding The an initiate are intact fluorescent the produced mRNA, form and mature transcribed same locus protein transcript. reporter and When eGFP) (e.g., from spliced both the the protein modified cytokine is the the to This flow characterization allows the cells, as by identification eGFP. detection cytometry, of of the based such on cytokine-expressing and

Fig. Fluorescent colors. rainbow a available are of in A.29 proteins eight fluorescent of colors. red-fluorescent a protein GFP coral and Derivatives different generate can beach protein. expressing with A each drawn strains scene bacterial fluorescent is Courtesy Roger of Tsien.

T-cell specificity tetramers. Identification A-24 of using peptide:MHC receptor

receptors staining tetramer expressing 10 made CMV-speciÿc from tetramers 10,000 with streptavidin bound to MHC staining 1 by T appropriate 10,000 100 recombinant of bound Peptide:MHC 1 class MHC I are the is The peptides, biotin 10 + via speciÿc tetramer molecules peptide:MHC streptavidin 1000 speciÿcity cells 100 1000 HLA-A2 CD8

specificity eluded antigen-specific the T ability through their cells receptor years, many to directly immunologists. For identify T not directly to MHC the do unlike fragments T molecules. complexes rather B cells cells antigen alone identify could recognize to self antigen because, cells, be peptide of but bound Foreign used not of antigen routinely so T-cell is peptide:MHC between low failed. specific complexes cells peptide:MHC that T to the receptor interaction affinity the in practice and the of complex label their Moreover, attempts with the cells antigen-specific peptide:MHC labeling to of in the of idea came with increase T breakthrough the so as complex, making of avidity multimers the The interaction.

amino bacterial BirA, can acid a specific the recognizes Peptides sequence. biotinylated using enzyme which be biotinylated. this are used MHC sequence Recombinant molecules are containing which peptide:MHC target make then complexes, to bacterial bind sites that its streptavidin, Avidin, extremely affinity. four counterpart contains high or with biotin streptavidin single bound the (Fig. complex biotinylated a peptide:MHC in results to specific tetramer—four complexes peptide:MHC or peptide:MHC a the of molecule with streptavidin formation avidin Mixing of A.30). the cells is streptavidin the fluorochrome to a T binding moiety tetramer. those Routinely, of allow detection peptide:MHC with labeled capable of

T with of Epstein–Barr can been to 80% a specific Peptide:MHC in to (infectious cells T for mononucleosis), antigen-specific infections up acute individuals example, used patients cells be the showing populations complex. tetramers virus that infected of single peripheral have identify for in, peptide:MHC in timescales over been follow example cytomegalovirus the we have to individuals years in infections. of show, with responses also used HIV or, They responding, been molecules identifying both class such as to showing that the nonclassical nonclassical reagents in HLA-G, also for cases in I HLA-E receptors. recognized NK by example, or these cells are important molecules have These subsets MHC of

Fig. to tetramers to A.30 stain to able Peptide:MHC cells. complexes streptavidin are antigen-specific form coupled T tetramers peptide recombinant refolded complexes epitope. single from are formed defined Peptide:MHC containing peptide:MHC a the a MHC bacterial can molecules BirA, but chemically coli synthesized, biotin target is chain a usually heavy molecule. to is that add single a Escherichia for linked MHC biotin the biotinylation MHC be which the used enzyme group sequence, to to recombinant contain streptavidin:peptide:MHC a is having tetramer, for a peptide:MHC hence each panel). complexes of (top biotin; a tetramer the binding single site Streptavidin complex creates subunit receptors T-cell complex able the with to for T and complex the the is a to are (middle stably multiple between for the T affinity its interaction single bind cell, particular tetramer, to avid low more complexes whose bind cells being receptor a too make to peptide:MHC a Although is binding specific able panel). by peptide:MHC ligand to simultaneously, peptide:MHC cytometry. cells the so molecules are streptavidin the be to flow coupled by that Routinely, monitored binding fluorochrome, can a to T in of molecules T stained specific containing CD3 tetramer simultaneously antibodies and shown the bottom cells been for example In and CD8, panel, the have a with cytomegalovirus HLA-A2 with a peptide. cells displayed tetramer the the the axis. CD3+ horizontal staining with of are axis and staining displayed Only along on the CD8 vertical shown, the on (mostly the on of CD4+), left, The cells CD8+ cells, bottom while figure, the staining, staining. show tetramer show CD8– no of tetramer top specific the no left the bulk likewise the the of of cells, a seen. 5% discrete some cells, CD8+ clearly top CD8+ total can panel, comprising right positive be the at tetramer population the of However, courtesy of G. Data Aubert.

receptors antigen assays dissociation Biosensor ligands. their association A-25 for rates the of and for of measuring

interaction of or affinity, strength and, of any What asked Two of receptor–ligand and always the binding, that What the is questions the are, of important are of are dissociation? rates interaction, the association purified parameters preparations proteins. using are These generally assessed of domains. For proteins the native eliminate prepared, are membrane receptors to forms proteins usually integral their that state, by proteins membrane-spanning the their in soluble are truncating of (Fig. on measured the gold-plated phenomenon With (SPR) to binding surface of resonance be immobilized plasmon proteins, the binding can as binding following detect known ligands to by these slides, using glass purified receptors rates a A.31). resonance is scope mechanical is physical plasmon of full the beyond textbook, and based principles. advanced A surface this quantum as on explanation it of gold-coated of slide. it total internal surface relies the of beam reflection brief, on the a light of In a glass from of affected energy of the of coating. electrons is the these As molecules glass to field excited and any electric are gold some the reflected, its the light the surface in excites coating electrons binding by reflected more in is and surface, the greater molecules on the light the affects that electrons, bind beam. excited to turn the this The effect the to a of light becomes reflected number surface slide. the The bound of the atoms thus sensitive measure gold of the

is the make biosensor on it ligand solution immobilized reaches surface Fig. followed equilibrium and the the ‘chip,’ receptor streamed is receptor a glass until If over of the of the slide, to can containing surface, ligand be that gold-coated to binding (see a a purified A.31). from and receptor followed ligand ligand then If of the out, be can easily dissociation is the washed the

Ru receptors they washed over T-cell to surface from surface away; ˜ow Ru Soluble in to is ligand continued the Time Receptor be and Time removes are allowed complexes Ru a the receptors are washing on complexes, gold-plated Unbound immobilized dissociate special Time to receptors as complexes peptide:MHC bind peptide:MHC this reaches the peptide:MHC The tested, binding equilibrium case

Fig. biosensor. in made time a A.31 of real be using Measurement receptor–ligand can interactions effects chip. glass on light through a Biosensors polarized of binding surface binding the on beam the at of the the to reflection total indirect are of gold-plated the molecules chips surface of internal able the of the measure of what reflected or analyzed, exact on of ‘sensorgram.’ angle is in the either receptor the on units’ time are pair of ligand beam chip. termed be (Ru) the nature measured the and the against intensity be in the to of surface a in Depending plotted ‘resonance receptor–ligand immobilized Changes can and the the panel). peptide:MHC a In immobilized the such complexes (first on are example shown, surface (second peptide:MHC in solution flow panel). the to receptors T-cell to surface, are the bind immobilized complexes now and allowed over to of main reflects protein the panel) As bound. the the T-cell the panel bind, below (inset increasing sensorgram receptors amount the equilibrium saturation shows As no as binds. or more (third sensorgram a the panel), reaches plateau, binding either protein point, can away. receptors this washed At unbound be washing, to flow the now continued and panel). With removed dissociate (last the washing in bound are receptors start of solution now The receptor dissociation shows ligand curve, a occurs. rate and at the declining which reflecting sensorgram

Fig. many mitogens, stimulate proliferation of plant origin, in A.32 Polyclonal culture. lymphocyte tissue ability proliferate. in to Many test these mitogens blood of of peripheral used to human the are lymphocytes

such first carboxyfluorescein ester incubated (CFSE). as are dye Cells with fluorescent a succinimidyl residues the cellular in lysine cell coupled dye to enters and, once proteins. becomes the covalently on This cytosol, one-half daughter the divides, by one-half, inherits as the of cell cell is CFSE time each amount of diluted CFSE-labeled proteins. Each the peaks, fixed histogram each cells of then have flow of a displays CFSE represents Cell of a divisions. by where that analyzed number cytometry, fluorescence a undergone which division series be can of this cell conditions, measured. can divisions, optimal which is 7–8 assay detecting longer after be Under to up capable CFSE of no fluorescence

dissociation calculated. rate concentration over again measured. the a once be and can different binding A chip new at of streamed the solution then the ligand binding can assay. of in calculated this affinity ways type a of be The in of number the at Most dissociation can of of be but obtained simply, estimate ratio the rates of different more estimates binding concentrations the of ligand. an the give and the of will affinity, accurate measurements from association measurement a receptor–ligand binding From affinity of plot a of the the Scatchard will interaction. equilibrium, at give of measurements

proliferation. lymphocyte Assays A-26 of

before order functional extensively sufficient immunity, into cells adaptive differentiate they generate of of effector particular a To in cells function rare must antigen-specific proliferate specificity. in lymphocytes effector to numbers analysis in central is Thus, a issue their lymphocyte proliferation study. the of induced difficult It cells divide. of minute will to of antigen normal proportion in the to lymphocytes because to be specific proliferation is, response a only however, stimulated detect the culture type certain proliferate. Great many all of or was a field by to that the finding substances given of given lymphocytes lymphocyte impetus induce to many mitogens as they because origins. referred specificities different collectively clonal polyclonal substances These are mitosis induce in lymphocytes to or of are T stimulated lymphocytes different (Fig. by polyclonal B and mitogens A.32). mitogens the seem trigger to growth same essentially response antigen. as mechanisms Polyclonal the exist cell G0 Lymphocytes of as phase in the cells cycle. normally resting mitogens, phase stimulated and cycle. cell they the through with rapidly enter polyclonal G1 progress the When lymphocyte 3H-thymidine most simply into In is most of DNA. proliferation the measured incorporation studies, by with the proliferate to nonspecific suspected stimulus. from is a ability to for immunodeficiencies clinically lymphocytes response used assessing of This in patients assay

of is assay to proliferation by be FACS. can An to the that radioisotope a a measure to use use lymphocyte alternative performed fluorescent assay, carboxyfluorescein the fluorescent such are (CFSE). lymphocytes ester For dye with succinimidyl a as incubated this residues dye enters cell This once cytosol, the the on and, lysine covalently in cellular becomes to coupled proteins. CFSE-labeled one-half CFSE half, inherits the cell of is daughter the amount each cut of time in as the proteins. Each cell divides, FACS, divisions population analyzed which each detected, of number fluorescence of is (Fig. cells a have cells fixed When a peaks dividing represents A.33). that of undergone of by CFSE be can after which measured. can up capable 7–8 longer to be is no This detecting assay divisions, fluorescence of CFSE cell

remove no proliferation from cells with B node B culture 5–10 with antigen lymph A After T-cell A antigen antigen days, 53 no Culture antigen Measure or cells of Immunize B antigen antigen A Days A Proliferation antigens antigen

Once had antigen optimized to proliferative in to culture mitogens which donor assay, been response T-cell antigen-specific possible proliferation T-cell (Fig. been polyclonal detect an uptake previously became response to 3H-thymidine using as it the lymphocyte had immunized culture by to an in measuring the A.34). about used for assessing little after the immunization, responses T-cell but This assay T reveals of most functional capabilities responding the it the commonly is cells. A-28 These ascertained assays, functional must by and be as A-29. in Sections outlined

Measurements apoptosis. of A-27

end cells labeling) known can nick detected by (TdTdependent Apoptotic TUNEL dUTP–biotin procedure be a staining. as of deoxynucleotidyl generated the fragments biotin-coupled DNA enzyme using technique, In with apoptotic are the cells labeled by uridine the this in (TdT). 3ʹends transferase terminal enzyme-tagged binds with which biotin. to The label streptavidin, detected then is biotin (Fig. tissue the only a have precipitate or it in substrate is enzyme section to apoptosis a culture, of cells undergone that cell colorless colored added produces the When A.35).

methods of often experimental cells used apoptosis animals. to are Additional in detect a simple is with for of One a phospholipid, preparation a has cells method to high incubate specific V. This Annexin (PS). affinity protein protein membrane the phosphatidylserine labeled fluorescently detected undergoing therefore transported exclusively and inaccessible plasma inner incubation surface, to can membrane, the cell fluorescently where the is V, the found extracellular the be When by healthy to leaflet PS the are is Annexin cells labeled of Annexin V. PS then it is apoptosis, In on which with cells, bound is outer

Fig. for T-cell as proliferation T-cell responses. is used an assay A.34 Antigen-specific frequently humans (A) to to and A mice antigen B). not which proliferate antigen immunized the hosts when been they an antigens with immunized unrelated cultured have (antigen are cells from been have or exposed when not cells but T antigen-presenting with that measured the of incorporation can 3H-thymidine Proliferation be into of by DNA actively dividing cells. proliferation is specific Antigen-specific immunity. of a CD4 hallmark T-cell

Fig. DNA panel). the labeled A.35 TUNEL In are is fragmented (second assay, added by detected DNA The to can be transferase streptavidin, to reveal coupled that deoxynucleotidyl biotin, cells. terminal using to apoptotic biotinylated binds enzymes which by (TdT) substrate into a insoluble cells becomes or fragmented convert (third (first panel). product a their DNA programmed colored undergo When apoptosis, death, cell colorless The panel). enzyme biotin-labeled Cells in most be this red) cortex. shown in light the stained of the as apoptotic in DNA assay, to able (stained in TdT microscopy, add nucleotides thymic fragments; by cells this of way (usually commonly can ends the photograph detected dUTP) to nucleotides is and J. of R. Russell. courtesy Photograph Budd

FACS by (Fig. A.36). combined dye V or 7-aminoactinomycin iodide with Annexin viability as propidium (7-AAD). staining D (PI) often is a such These enter unable DNA, apoptotic integrity. cells viable but of to bound to or fluoresce prior are loss to membrane their two when dyes and when cells Annexin PI/7-AAD-negative, be but cells Annexin the Therefore, PI/7-AAD-positive. the of as combined can whereas V-positive in identified stages late of early both V-positive with V, apoptosis are apoptosis stages Annexin in assay additional the of 3, program. the of execution An in analysis detection cells functions means apoptotic detecting a cysteine apoptotic that provides is on protease caspase FACS of by activated phase that sensitive the cell based a death inactive pro-caspase. synthesized initially called by a an cells 3 precursor in Caspase is form dimerize cells that into two apoptosis, is form the pro-caspase undergoing active enzyme. to 3 When are subunits cleaved used cells detect fluorescently versions of not generated (Fig been that these coupled be 3, the been to form Antibodies but of permeabilized can pro-caspase that and have and active detect caspase antibodies have apoptotic fixed 3, A.37). for cytotoxic cells. Assays T A-28 they generally recognize. kill cells any specific complex Activated that pep-tide:MHC the CD8 T cells class I display and CD8 T-cell of target T-cell be cytotoxic cell can by determined simplest function most a Thus, the using T a bioassay—the rapid cell. killing This 51Cr-release a usually is detected in assay. spontaneously release, cells Na2 will up, radioactively take chromate, not Live but sodium do 51CrO4. labeled target labeled its are these presence of T (Fig. supernatant the cells the killed, mixtures in When can chromate and cytotoxic cells released measured be is and radio-active cells of A.38). such cells similar can proliferating tumor DNA. incorporated be target the a labeled replicating into which as is cells with In 3H-thymidine, assay, stimuli attack Apaf-1 active Apoptosis caspase cell, cytochrome binds 3/7 Fig. caspase only by Apaf-1 antibody 9 active Specifc caspase pro-caspase 3/7 pro-caspase cytotoxic a to 3/7 caspase On Apoptotic active 9 T 3/7 c activate staining by A.37 of caspases. cells apoptotic Detection for intracellular active the of early cytochrome release the An apoptotic mitochondria. event from c in process is into to active of Apaf-1, 9. 9 to cleavage binds leading caspase the pro-caspase c Cytochrome 7 caspases pro-caspase cell their to ‘executioner’ 3 pro-caspase active cleaves promote then forms, death. 9 and Caspase yield that undergoing Antibodies permeabilized caspase the these detect forms the will that apoptosis. 7, or cells not pro-caspase recognize active caspase of enzymes, 3 but Fig. facing its Detection In V. face cells, the healthy plasma oriented cells polar cytosolic membrane of phospholipid the Annexin the headgroup membrane. phosphatidylserine is with of with A.36 apoptotic longer enzyme maintaining active. apoptosis, polarity, When flippase, no undergo for called is cells phosphatidylserine the responsible many groups a As head their the randomly face result, extracellular with oriented, phosphatidylserine the membrane. polar molecules on plasma of exposing becomes protein detect used The fluorescently FACS. be binds labeled, V cells if the and, can to exposed Annexin by apoptotic phosphatidylserine to tightly cell cell plasma healthy cell the cell to membrane serine is In the of on plasma inner an Annexin choline phosphatidyl will phosphatidyl Annexin the apoptotic phosphatidylserine a healthy leafet confned outer phosphatidylserine V membrane V In bind to of the and phosphatidyl-ethanolamine appears leafet apoptotic

cells Add 51CrO4 cytotoxic cells cells to Label with labeled chromium target Na2 release Killed T cells target radioactive

Fig. cells. A.38 T-cell chromium activity release is Cytotoxic by from often target labeled assessed radioactivity, exposed radioactive labeled as washed cytotoxic cells Target to excess Na251CrO4, T and cells. are remove chromium with to mixing chromium destruction radioactive cells. by target detectable measured into is release within with of hours of the the medium, cells 4 T Cell

and rapidly is DNA. in cells release collected DNA measure chromosomal filter, the the 3H-thymidine can of fragmented large, is target the the unfragmented in or DNA these the on of while retained retention either fragments one a and filtrate, of activity and rapid, provide a the T specific cytotoxic of sensitive, cells. assays These of measure

measure experimental animals. in An assays to intact target-cell these cytotoxicity in vitro killing by T to cells is cytotoxic alternative performed cytotoxic infected assay pathogen This a response, mice known to a such that virus. induce a with strong T-cell generally been with is as have the cells surface. class I the which antigenic on will peptide, MHC to Target are incubated bind target-cell with the CFSE (see a are fluorescent low concentration These with A-26). then incubated Section of dye cells concentration allowing of peptide that with high is be a given of is A the incubated antigenic cells not population control from the cells cells. antigen-bearing to distinguished CFSE, target these injected 1:1 The mixed two are cell experimental and the populations animals. into recovered later, of and hours Four cell (Fig. are calculated populations cells spleen lysis allowing be by animals FACS, from to the target-cell the analyzed CFSE-labeled ratio two the specific from the A.39).

into dye, control 1:1, Target concentrations of different are mixed mice cells with and cells and labeled injected

Fig. target activity cells. T-cell using A.39 cytotoxic for CFSE-labeled Assay virus fluorescent in T-cell mice with injected activity mixture the of animals, cells labeled target with are cytotoxic detect been a experimental infected have dye with that a To CFSE. intact cells the One cells; low target is binds labeled class this pre-incubated a is with concentration cells MHC of to a of group group with CFSE. peptide target I of that on viral peptide with incubated concentration a second labeled (nonviral) high is of CFSE. A is group with control cells a of and into groups infected two mice. are together and a mixed injected in 1:1 The of the ratio, cells and cells and target by mice analyzed the 4 recovered are After sacrificed are cytometry. flow the hours, lysis viral the the of provides target of peptide-coated two a measure of cells. of ratio target-cell populations specific Examination

for A-29 T CD4 Assays cells.

involve functions than killing bearing rather T-cell antigen. cells of usually the specific the CD4 activation part by the cytokines, mediated or released of are recognizes when T cell which cells B effects macrophages in on it T large CD4 by antigen. are activating The cells measuring usually and Thus, amount type cytokine of by released. studied is function CD4 the T-cell T by cytokines, the different the effector cell about release different proteins learn produces. of types T can Because and effector a of one amounts it measuring cells potential

factors can in growth their detected cell as growth serve assays inhibitors. by where Cytokines as biological growth, or of cytokines be activity either the (see A-4). known A capture or a assay ELISA ELISA is a modification Section of sandwich as specific more the this bridge reacting different In on cytokine antibodies to two epitopes molecule. assay, ability by as characterized its the with cytokine monoclonal act a between is by be also A-22). cells detected (see Section can ELISPOT Cytokine-secreting

bioassay. stimulate ELISA ability and of the to in response same cytokines bioassays, avoid a different namely, a cytokine Sandwich major the of problem ELISPOT antibodies inhibition by confirmed with monoclonal the of specific be the for always Bioassays response cytokine. must neutralizing A-23). given identifying actively stain a cytokine anti-cytokine (see cells of then way FACS them tagged monoclonal antibody, identify them is Section Another producing by with and and count fluorescently a to

determine mRNA cytokine different T approach is cells. the quite to of amount production in to A presence and relevant the cytokine detecting stimulated for reverse be cell and by cells the situ This can reaction done in by chain single for (RT–PCR). transcriptase–polymerase hybridization populations is cDNA. Reverse enzyme into used viruses, as an convert certain an transcriptase to a DNA genome RNA RNA or HIV, copy, such by are using and RT–PCR, transcriptase. vitro cells copies isolated In from reverse cDNA made is mRNA in primers. then by is selectively desired sequence-specific amplified PCR by cDNA using The band gel, reaction specific visualized subjected agarose of electrophoresis the can are amplified When of on products the size. to be a an as the DNA a large amount thus RT–PCR. mRNA; a particular representation give particular the large of stimulated that and mRNA on correspondingly be cDNA of the of amplified will produce cytokine selected proportional producing will cells amounts cDNA amounts will actively sequence its The to T in the of ‘housekeeping on a usually in expressed comparison by with by cells. level gene’ The determined of by the RT–PCR cytokine is mRNA all tissue mRNA produced the original so-called outcome

of protective A-30 immunity. Transfer

humoral immunity, involve to pathogen a immunity, immunity both. Protective or cell-mediated may For of protective of inbred animals unimmunized to animal recipient immunity from immunized a serum as (that in same such mice, an the experimental identical the strain). donor is, can be an cells lymphoid by or nature syngeneic animal inbred studies determined transferring genetically of the provided can transfer by protection called infection immunity the immunity. is and conferred be antibodies against circulating is by humoral If serum, antibodies of immediate such provides against those by and pathogens antiserum immunity and (Fig. as purified Transfer of venom many against protection tetanus snake toxins or A.40). active body. antibodies recipient’s lasting although so the remain it However, as only the temporary, immediate, long in protection is transferred is immunization passive is called immunization, active antigen, to with can This provide from type transfer distinguish which lasting immunity. therefore of it passive of A disadvantage

Fig. vaccination animals. of the protective immunity A.40 assay in In after vivo for presence a vaccine, injected a or test with as Mice saline such such as heat-killed solution. are pathogen, control the are a groups doses (not or test as then challenged of control an pathogenic pathogen with specificity Different shown). unrelated or pathogen with the lethal infected panel). die severely become (left animals Unimmunized or test specific mice seen pathogen. is with against immunized of vaccination infection as the protection Successful (middle is immunization This active and is process panel). the active called immunity, called a mediated If protection (right by immunity is immunity be donor, to called process passive syngeneic the from then transferred immunity with such is is called and this antibodies; serum recipient an can normal immune panel). immune immunization humoral or is adoptive into immunity If lymphoid the transferred process (not transfer recipient, be only the then adoptive can donor syngeneic immunization and cell-mediated from called shown). is immunity called transfer normal immune immunity infusing a cells the by provide survive mediated longer-lasting short-lived, because antibody immune Passive immunity but immunity. immunity cells, can is is adoptively and transferred is by which eventually catabolized,

recipient transfer to antiserum may to immunized immunity. used the immunization is become the that or, and administration to Horse lead becomes sources (see sickness Section the repeated to if usual allergic venoms in can 14-10). the recipient 14-5) of sera or (see foreign are anaphylaxis anti-snake either used humans, the Section sheep serum, serum to

many by Protection cells lymphoid be with against be immunized serum transferred but can cannot from donors. diseases transferred normal is to and immunization, transfer adoptive recipient cells immunity. immunity an syngeneic is transfer the called from of adoptive The transferred a called adoptive donor or lymphoid immune immunity. Immunity be cellmediated transferred that can called is with cells only lymphoid the attack the as the genetically cell transfers donor not and inbred Such and of lymphocytes recipient same rejected must not recipient’s donors members identical are between recipients, tissues. that by of such strain so mouse, be do the own the these given. bone immunity cells, T used bone to approaches clinically T as transfer transplantation; of in marrow to patient’s in the adjunct or the marrow humans experimental in is cells donor, therapy cancer are of Adoptive cases, an or

transfer of Adoptive A-31 lymphocytes.

that body. at doses of other kills cells other and spare gamma-ray immune the radiation the from tissues lymphoid X-ray sources Ionizing or it a recipient animal immune eliminate before makes to possible function This in

After one from can identifed CD45.1 transfer congenic cells mouse be CD45.2 CD45.1 ˜ow recipient, cytometry line isolated by CD45.1 express into CD45.2 Cells

Fig. cells. of transfer A.41 Adoptive marked congenically identical be (or mice. Hematopoietic genetically between nearly identical) transferred cells can The in the of based a usually variant of on an population allelic abundant transferred recipient, cell-surface cells, expression identified are receptor. minority an two receptor can be is purpose common which alleles for distinguished antibodies. One by that used has CD45, this allele-specific identical the mice population from into a flow are be can mouse or staining cells antibody their easily the immunofluorescence CD45.2), of expression transferred by CD45.1+ followed donor-cell When (save of identified cytometry microscopy. by strain for

function and of studied to absence cells restore by be lymphoid adoptive the to the in of immune the allows cells. effect transfer, adoptively attempting transferred other used the originally technique this James responses. role immune in lymphocyte to Gowans the of prove to transferred irradiated He that showed recipients donors. from by lymphocytes could responses small be immunized all active immune

advantage use receptor common T-cell assays mice of or of the (see transfer A-34). takes B-cell One availability Section adoptive transgenic receptor of a In adoptively a with population fixed transferred specificity. homogeneous the case, antigen are this lymphocytes be unmanipulated by the animals These respond and strain immunization the can into infection recipient can or need challenge their monitored. transferred of system, be immune the ability to deplete to inbred to cells host without same be out recipient’s lymphocyte One responses host’s system. strategy of the the cells or population, by by these this that advantage carried of of is the dilution the B can antigen-specific be response examined small in can cells T relatively transferred; cells numbers of environment experimental after immune a immune normal transferred as an variant cell-surface (Fig. with cells Commonly, abundant are ‘marked’ an the CD45 allelic such of receptor, A.41). one cells the variant, be When lymphocytes from but easily distinguished an recipient cells express and can the binds transferred antibody of by the variant different of the donor CD45, variant that host to express not allelic staining a other. CD45 cells the one with two to be a are gene, said they identical with mice are congenic. strains When single genetically exception of the of accurate, the where and genetic recipient as that not receptor receptor strain donor the a B-cell above, is terminology referred transgenic one strain or is transgenic as case conveniently a it T-cell of as congenics’; should DNA In the the in to the is completely however, this line, be noted, ignored. example are the strain difference ‘CD45 presence a are study cornerstone studies Such transfer in system. of adoptive intact the immune the and the gene death of effects receptors, B genes, the as of on such They or and T cells protective many means immune rapid factors, cells survival/cell provided ability convenient have to those mount cell-surface transcription responses. in cell deficiencies, of a cytokines, determining

transfers. A-32 stem-cell Hematopoietic

donor be rays, high marrow allowing hematopoietic can hematopoietic of γ doses entire or transfusion of replacement or stem by origin of purified lymphocytes, the treatment from animal. system, X eliminated bone All cells another with of including radiation cells by hematopoietic marrow head are called a had and body bone of goat. animal a radiation word chimeras, the chimera, from the of lion, of serpent, a tail a Greek animals the that resulting the mythical The studying to functions, their used to in development experimentally of lineages, been effector technique development. as has particularly opposed and T-cell important immune-cell the This examine is aplastic normal bone replace and same or it marrow after or with fails, system replace to in humans when of hematopoietic in marrow is the anemia the it cancers. Essentially in the technique treatment as the used certain accidents, nuclear eradicate to stem they after cells, growth blood the such bone source cord from cells of blood, factors main humans, been GM-CSF, 15). the with in being or treated is but which marrow hematopoietic from donor In stem has Chapter is hematopoietic are increasingly (see umbilical such as rich obtained peripheral

administration vivo A-33 antibodies. of In

to immune the humans, to provide or animals, system. administered Antibodies of potent experimental manipulating means a intact intrinsic the inhibit population a cell can target recognized the the elimination the antibody on some molecule. administration the in molecule the each lead to the and cases, either expresses function of molecule antibody, antibody, or, of target vivo by of in Depending that target properties

been targeting immune otherwise an cytokine that to animal during used antibodies have intact cytokine’s an individual inhibit response. In function models, with intracellular the into the T of Experiments cells evidence provides lineage polarizing TH1 in CD4+ this signal provided that an type first important protozoan. some cytokine IL-12 the an of infection following used great This has in approach also with humans. success been treatments of Chapter (see an administration common the of to arthritis TNF-α; the case, the symptoms binds antibody of in rheumatoid the autoimmune with for that this patients the One of from activity disease the inflammation. relief is cytokine provides most inflammatory TNF-α joint inhibition 16) The antibody therapy the development great cytokine related led vivo. of has for of this utility to in strategies actions inhibiting cytokine’s ligand-binding the domains to has a approach domain antibody chain protein the that the receptor of constant-region an (Fc) One hybrid successful create heavy fused of been (Fig. has to A.42). properties the of acquires antibody, has but an receptor. long This binding half-life the cytokine and the of Fc-fusion stability protein to binds Fc-fusion the its given interfering to vivo, stimulate protein When cytokine, the thereby immune with the on cells. receptor ability cytokine’s in with protein treatment TNF-receptor patients has effective the been Fc-fusion arthritis. an an for as containing domain the rheumatoid example, also ligand-binding used As

surface also interfering administration to receptors, used as with the T-cell can response immune augment PD-1. by or such Antibody be CTLA-4 engaged ligands, by function downregulate When normally receptors immune their these to the response. in to been enhance leading responses these From antibodies tumors, to experiments cases eradication. in have to found receptors bind to tumor that immune and some mice, inhibit promise. initial a and humans being tumor these have in tested the for strategies Currently, variety types, results are great shown of

be used administration vivo deplete to cell In can of populations. also antibodies specific Fig. given which (see process 10-23 with (ADCC) cellmediated a antibodydependent antibody The relies known efficiency is Section functions on vivo quite depletion the as a cytotoxicity variable, mechanism and for as in 10.36). of it Fc that cells antibodies, express the a a target or killer coated with receptor FcγRIII. as cell known CD16 (NK) becomes natural When is induces cell. The cross-linking target NK the to the cell of FcγRIII kill antibody-coated IgG killing. with is cell NK does for a to it of antibody a of given efficiency bind thus induce IgG, is affinity by ADCC subtypes; FcγRIII and administration after to While all the not its ability determined cross-link receptor equal FcγRIII depletion an of Common of technique with with an CD8. this CD4+ include uses T the T CD4, or for cells CD8+ to antibody to cells antibody the depletion depleted an administering CD3 T-cell of In cells transiently component transplantation, complex. organ human patients T antibody to the undergoing are the by receptor early of during severe, stages post-transplantation. the produces temporary, a This of immunosuppression but state development. the subset returns As lymphocyte replenished gradually by of regimens, all that vivo antibody population with depletion as are cells depleted cell ongoing in

Fig. A.42 therapeutic. In is vivo an administration of antibodies effective

(TNFR). receptor contributes by arthritis, The to inflammation and chronic of rheumatoid to in triggering a range of cytokine including the TNF-α signaling TNF binding conditions, portion is conditions, fusion these the treat extracellular therapeutic as of creating known etanercept. human constant-region a the fused of To a the protein to consisting TNFR, domains IgG1 of from and it thereby binding this to signaling, triggering administered preventing fusion inflammation. is TNF-α effective TNFR protein When patients, at reducing

Fig. genes vivo of A.43 be mice. and can using studied function by in transgenic The expression into encoding fertilized protein class male and pronuclei the the purified Eα, II protein is DNA eggs. microinjected MHC interest, of a of mouse here The female mice. into are then eggs pseudopregnant implanted more of in presence carry genes. offspring, resulting mice extra are a the founders mice offspring as that one their to used cells, transgene The are the that or transgenic their for positive screened of establishing transgene transmit line and the inactivating endogenous mice here used carry function the their Eα transgene that The tested is by into mutation gene. in an breeding C57BL/6 Eα of gene the

A-34 mice. Transgenic

more by cultured mutations by has targeted recently, whole function cells. of of analyzing and, organisms effects spontaneous The mutations in the effects observing traditionally the studied of genes been in specific cloning gene it in The and of to advent vitro whole makes mutations produce in mutagenesis animals. possible now is can extra of their with copies now procedure. well-established which transgenesis, by altered in a or Mice genome gene generated a be copies a transgenic is implanted microinjection pseudopregnant which a of mice, the into female To introduced gene male into the the then a produce of into genome uterus is fertilized egg, mouse. pronucleus by mouse cloned of to some eggs, randomly genetic DNA transgene of genome, injected an rise known integrated has (Fig. mouse the the a the extra becomes the giving In into element that structure, A.43).

impact development, allows a a and regions on of one in its the determine tissues, expression, inappropriate the required This technique the impact out regulatory normal the expression gene find study its to newly gene tissue-specific on gene identify to mutations to or function. of of for of its effects overexpression discovered to as source and receptors development, studies B and B-cell in 8, mice lymphocyte in T-cell providing transfer been particularly a role Chapter Transgenic for in (see antigen lymphocytes adoptive and primary have in useful specificity the of known studying Section described A-31). T of of of during receptors known of development, transgene-encoded antigen genes generating to B-cell expression the respectively, receptor the utility and of bearing T-cell specificity. that of receptor populations a expression endogenous largely unique the preempts thereby and the T-cell antigen fact B-cell cells This rearrangement is due homogeneous and

A-35 Gene targeted by disruption. knockout

a only particular express functions be that understood fully many obtained. can cases, does a gene of In be gene animal the the not if can mutant copy. it genes the Whereas used vivo identification function common discovered now by mutant of in the determine gene defective to more is with it be a through far replacing isolate then normal its phenotypes, to discover and and is possible recombination, stem as powerful of a embryonic continuously gene homologous developments: for development and and cells known lines the by by of two has mutation to made targeted This it (ES growing strategy procedure cells). been select knockout, that, into can give cells cell to embryonic implantation chimeric are These rise on a blastocyst, in lineages a mouse. all

homologous phenomenon targeting takes gene recombination of (Fig. the advantage technique known The of as A.44). nonfunctional genome, normal altered into ES copies to Cloned with the nonfunctional the copy. are homologous them and where gene target cell, a the gene recombine the are cell’s introduced with gene in the make then replacing they of occurred. cells, Homologous in strategy is those a selection is powerful recombination in cells required which has to mammalian thus rare detect a and event it its introduced commonly, by the that for disrupted gene gene as antibiotic-resistance (neor). sequence inserted has resistance such an Most neomycin construct allowing is gene, drug incorporated the with the that in undergoes gene for neomycin-like functional, cells have antibiotic-resistance resistance the be culture this of the the but endogenous remains copy gene disrupted endogenous If G418. construct gene to the recombination to homologous selected gene. up its However, and on cells the have neomycin-resistance integrated the antibiotic taken that own shows resistance only usually gene the of construct from be ends To simplex virus the occurred, those the recombination thymidine to in has for herpes kinase carry select (HSV-tk). the cells homologous which able HSV-tk of the the DNA retain desired between construct the the including construct whereas homologous the HSV-tk, that entire DNA of so nonhomologous result, usually and involves Cells recombination that eliminated. at exchange DNA the genes incorporate ends randomly are cellular the construct DNA, homologous sequences efficiently (see resistant are Fig. feature with have them being to unique homologous are ganciclovir, carrying to antiviral the drug cultures when to cells so both drugs be the and these of allowing added recombinations the killed selected by neomycin ganciclovir, and HSV-tk Cells A.44).

genome. DNA by neomycin-resistance fails gene DNA introduced gene neorDNA killed Cell into (neor) is at ganciclovir integrates is interrupted insertion integrate site of random cell by to on Target or by Cell Homologous analog) (a resistance both by so expresses HSV-tk but killed HSV-tk, gene -microglobulin G418 interrupted is expresses neomycin is replaces copy recombination neomycin Cell Cell neorand wild-type not either ˜2 G418 ganciclovir not with killed

ES To disrupt necessary it of copy in vivo, in gene the one cell. cellular a knock out is an to only gene ES These which the is reimplanted into blastocyst, are into cells a uterus. injected then of resulting the tissues of contribute chimeric incorporated the and carrying the disrupted offspring, gene the into The those cells developing to germline. including become all embryo gene further expression of be of some that to that chimera, gene produces homozygosity the lack the and gene completely A.45). offspring mice can of mutated original breeding transmitted therefore mutant to The product (Fig. particular of the the The gene’s function be can the then effects the of of absence

Fig. genes be deletion recombination. homologous can accomplished A.44 by The of specific into are pieces cells, two they cellular integrate DNA in introduced can DNA into ways. When of different usually randomly is several copies. insert they sites in often If of into whole piece breaks, integrated, the DNA only can incorporated with undergo extrachromosomal DNA recombination DNA. However, also homologous in which of case cellular homologous the region the central, into is copy gene, cellular the and Inserting such achieves region the it a goals. to selectable not a neomycin as gene marker gene coding resistance recombination, of homologous prevent into does two (neor) injected DNA the neomycin-like is integrated First, from G418. has any the antibiotic that cell protected coding cellular the when neor cellular the homologous gene recombines sequence modified of with Second, disrupts gene the the DNA, gene. it the at (HSV-tk) recombinants targets virus encoding the thymidine can kinase as known gene herpes is construct’ cellular from Homologous or is a the if placed gene. ends discriminated often be of DNA insertions because random both construct, one simplex which ‘targeting is retained. HSV-tk random In integrations, DNA to sensitive agent antiviral cell the HSV-tk ganciclovir. the renders is homologous However, target not from is to homologous as it DNA, HSV-tk the lost recombinants. antibiotics. Thus, resistant the both in a uniquely two are undergone that and have cells mixture ganciclovir, and recombination homologous to survive of G418 in by has DNA gene construct. the presence the to PCR the The gene be Southern primers outside targeting using confirmed blotting in lying neor in of by and cellular or used the region disrupted copies deletion shown). of making the a a different can mutant two By genes, cellular two using gene, one resistance disrupt (not

Fig. knockout mice be to mutant stem embryonic A.45 enables cells Gene produced. in can (ES embryonic Specific stem recombination inactivated homologous in cells cultures cells). be genes of by Fig. in is as Homologous described performed recombination A.44. disrupted this the In in construct. with gene encoding cells is recombination homologous example, by β2-microglobulin a ES targeting disrupted. gene to needs a copy the of be single Only cells taken blastocysts. recombination which has place ES injected into in are mouse homologous cells to transferred the the If resulting mutant mutant mice gene chimeric (striped rise the figure), ES can cells to their in offspring. be give germ in the breeding a mutant if mutant offspring can generated. By determine be to to is the phenotype gene tested homozygosity, case, to In MHC lack I have expression. the mice MHC for molecules surface on class because cells, molecules mutant with homozygous β2-microglobulin pair this I class their deleted with mice β2-microglobulin-deficient gene, to be effect for allowing tested vivo. of mutants mutants The then in transgenic the subtler the can mice bred of such be

studied. into In back by transgenesis. the can be identified parts addition, gene the copies restored that by mutated of of its for different by be can genome essential introducing are determining function function whether the the gene manipulation by function. knockout lymphocyte and the The of development genes the role in understanding gene of and individual revolutionized of has mouse genome our transgenesis

strain the function used cells derived back-crossing 129, the ES analysis requires known are Because characterized the from of commonly most gene often knockout of strain a strain. poorly to as extensive a another mice of neor presence gene. copy track the the One can the by of presence mutant of gene of the the intercrossed produce stable mutants a to mice back-crossing, on sufficient genetic After are the background.

is the gene the arises A the homozygous cases lethal such is of recessive animal; with be gene the termed when the function for cannot in a animals gene gene, and survival knockouts problem produced. essential of function can gene be tissue-specific developmentally such employed. To deletion or the a study gene, regulated of makes used P1 sequences the host to cell’s bacteriophage genome. This strategy itself by a from enzymes of use DNA excise and recombination is Integrated sequences loxP P1 called signal flanked sites. DNA by bacteriophage the of the ends, excising recombinase, two the and Cre, DNA intervening a these joins in recognizes the A DNA, sites, thus circle. form cuts tissues of certain be genes development. deletion to specific in This transgenic at the certain allow only times in animal mechanism adapted in can a or just by flanking gene, are First, a exon, homologous flanking single or (Fig. introduced sites recombination perhaps a loxP A.46). introduction intronic these sequences not flanking of DNA the Usually, normal the of the disrupt function gene. does into or recombinase placed that mutant for inducible such tissue-specific been promoter. mice mice are has mated the of Cre a with containing transgenic genes control made under Next, loxP or inserted is the when loxP between inactivating Cre the When active, it excises or gene sites, exon. the recombinase or in thus tissue the induced, the DNA appropriate either drive be in to of deleted for functional of promoter while a the other Cre example, T gene T-cell-specific remaining recombinase, Thus, all a cells can expression only cells in using animal. the importance in the B-cell to of powerful demonstrate receptors survival. was genetic used B-cell technique This extremely

has as inducing known mice; developed Recently, technology it a specific been system. CRISPR/Cas9 is disruptions the for in new gene RNA-based technique This plasmids, the DNA a adapted genomes is uses of invading to that immunity. in breaks generate bacterial strategy of from double-stranded bacterial or form system an a pathogens been gene an this sequence protein-coding signal in localization of into the enzyme. use a by endonuclease; encodes Cas9 incorporating modified cells the The has eukaryotic for nuclear a mutations a homologous the produced nucleotides) To target (~20 incorporates is RNA short particular to to gene, a sequence that gene guide synthetic

a the Cre transgenic containing the Animals tissue-specifc e.g., cells, only from made lymphocytes sites expressed certain protein, promoter loxP are in for

Cre loxP protein the expressed, the in deleting between excises only When gene the cell DNA sites, specifc types the

Fig. system development A.46 The bacteriophage P1 during (center times recombination panel). lineages. particular Cre in cells the cell to can the In used eliminate genes be which in the expressed, is panel). (right and The excises DNA bacteriophage sequences is it P1 lying them the between that loxP bounded protein recognizes Cre protein DNA excises sequences. can signal Thus, genes by sequences loxP called individual recombination cell be only deleted only at types certain or times. certain in These recombination either introduced by the this of development end for way, panel). mouse normal genes (left at be a In homologous sequences can a essential that are gene of made by in the gene flanked Animals specific loxP and/or function be for the can their can encoding types. be for in cell analyzed transgenic carrying developed also animal genes is control a as colored protein, the Cre boxes, proteins squiggles, balls. and shown which the under Genes tissue-specific of are as as RNA placed that cells the in only sequences along Cas9 bind targeted promoter so or expressed is being it that certain enzyme. at with only certain DNA The double-stranded will genomic RNA endonuclease Cas9 break guide produce a the location, the (Fig. to recruits where A.47). is break this repaired When

Fig. using Genetic A.47 the bacterial system. CRISPR/ engineering Cas9 guide cells targeted Genetic components, two locus RNA (left be Cas9 in can engineering bacterial the enzyme gene using by and a to specific a panel). two RNA The and of the in guide sequence is the second RNA a contains first by tandem, that enzyme. gene being targeted the homology to a recognized single-stranded with regions Cas9 guide the adjacent the protospacer RNA sequence by endonuclease DNA targets Cas9 (PAM) The promoting to enzyme motif of (right region, double-stranded the nucleotides 3–4 upstream homologous the genomic cleavage panel). is GG PAM on (CC endonuclease required the sequence Cas9 the other by The the strand). dinucleotide the double-stranded are pathway, of mutations is the leading and/or gene, often gene break function. loss the target When point deletions introduced end-joining small repaired into nonhomologous by to DNA addition and template in Cas9 the guide sequence induce target specific To are in a a replacement DNA, the with cells gene, to provided RNA. to containing but is DNA nucleotide changes. This gene, template specific double-stranded the sequence target homologous a the nonhomologous provided than using with cells in rather double-stranded the this original the sequence repair end-joining, In of recombination, replacing DNA. Cas9-mediated the sequence presence the template will homologous thereby template, cleavage

by end-joining or of insertions to small the nonhomologous introduced, disruption repair sequence. original a pathway, deletions commonly leading are the DNA

can be generating used deficiencies means mice. can homozygous generate lines, to importantly, in cells it and be mutant but powerful gene single-step This used technique as cultured homozygous also cell of a are the mouse used mixed guide mouse using Cas9 this to into (see and encoding RNA with transgenic as purpose, zygotes, single-cell molecules RNAs technique generate Fig. For same injected that lines latter A.43). these mutations on efficiency alleles CRISPR/Cas9 of the gene. targeted of Due system, harbor both embryos the the frequently to breeding. are gene, the of embryos born these after the mouse already mothers, Thus, homozygous into pups for transplantation embryos from lengthy targeted the the for foster without need resulting the targeted end-joining. rather of be to from introduced gene, changes that into developed nonhomologous has A the this refinement than nucleotide allows been changes random technique specific fertilized by the guide Cas9 zygotes and This oligonucleotide into the along mouse RNAs. DNA introducing accomplished a with is The to the homologous nucleotide targeted by contains the desired sequences oligonucleotide flanked gene. changes with DNA preferentially that damaged by Cas9 from a oligonucleotide this is present, Fig. the is the (see repaired When the DNA introduced double-strand oligonucleotide homology-directed by process sequences replaces the break A.47).

(RNAi). RNA by interference gene Knockdown expression A-36 of

of or assessed gene by function specific cases, can be in the the some of cells. a even that gene In reducing, eliminating, expression cell interference, This present be as by system is types. a in RNAi, accomplished many known RNA eukaryotic that can harnessing or bind are will will siRNAs) interfering cells, complex). introduced the enzyme be to strands to and silencing one into separated complex RNA RNAs, or When an two RNA as molecules known double-stranded (referred RISC small as small (RNA-induced bound of and to arrest complex mRNA has the gene to the or which the homology, siRNA degradation to it leading The thus mRNA, to the of translation silencing either RISC to targets (Fig. A.48). gene cells, recombinant with not transfected implemented be molecules lymphocytes as viruses. can For that directly, siRNA are cells primary using such easily myeloid by silencing and case, small hairpin that this infectious In introduced vectors viral into particles. packaged (shRNAs) viral encoding be RNAs can are into genes (see double-stranded enzymes these cell gene hairpin hairpins needed RNAs siRNAs a by form encode shRNAs processed are A.48). to that the structure; for Fig. in generate The silencing the small transduced readily are to cell types in can effectively used recombinant types. cell hematopoietic genes Since such and viruses, retroviruses silence be lentiviruses, shRNAs primary many as with these

Fig. A.48 expression of RNAi gene the using pathway. Knockdown translation transcript degradation to molecules will an RNA Small arrest. double-stranded with mRNA or for homology the target mRNA is (shRNA), initiated from RNA into that cells the small which introduced RNA hairpin of produced or double-stranded This transfection can direct is vector be molecules called expression with an by expression short pathway a cells, siRNA. of by are duplexes. by processed enzyme molecules shRNA the generate to Dicer siRNA of noncoding siRNA. retaining duplexes The RNA siRNA bind RISC separates the two strands, the to complex, which the the strand siRNA–RISC degradation the targets or This termination. mRNA noncoding to mRNA, complex leading to strand the translation

of Singer, at Alabama Moseley, Compiled Carson University by Jeff and DiToro, Daniel Birmingham. Workshop based made Antigens. Leukocyte 9th Human the at Differentiation designations on CD Data on

and DiToro, Daniel at Washington Compiled Robert Schreiber, as and May St Medicine, of Jeff Carson dimers University of function Birmingham. Moseley, by * Singer, Louis, Alabama University School

humans. locations are Chromosome for are no homolog listed for Chemokines human mouse which with chromosome. is the there

ELR CXC motif. † amino precede of the refers the cysteine that first to residue the three acids If Glu-Leu-Arg acids are these amino (i.e. chemokine chemotactic for neutrophils; the lymphocytes are ELR+), if for is then chemotactic then (ELR–) they chemokine the is not

NIH. Oppenheim, by Cancer Compiled Joost Institute, National

antibodies with discovered Kitasato. von (1854–1917) Emil Behring Shibasaburo antitoxin

MHC (1920–2011) in response collaborated first genes immune demonstration of Baruj Benacerraf and the restriction. discovered

in of innate receptor mice. (1957–) the Bruce discovered the immunity Toll-like Beutler in role

heat-labile enhance antimicrobial serum in a complement that specific (1870–1961) normal Bordet potency as antibodies. discovered the of Jules component would

description child produce Bruton first C. an to (1908–2003) disease Ogden the immunodeficiency failure describing antibody. a of documented of male the X-linked this Bruton’s X-linked inheritance the by absence of was and serum is the called of in Because it immunoglobulin (agammaglobulinemia), is agammaglobulinemia. characterized condition

of proposed (1899–1985) accepted generally MacFarlane Burnet hypothesis clonal first adaptive the immunity. selection Frank

the that developed Robin anti-immunoglobulin first antibodies the of disease (1921–2006) detect antibodies cause Coombs newborn. hemolytic to The Coombs still disease test. the is this for called test

(1916–2009) in study Dausset pioneer major early HLA. complex of was an or the histocompatibility human the Jean

encoded the antigen complex the histocompatibility leading recognition by showed is and of and in understanding by importance its T and Peter processing Rolf of (1940–) major T establishing (1944–) antigen proteins an Zinkernagel the recognition that biological to the cells antigen role cells. Doherty MHC-restricted, thereby by of

immunoglobulins, Edelman made first about complete the an sequence Gerald of the structure discoveries (1929–2014) antibody molecule. including crucial of

theory of immunity, an current and was champion proposed bears (1854–1915) about to a receptors. Paul a thinking of theories antibody side-chain striking resemblance that formation surface famous humoral Ehrlich early of

attention James Gowans (1924–) mediated immunologists of that adaptive by lymphocytes, is on immunity small discovered these the focusing cells.

of the melanogaster. Hoffman in Jules Toll-like discovered innate Drosophila the immunity receptor (1941–) role in

in quantitative assay, Michael of precipitin (1888–1991) Heidelberger quantitative the the developed era immunochemistry. ushering

for responses. adaptive (1945–2003) immune Jr. initiating co-stimulation of Charles importance the A. Janeway, recognized patterns system. recognize receptors that immune adaptive of the predicted the He existence of signal of immune pathogen-associated the system molecular activation innate would and would mammalian had Toll-like first discovered function. that receptor laboratory His this the also of this He original the was author principal textbook.

by with or of against humans successful cowpox infection Edward Jenner described virus. the (1749–1823) vaccinia smallpox protection vaccination This founded the of immunology. field

assay the clonal biased to inherently of plaque receptors immunological an version would idiotype theories, (1911–1994) recognition, Jerne and the important lymphocyte be Niels early prediction developed and hemolytic including MHC that network. a selection, several

Emil Behring. in with collaboration (1852–1931) Shibasaburo antibodies Kitasato discovered von

Robert disease, (1843–1910) an as to infectious defined Koch’s the postulates. Koch characterize needed criteria known

with antibody-forming Georges production antibody Kler cells (1946–1995) César from pioneered hybrid Milstein. monoclonal

Landsteiner Karl the discovered group antigens. ABO blood (1868–1943) antigens. of using of the model antibody studies as haptens also out He binding carried specificity detailed

theory. of acquired (1915–1987) tolerance an cells, key Peter used clonal lymphoid grafts to that Medawar skin feature characteristic a selection show is of

defense. role cellular of the champion host studies immunology, in focusing phagocytes central first Èlie the Metchnikoff his was of (1845–1916) on

César Georges production antibody monoclonal with (1927–2002) Milstein pioneered Köhler.

genetically placental sharing different circulation, a calves blood tolerant placenta, (1915–2014) another’s with discovered thus were Owen that to common immunologically tissues. twin Ray one

who concept immunization and by Louis the first a immunologist of (1822–1895) French validated studied microbiologist Jenner. Pasteur was cholera He vaccines and rabies. chicken prepared against

groundwork its by out antibody of worked laying structure (1917–1985) polypeptide sequencing. the analysis protein the Rodney the for Porter molecule,

into infectious German-Hungarian physician Ignác consequently introduced a between hygiene fever, and disease, (1818–1865) puerperal who an antisepsis practice. Semmelweis determined connection medical hospital first and

laying murine genetics current out of George the MHC complex for for worked biology. the major of strains role understanding and the the analysis, congenic needed generated in its of our histocompatibility the T-cell (1903–1996) the biological groundwork Snell

the ‘suppressor indirect (1934–2010) by regulation of immune response T formulated experimental Tada evidence. Tomio the concept cells’ of first in from the 1970s, the cells discredited, the not cells.’ identified verified concept ‘regulatory at in of became the now be cells but the the vindicated 1980s could when called existence such time researchers Tada and was The T

Susumu discovered genes and murine of immunological in receptor recombination T-cell and somatic the human antibodies generation (1939–) underlies that Tonegawa the diversity of receptors.

immunity, to of Jg innate by contributed T-cell the mechanisms, and system seminal to Tschopp contributions delineation and apoptosis fields made and the the particular inflammasome. in (1951-2011) of complement discovering the cytolytic

an in crystal recognize structure I antigen C. MHC T cells how context the startling MHC a (1944–2001) molecules. into providing of first the insight in the solved protein, of Wiley their Don

Fig. Whitney courtesy of reproduced Yale Cushing/John Hay 1.1 University, Harvey Medical Library. Fig. second panel Portnoy, Tilney, 1.4 from L.G., D.A. Actin monocytogenes. filaments spread intracellular and movement, the : parasite, growth, Listeria the and of bacterial J. Cell. Biol. 1989, 109:1597–1608. With Press. from University Rockefeller permission Fig. from J.: Mowat, Viney, 1.24 The photographs immunity. intestinal basis A., of anatomical Immunol. Rev. 1997, 156:145–166. Fig. Kaplan, 1.34 al. et photographs from G., of the a cell-mediated protein the leprae purified Mycobacterium reaction to derivative : in tuberculin from skin. of of human Efficacy disposal 85:5210–5214. 1988, PNAS

2 Fig. Chapter panel Button, et 2.7 B., top from al. layer from : brush lung epithelia. the by airway mucus A the health periciliary promotes separating 337:937–941. 2012, Science permission With AAAS. from Fig. S., Mukherjee, from micrograph 2.12 et al. adapted attack lectin. pore-forming by Antibacterial intestinal : membrane C-type a Nature 505:103–107. 2014, Fig. S., reproduced photographs permission et al. from 2.35 with Bhakdi, :

relevance terminal the and complement Functions sequence. of 60:309–318. 1990, Blut © 1990 Springer-Verlag.

3 Fig. Chapter permission reprinted Jin, with 3.12 al. M.S., structure et from of a binding structure of by lipopeptide. : heterodimer TLR1-TLR2 triacylated induced Crystal the Cell 2007, 130:1071–82. with © Elsevier. 2007 from permission Fig. Park, et Macmillan structure B.S., with from Ltd. Publishers reprinted permission al. 3.13 TLR4-MD-2 structural lipopolysaccharide the by of : basis complex. The recognition 458:1191–1195. Nature 2009, Fig. model et 3.34 with Publishers reprinted Ltd. structure al. Macmillan from permission Emsley, J., serum of P human amyloid component. Structure pentameric : Nature 1994, 338–345. 367:

Chapter 4 Fig. microscopy Green, 4.5 from immunoglobulins. N.M.: Electron the photograph of Adv. Immunol. 11:1–30. 1969, from with © 1969 permission Elsevier. Fig. 4.15 Fig. and structures et from Garcia, model al. 4.24 K.C., αβ 2.5 cell and : the its Å structure TCR-MHC T at in receptor complex. An orientation 274:209–219. Science 1996, with Reprinted from permission AAAS.

Fig. F.G., Ltd. et reprinted permission Whitby, from Publishers 6.6 al. Macmillan with : of 11S basis for proteasomes 20S activation Structural the by regulators. Nature 408:115–120. 2000, Fig. et from 6.7 panel bottom al. G., Velarde, particle (TAP) analysis. processing Three-dimensional by of : single obtained with antigen image transporter structure associated J. Biol. Chem. 2001 276:46054–46063. ASBMB. © 2001 Fig. definition Structural peptide-binding & Fremont, from H-2Kd structures motif. D.: of V.E., Mitaksov, the 6.22 Biol. J. Chem. 2006, 281:10618–10625. 2006 Biology. and of Biochemistry © American Molecular Society Fig. Fields, et B.A., permission model with al. reprinted 6.25 Ltd. Publishers molecular from Macmillan Crystal β-chain receptor a of T-cell complexed with structure : a superantigen. 384:188–192. 1996, Nature

Fig. apoptosis thymus. in positive C. Macmillan in Sprent, 8.19 D., photographs Surh, from Publishers detected during J.: T-cell permission selection negative the and with situ reprinted Ltd. 372:100–103. Nature 1994,

Fig. Macmillan ﬂuorescent al. permission reprinted Ltd. Pierre, Publishers micrographs 9.12 from S.J., P., with Turley, et cells. class in of regulation transport II : dendritic mouse Development MHC 388:787–792. Nature 1997, Fig. c Martz, 9.38 (eds): panel Henkart, Cell on E. Cytotoxicity. P.A., from Workshop Second & International Mediated © Kluwer/Plenum Publishers. 1985 Media. of Springer permission With kind Business Science and

10 Chapter Fig. left et Szakal, 10.17 from panel A.K., al. dendritic TEM antigen Isolated morphology. cytochemical Nomarski, follicular localization, cells: : SEM, and J. Immunol. 1985, 134:1349–1359. The 1985 American Association © of Immunologists. Fig. 10.17 right panels and center et Szakal, from al. A.K., Microanatomy responses: structure of function : relationships. lymphoid during tissue humoral immune Ann. Rev. Immunol. 7:91–109. 1989, © www.annualreviews.org. Reviews Annual 1989 12 Chapter

Fig. from Publishers by Macmillan McFall-Ngai, M., permission Ltd. Dethlefsen, Relman, 12.4 L., adapted D.A. perspective ecological on human–microbe disease. mutualism An : evolutionary and and 449:811–818. Nature 2007, 2007. © Fig. et micrograph bottom al. left Niess, from 12.10 J.H., dendritic cell to : the lumen bacterial access intestinal and CX3CR1mediated clearance. Science 307:254–258. 2005, from permission Reprinted AAAS. with Fig. center 12.10 bottom McDole, et from micrograph al. J.R., deliver intestine. luminal antigen DCs Goblet in small cells CD103+ the to : 2012, 345–9. Nature 483: Publishers Macmillan Ltd. With permission from Fig. et 12.10 right micrograph Farache, J., al. bottom from into antigens cells the presentation. CD103+ to bacteria recruit intestinal sample epithelium : dendritic Luminal bacterial for 581–95. 2013, Immunity 38: permission With from Elsevier.

13 Fig. Chapter G., top 13.20 photograph Cohn, Z.A. left from Kaplan, immunobiology :The of leprosy. Int. Rev. Exp. Pathol. 28:45–78. 1986, © with from 1986 permission Elsevier. Fig. from on al. data F.J., et 13.37 based Palella, virus mortality advanced patients : among immunodeficiency human morbidity and Declining infection. with Investigators. Outpatient Study HIV

N. Engl. J. Med. 1998, 338:853–860. Fig. permission Macmillan by from Publishers et X., al. Wei, 13.40 Ltd. adapted human type virus infection. : immunodeficiency 1 Viral in dynamics 1995, Nature 373:117–122.

Fig. 14 Chapter from top et 14.5 al. E., Sprecher, photograph for : Netherton with tool as in a diagnostic testing helpful Deleterious a congenital erythroderma: SPINK5 in mutations syndrome. molecular patient ichthyosiform Clin. Exp. Dermatol. 29:513–517. 2004, Fig. mice Development in S., T-bet. 14.14 asthma et changes consistent al: human airway of from photographs with Finotto, lacking spontaneous 295:336–338. Science 2002, with permission AAAS. from Reprinted Fig. Mowat, Viney, J.L. 14.24 from photograph A.M., left basis immunity. of : intestinal The anatomical Immunol. Rev. 1997 156:145–166. Chapter 16

Fig. from D. Herberman, & from 1985 Callewaert, are of © Killer Cells, permission Cytotoxicity R., Mechanisms by with reprinted Elsevier. 16.16 photographs Natural (eds):

Suffix murine to monoclonal fully antibodies applied used therapies. human for -omab

used for antibodies monoclonal to human applied therapies. fully human -umab Suffix

Suffix chimeric antibodies to used -ximab monoclonal mouse/human) (i.e., for therapies. applied human

used for Suffix antibodies -zumab therapies. to applied monoclonal humanized human

Phenomenon or spacer. 12/23 joined 23-basepair 12-base-pair signal an sequence a can and the receptor has of wherein two recognition segments spacer has only if be other rule gene T-cell a immunoglobulin one

α:β that of of antigen-recognition the α receptor. T-cell portion The an α:β dimer heterodimer up makes β one and chain one

See T-cell receptors α:β receptor. T-cell

α4:β1 integrin (VLA-4, See integrins. CD49d/CD29) individual CD Properties II. in be Appendix can antigens found of

peptides A neutrophils the of intestine. by produced antimicrobial α-defensins and cells class of the Paneth

that various originally NKT sponges but presented marine α-galactoceramide (iNKT) (α-GalCer) ligand CD1 An produced from cells. bacteria actually a by glycolipid invariant to by immunogenic is extracted

cells, binds SLAM the to expressed another receptor. 2B4 molecule receptor (SLAM) which A activation belonging signaling CD48, lymphocyte NK by family to through These proliferation. Fyn signal survival promote and SAP and to

functions regulatory that 19S for core. the to catalytic caps the proteins of proteasome ubiquitinated degradation component Multisubunit capture in

core catalytic of for component protein proteasome responsible Multisubunit degradation. 20S

in An domain extracellular abatacept binding co-stimulation fusion B7 of T CTLA-4 the treating protein cells Fc used rheumatoid arthritis blocks molecules. containing that by

graft a rejection graft. of more first of The rejection the accelerated rapid rejection after second that to evidence adaptive It due response. showed graft an immune the of one was that rejection pieces of was

involved accessory specific aid adaptive in in Cells are response an that immune not effector but cells recognition. antigen cells. mast They NK phagocytes, neutrophils, cells, include and

inactivated vaccines containing A used pertussis vaccination antigens, toxoid. formulation chemically pertussis including of for acellular pertussis

caused immune (AIDS) by (HIV-1). deficiency with immunodeficiency infection the A acquired virus syndrome human disease his of her occurs most has when or with T that an infections pathogens so opportunistic occur. patient AIDS infected CD4 lost cells,

whose cells, activating receptor the stimulation a of activation results On NK cell’s receptors in cytotoxic activity.

to are to A if autoreactive cell cells thymic complete which they death by activation-induced process maturation periphery. the and T migrate induced die

hypermutation by cytidine activation-induced in regions regions. deaminase directly (AID) somatic initiates that Enzyme and or switch V DNA immunoglobulin at cytosine deaminating switching isotype Loss patients to and leads of hyper activities, causing IgM AID both loss affinity lack in maturation. of activity of

as A formed lymphocytes. (AP-1) 1 signaling activator transcription protein factor by of intracellular the antigen receptors one of of outcomes

Immunization to provoke adaptive active with antigen immunization immunity.

acute to person or essential in as rapidly desensitization penicillin such insulin for inducing tolerance example, An technique it. to, for who drug immunotherapeutic an allergic temporary a is desensitization. rapid Also called can mild moderate symptoms produce anaphylaxis. performed to When of properly,

acute soon period HIV to after infected. In that person becomes infection, reference a phase occurs the circulating abundant cells. illness, in in blood, of T number characterized the CD4 decrease is inﬂuenza-like by a virus the and an It

(the proteins with of whose an acute-phase increased is presence innate in acute-phase function immune response). production the Proteins infection host against in and infection. circulate in blood early phases They defense the participate of example is lectin. mannose-binding An

response A that change of in proteins during an the blood the in infection. the phases occurs present acute-phase early many proteins, of produced in are production acute-phase which liver. the It includes of the

of organ acute of graft by occurs from 10–13 days that or donor a treatment. tissue prevented rejection immunosuppressant genetically The unless rejection unrelated transplantation a within

infection immune an adaptive response. immunity adaptive to by conferred Immunity

of links other signaling proteins. a proteins Nonenzymatic and pathway, a between between physical signaling that adaptors particularly form members receptor functional into the protein They signaling complexes. members recruit of pathway

See cell-mediated cytotoxicity. ADCC antibody-dependent

adenoids located cavity. tissues mucosa-associated the nasal lymphoid in Paired

which nucleotides purine inherited (ADA) by deaminase enzyme developing characterized toxic nucleosides deaminase, thymus. and leads in the nonproduction of the defect to the in most within resulting lymphocytes adenosine the death of deficiency cells, An of accumulation adenosine combined immunodeficiency. is a severe cause of It

of bind them to bacteria that enable proteins adhesins surfaces on the host to Cell-surface cells.

of storage in the lipid differentiation droplets protein types protein neutral maintenance adipose functions many cells. and related of in A that

immune mixed. substance the to Any enhances with which an response is that adjuvant it antigen

of and peripheral from lymph the lymphatic or nodes organs. other and drain infection extracellular afferent the Vessels ﬂuid to lymphatic dendritic tissues sites carry that lymphoid antigen, cells vessels system from of macrophages,

another to The to binding one molecule of of antigen. of a strength a such Fab antibody site, monovalent affinity the a fragment as monovalent binding single at of Cf. avidity.

how by the T-cell binding is made, T positive the choice between to receptor. that affinity negative thymus cells the Hypothesis and proposes according hypothesis strength of of selection self-peptide:MHC the selection in thus leading the death and Low-affinity negative selection; interactions by induce positive high-affinity interactions neglect, to from rescue apoptosis selection. cell

adaptive in an antibodies their response for antigen immune progresses. the affinity as specific The of produced increase affinity maturation phenomenon is This subsequent secondary immunizations. in prominent and particularly

of An absence blood. antibodies the agammaglobulinemia in (XLA). X-linked also See agammaglobulinemia

age-related the risk. degeneration leading (SNPs) increased confer in of A H cause an single-nucleotide elderly, macular polymorphisms for in which blindness genes the factor some

and family paired (APARs) of that immunoglobulin domains resembling mammalian containing genes present represent receptors possibly ancestral antigen Ag agnathan Multigene receptors. hagfish lamprey, of predecessors in receptors

somatically possessing agnathans vertebrate distinct fish a VLRs. on immunity RAG-mediated based adaptive system assembled adaptive comprising based recombination, immunity class the of on V(D)J A lacking of but jawless

by the are selected relatively their positively cells selection thymus by which in T process ligands. with A agonist interaction high-affinity

deaminase. AID activation-induced See cytidine

acquired AIDS syndrome. immune deficiency See

containing (absent member HIN in A receptor) domain. N-terminal of of melanoma AIM2 subfamily family 2) PYHIN an (NOD-like NLR activates DNA. viral caspase double-stranded in It to 1 response

thereby enabling the be to other these thymic of proteins. characteristic protein in expression T proteins regulator) AIRE cells, involved exposed developing promoting tissues, numerous self cells tolerance is by encoding (autoimmune epithelial to of a Gene that genes to medullary of disease, APECED. autoimmune leads Deficiency AIRE to an

pathologically which The hyperreactivity, to and sensitive (allergens) stimuli, condition hyperresponsiveness airway such the airways nonimmunological are in both air, immunological smoke, cold or perfumes. as in is asthma. hyperreactivity chronic present usually This

layer to A thickening chronic glands, of of of occurs muscle remodeling hypertrophy that the with the asthma fibrosis. eventual airway the tissue hyperplasia and airway and walls in due smooth development mucus an decrease Often irreversible in lung function. of results

kinase PI3 pathways. the kinase targets numerous of mTOR downstream with Akt including involved of downstream cell in Serine/threonine growth activation survival, and activated

for binding Recombinant alefacept protein CD2 CD58–IgG1 fusion in psoriasis. by that blocks treatment CD58 used

depletion during used in CD52 Antibody alemtuzumab bone treating marrow chronic to lymphocyte allografts such depletion, for leukemia. T-cell for used myeloid as

more) in occur population. a the within A variant many allele general gene; (or genes form of different several forms homozygous, See polymorphism. heterozygous, also

alternative a the particular of gene. two expression allelic only one In individual, alleles a of exclusion the of heterozygous term immunoglobulin produces that the individual of chains of receptors describes such specificity. antigen the expression or immunology, In of a lymphocyte T-cell the individual the restricted receptor antigen genes, single each

that allergen Any an allergic antigen elicits reaction.

to has response either develop that allergen immunologic been technique causing response, unpleasant allergen or symptoms. to to a an immunotherapeutic to An tolerance aims change allergic desensitization symptom-free an that clinical immune non-allergic doses allergen. individual allergic an of exposing to involves increasing procedure The

airway allergic causes to of which inhaled reaction the difficulty asthma bronchi, antigen, and allergic in constriction of production increased An mucus, breathing.

the in conjunctiva sensitized An airborne exposed individuals that of to eye the allergic occurs reaction allergic allergens. conjunctivitis involving manifested as fever. allergic or allergy nasal with together hay It is rhinoconjunctivitis symptoms usually

largely A hypersensitivity site manifested contact a allergic skin rash immunological the at of allergen. the T-cell-mediated contact by dermatitis with reaction urushiol the render example from stimulus of for molecules to plant, allergenic. haptenate is the leaves normal the Often them oil agent, poison a which chemical ivy can host

cells. A that or is specific B response to allergic or antigen, environmental reaction caused T innocuous sensitized an by allergen, which of the asthma, various but release symptoms allergen can other to Allergic biologically causes is active the allergic fever, caused responses. the mechanisms, cause that and molecules and cells, be signs hay binding to common to histamine cells common reactions the by bound other IgE of mast and most

production, allergic rhinitis causes itching, in and that An nasal allergic mucosa the excess mucus sneezing. nasal reaction

a made allergy is state symptomatic immune antigen. reaction environmental normally which in to innocuous The a and antigen cells exposure antibody T primed the produced to by interaction same involves earlier It the antigen. the between or

nonidentical alloantibodies a antigens of member Antibodies same produced genetically species. the against from

species. member genetically nonidentical same the another of from alloantigens Antigens

mouse in Describes two differ that MHC. or allogeneic strains genes two at the individuals used differences term also at other be for The can allelic loci.

of allograft of (genetically species. A tissue the same allogeneic nonidentical) an from transplant donor is the are invariably grafts immunosuppressed. recipient unless Such rejected

rejection The donor. tissues from nonidentical allograft genetically of grafted immunologically a rejection or organs mediated graft. is chieﬂy to molecules due the It recognition MHC on nonself of

self. of cells alloreactivity molecules T by MHC than The other recognition also alloreactions responses or called responses. alloreactive are Such

which binding made to altered contact (APLs) affect amino their the acid ligands Peptides that receptor substitutions been in positions have peptide receptor. T-cell in

uses complement C3 initiated factor form unique alternative of and by convertase C3 D that to C3bBb. form spontaneous pathway of the activation B which A and is factor hydrolysis

activated alternatively M2 macrophages. macrophages See

the and aluminum salts and (for when adjuvants with example hydroxide); humans. Inorganic of use alum antigens few act aluminum they for as in are adjuvants phosphate mixed aluminum permitted one

from hydrophilic) (or molecules amphipathic hydrophobic Describes region charged separated a have that positively region. a

anakinra arthritis. activation to IL-1 receptor receptor antagonist IL-1 used in (IL-1RA) A used and recombinant block rheumatoid treating

See shock anaphylaxis. anaphylactic

fragments and during by C3a complement C5a released activation. Pro-inﬂammatory complement cleavage anaphylatoxins recognized ﬂuid They the of inﬂammatory site release. their specific to receptors, recruit cells and are by and

antigen, and to anaphylaxis into peanuts. reaction foods insect the venom allergic A for systemic example directly injected bloodstream, such rapid-onset to to or as due be and to fatal circulatory from can potentially suffocation tracheal swelling. collapse Severe reactions systemic mediators. It IgE usually systemic antigens leading from cells, release to inﬂammatory to binding on of bound Fcε receptors results by mast

amino residues antigenic binding Specific molecules. residues determine in acid that MHC peptide specificity I class peptides anchor to but residues I. MHC Anchor MHC molecules obvious for less class class are for than exist II

nonresponsiveness anergy of to A antigen. state be hypersensitivity test People to under mount of cells a and anergic delayed-type specific antigen, cannot they respond be anergic cannot said said when T conditions whereas are reactions B stimulation. to optimal cells they to to are their antigen when

HLA-B27. disease spine vertebral associated fusion leading the ankylosing strongly to Inﬂammatory of spondylitis with

specifically substance—called antigen. to protein particular that a its antibody A binds has immunoglobulins. the to a antibody unique have its to specifically bind enables it as antigen, Each corresponding antibodies structure structure known molecule and that are collectively but same overall all by bind prepare B cells) or response uptake and phagocytes. Antibodies (plasma them neutralize or by to are pathogens cells produced for and in differentiated immunization, infection and destruction to

antigen-binding site. combining See site antibody

constant The antibody-dependent that receptors target cell-mediated the of by Fc region antibody-coated antibody. (ADCC) of cells the cytotoxicity recognize cells killing bound with ADCC cells their receptor on the is that have FcγRIII Most surface. mediated by NK Fc

antibody-directed nontoxic active cytotoxic metabolizes an therapy is to pro-drug linked enzyme/pro-drug Treatment drug. in which (ADEPT) a the an enzyme that to antibody

antibodies The of repertoire the total of an individual. in antibody variety body

generate can antigen to recognized molecule antibody an specifically peptide or fragments receptor. that by are T-cell a bind Any that

binds noncovalently. antibody each The of tip an the antigen-binding with of at physical it antigen makes site contact site and arm that the is acids and its the site shape the by antigen amino specificity of present. determined The

antigenic molecule determinant it an is antibody antigen-binding bound as portion receptor; epitope. of That an by given the also known antigen is antigenic or that a of site

varies drift process minor in which virus antigenic year by inﬂuenza ways year. to The genetically from antigens. the cause genes in mutations of surface differences viral the Point viral structure in small

of caused with of often radical reassortment inﬂuenza the their shift that inﬂuenza A genome animal. from another virus, change virus, antigenic segmented of antigens in by surface an

to from allows generation that some to African trypanosomes) another, which as occur evade one preexisting in antibodies. antigenic pathogens Alterations them antigens surface (such variation in

antigen on presentation molecules. The of a the the antigen peptide bound fragments to form in display surface of cell of MHC this antigen when cells way. it T in presented is recognize

peptide surface and cells. process naive specialized can for proteins antigens co-stimulatory, cells their cell on that with activating other, the together (APCs) antigen-presenting Highly required display cells T fragments cells. are naive T The cells cells and dendritic cells, main antigen-presenting for B macrophages,

The cells. of into to degradation molecules antigen to processing T peptides MHC presentation intracellular foreign proteins that for can bind they peptides processed before molecules. presented All antigens must protein into by can be MHC be

lymphocytes by antigen. which receptor antigen receptor cell-surface The recognize Each receptors single lymphocyte specificity. antigen individual of bears a

species human raised against globulin anti-lymphocyte cells. in T Antiserum another It responses of suppression in used in transplantation. immune is temporary the

kill antimicrobial enzymes Enzymes actions. microorganisms that their by An cell walls. digests bacterial is which example lysozyme,

Amphipathic antimicrobial by that kill variety microbes of proteins peptides, cell and mainly disrupting nonspecifically, antimicrobial epithelial membranes. by cells phagocytes peptides or a secreted proteins peptides the the and humans include RegIIIγ. Antimicrobial the cathelicidins, in histatins, defensins,

that contains an of used immune The immunization. antiserum for ﬂuid against individual from clotted antigen blood component the antibodies of set own a that which epitope their and each An own different antigen, antibodies their antigen, contains have structure, different bind mixture on but antiserum the of a cross-reactions. all the unique. each antiserum This makes heterogeneity

other venom treatment of a raised used snake neutralize can Antibody to the the organism be bite as the for and antivenin against an immediate venom. poisonous or which

hematopoietic which in aorta-gonad-mesonephros development. arise embryonic An region during cells (AGM)

as the cells and intracellular receptors of innate the heterodimeric of lymphocytes immunity. the transcription A of formed signaling TLRs factor of one of antigen via AP-1 outcomes contains Fos-family Jun-family one member often, Most member. and one and for the of AP-1 cytokines genes mainly chemokines. activates expression

autoimmune See polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal APECED dystrophy.

RNA involved An related apolipoprotein isotype AID the to switching. enzyme enzyme certain somatic editing in uracil hypermutation deaminates and in cytidine is which that to B, mRNAs, as and such

immune the an program. cell in form cell in which internal common death activates A the death apoptosis system, of is the phagocytosis degradation, characterized It nuclear condensation, cell rapid by of and DNA degeneration remains. and nuclear lymphocytes high experience rates immune and during apoptosis during of development their Proliferating responses.

large, is A structure apoptosome protein from multimeric binds apoptosis that the process forms Apaf-1. and released when cytochrome in of mitochondria c procaspase-9, caspase structure activates cascade. of the that wheel-like and caspase, heptamer assembles into initiate to binds c-Apaf-1 an initiator A heterodimers cytochrome

gut-associated beginning the lymphoid appendix located of the tissue colon. A at

on A differentiation. related that TNF cells family and APRIL receptors binds cytokine BCMA the BAFF and to TACI promote to B regulate survival

switch endonuclease involved 1 apurinic/apyrimidinic recombination. endonuclease class (APE1) A DNA repair in

rearrangements in and that the Artemis generate endonuclease gene genes. An functional immunoglobulin T-cell receptor involved

with antigen by challenged against antibodies of a IgG Arthus reaction local particular when antigen skin the injection individual is sensitized reaction occurs A the dermis. a into that produce activate complement cells antigen in the a of spaces inﬂammatory to phagocytic response. complexes and local antibodies Immune IgG in dermis extracellular the the with

that basic aryl by transcription hydrocarbon aromatic factor (AhR) activated dioxin. helix-loop-helix receptor famously, A including, various is ligands immune activity normal several and ILCs functions some in of It types of IELs. the cells including

1 and adaptor in protein the activating domains involved inﬂammasome. ASC containing pyrin (PYCARD) CARD An caspase in

which phase reference to it check is many asymptomatic infection, occur; symptoms held may in In in being and for last period HIV infection partly no the years.

A ataxia blood disorganized often gait a vessels, multiple telangiectasia and immunodeficiency. disease by staggering and characterized by (ATM) accompanied clinical ATM the is used recombination. by repair and protein, also are DNA in V(D)J in recombination caused in is pathways defects class-switch that which involved It

eczema and/or is clinical asthma. that march develop with common allergic for observation children atopic to later atopic rhinitis The it

increased innocuous atopy A tendency to reactions substances. genetically against based allergic IgE-mediated produce

transporters, ATP-binding also of nucleotide-binding members. NOD as (ABC) and many includes particular for a domain TAP1 such large containing TAP2, various proteins family cassette that but A

their are that they so producing serious attenuation grow can human disease. growth and induce in modified in clinical pathogens animal which process by The without culture host or immunity by

red inﬂammation condition atypical in of and activation by is caused complement inherited in uncontrolled regulatory characterized hemolytic and uremic kidneys the damage platelets cells syndrome A by that proteins. with individuals complement deficiencies blood to

antigens. specific Antibodies autoantibodies for self

antigen system A a the to immune makes self autoantigens response. which

Describes cytokine autocrine produces acting biologically the cell that or molecule other on a it. active

graft A site on from to the same individual. another autograft one of tissue

pathology antigens. caused is autoimmune disease by immune Disease in responses adaptive to the which self

that autoimmune which autoantibodies cell caused A bind anemia cell blood surface (anemia), blood and red of antigens levels the hemolytic target by for is cells blood with condition red destruction. pathological red low

responses, (ALPS) autoimmune apoptosis, Fas in syndrome a including An causing failure defect lymphoproliferative leads a inherited autoimmune which unregulated responses. gene syndrome to in in normal the immune

caused by negative loss polyendocrinopathy–candidiasis–ectodermal characterized of in antigens, to a by (APECED) breakdown A of dystrophy thymus. selection the tolerance a disease self autoimmune epithelial in encodes defects is which self be many to enables that expressed transcriptional a regulatory due protein to It gene the antigens by AIRE, cells. thymic medullary type polyglandular Also I. autoimmune called syndrome

platelets An made. against disease antibodies autoimmune autoimmune are in purpura which thrombocytopenic in purpura them count in to platelets and leads be receptors Fc receptors, with to that binding platelet up cells (bleeding). by a Antibody causes resulting to complement taken decrease

self immunity autoimmunity Adaptive specific antigens. for

inﬂammation autoinflammatory to defects. inherited due a the Diseases of genetic infection; including they of in can variety absence diseases unregulated causes, have

in structure and bilayer contents cytoplasmic double fusing by lysosomes. autophagosome macroautophagy with engulfing functions membrane A that

and breakdown and by a lysosomes. of autophagy its organelles own cell The proteins digestion in processed class II may on molecules. presentation for It which MHC cytosolic be proteins be route one can by

The avidity or sites. of another the strength binding cells of molecules one sum total multiple two to of at on to is site from molecule is affinity, a of strength of It distinct its one binding the ligand. which

such host's Mechanisms exposure to a or that anatomic barriers behaviors. avoidance particular as microbes, prevent

azathioprine cytotoxic as disease that cells, used proliferating lymphocytes; autoimmune to powerful form active then rapidly converted proliferating including is in an A which treat drug in vivo, immunosuppressant its is kills and to transplantation. it

known CD5 the B-1 atypical, A of adults part cells and mainly (also adaptive of the cells) B rather pleural as in the B cells B found innate system. in immune self-renewing class peritoneal cavities considered than and less are and major diverse than of natural antibody. a B repertoire cells conventional source much They the antigen-receptor have

B7 specialized the B7.2 B7.1 T antigen-presenting Cell-surface major are cells as molecules, on which dendritic cells, co-stimulatory for such and proteins cells. molecules bind immunoglobulin (CD80) proteins superfamily CD28 members on related and B7.1 of to are and and B7.2 the CTLA-4 closely T cells. (CD86) the both

subunits β2, produce (LMP2), catalytic by subunits that constitutive induced interferons β2i replace β1, that and the Alternative the (MECL-1), are (LMP7) β5 β1i immunoproteasome. and β5i proteasome

during development. epithelial by for by thymic generating involved encountered the that produce in peptides cells thymocytes Alternative to β5 substitutes thymoproteasome β5t proteasome expressed subunit

all by virtually β-defensins peptides made Antimicrobial multicellular organisms. and In of mammals they by produced epithelia respiratory skin, are the tongue. and tracts, urogenital the

such β sandwich that the immunoglobulin fold in structure as of secondary two over other, sheets protein composed β A lies an fold. that one

interactions and A stabilized noncovalent β backbone between by β protein carbonyl groups. secondary of structure sheets composed strands amide same ‘parallel’ ‘antiparallel’ strands directions. in run in in adjacent run β β strands adjacent In sheets, opposite direction; the sheets, the in β sheets of arranged form β Immunoglobulin the of up barrel. made two a domains antiparallel are

in is arranged often and acids the a ﬂat, an β secondary as protein planar, backbone strands polypeptide or of A conformation, consecutive amino structure in illustrated several arrow. which

light chain MHC the class I of the β2-microglobulin MHC. encoded outside proteins, The binds the or It to noncovalently α heavy chain.

TNF lymphocytes of inhibitory expressed interacts a herpes lymphocyte and receptor family. molecule by (HVEM), receptor B that and B the with T the virus T CD28-related entry An member attenuator (BTLA)

unicellular of vast most while infectious species body’s some diseases cause humans of A kingdom microbiota. commensal in and up microorganisms, the which animals, others of prokaryotic bacteria make cells vesicles Disease-causing the bacteria spaces, the in live or or inside may in in extracellular cytosol.

promote TNF cell factor B family that binds the the activating TACI BAFF to and to receptors survival. belonging BAFF-R B-cell

promote NF-κB cells. Receptor and survival non-canonical canonical activate signaling for B that BAFF and BAFF-R can of

I II MHC class bare MHC class deficiency, See syndrome deficiency. lymphocyte

repair hypermutation somatic in lead of mutation is class DNA B that and can to that and in base-excision involved cells. switching Type repair

T block used Antibody basiliximab to in for IL-2 renal to of transplantation. treatment cells human receptor CD25 signaling rejection in

basophils of dyes. basic that Type granules with cell containing blood stain white It similar a thought to have mast to function cells. is

includes the factors dendritic Fos. family, many other which such to c-Jun AP1 in and as belonging A expressed BATF3 cells transcription factor

lymphocytes cells, types adaptive cells. antigen-specific T immune B other responses, of the lymphocytes One responsible for B the of two being the to is The cells function B produce of antibodies. B two into cells are classes. divided are populate have generated cells highly bone marrow Conventional diverse tissues. in and the B receptors and lymphoid life, throughout antigen blood to emerging the peritoneal receptors cells cells and self-renewing the cavities. and in diverse much B form population have B-1 pleural of a less antigen

antigen. The receptor, B (BCR) receptor antigen on specific cells B-cell B-cell cell-surface for receptor molecule It the antigen) (which and a transmembrane signaling Igα invariant chains function). Igβ is with composed immunoglobulin a of associated have (which recognizes producing the cells B differentiate receptor. activation specificity antibody antigen as into molecules by of On same cells this antigen, plasma

2), B-cell the receptor transmembrane B-cell A (complement on complement by B-cell co-receptor antigens also composed CD81, bound surface which CD21 proteins the receptor receptor. binds of on fragments the bacterial signaling CD19, and with to B-cell the this antigen receptor responsiveness 100-fold. Co-ligation complex of about increases

also B-cell of co-receptor the surface complex 2), CD21 and on on (complement CD19, complement receptor transmembrane CD81, fragments composed which A B-cell the receptor. proteins antigens B-cell by bound receptor signaling the bacterial binds receptor with increases to the B-cell about 100-fold. antigen Co-ligation this of responsiveness complex

B-cell mitogens proliferate. causes nonspecifically to Any that B substance cells

that intracellular that Bcl-W, includes apoptosis Bcl-2 (Bax, Family family and members proteins and promote inhibit that Bok) and members of Bcl-XL). (Bcl-2, Bak, apoptosis

differentiation cells. Bcl-6 opposes transcriptional repressor into B plasma of cells A that

superfamily TNFR BCMA of APRIL. Receptor that the binds

Philadelphia tyrosine fusion between kinase leukemia. a protein with caused chronic translocation—the Abl active chromosome— myeloid tyrosine tyrosine Bcr the kinase Bcr–Abl with kinase associated by Constitutively genes chromosomal

surface C-type plasmacytoid the dendritic cells. 2) receptor lectin (blood cell antigen A as expressed a of human on dendritic selectively BDCA-2

treated a donor (CCR5) co-receptor in deficient stem virus illness with who HIV (leukemia). in (HSC) a an Berlin from cell with transplant for patient was hematopoietic man A for a Berlin unrelated the patients the eliminated, a to infection, thought be is He is cure. virus which of only HIV so-called cured be ‘sterilizing’ and thought one completely to in is the of known

Medical comprising and therapy proteins such antibodies treatments as cytokines, antisera or biologics natural whole cells. and

Blau gene. inherited NOD2 the An granulomatous in syndrome caused disease by mutations gain-offunction

B-cell and into affinity further switching BLIMP-1 A differentiation plasma cells repressor promotes maturation. and transcriptional that class proliferation, and suppresses

BLNK linker protein. B-cell SLP-65. See

the cellular the cells, blood—red blood bone platelets—are cells. cells, from where generated of hematopoietic blood all initially white The marrow and elements tissue stem marrow rise give of site cells to the source mammals thymus. to B-cell is the further and on development cells T the of The bone migration also in that stem cellular adaptive the elements Thus, blood, the restore required transplantation including of marrow responses. for immune cells can all bone the

See immunization booster immunization. secondary

peptide an tissue produced A vasoactive of bradykinin is as a and inﬂammatory as that damage acts result mediator.

by infection Antibodies that antibodies strains. viral block broadly multiple neutralizing these to the virus HIV, reference co-receptors. antibodies to chemokine that of block In are CD4 and/or binding

the in Organized some tissue tissue lymphoid bronchus-associated in animals. bronchi (BALT) found lymphoid but tract, such organized children. the be it tissue infants not in humans respiratory present do some in may Adult normally and have lymphoid

(Btk) B-cell signaling. tyrosine kinase important Bruton’s receptor tyrosine in Tec-family kinase A X-linked immunodeficiency in agammaglobulinemia. mutated human the Btk is disease

Bruton’s X-linked agammaglobulinemia See X-linked agammaglobulinemia.

development bursa that organ the Lymphoid gut of B-cell in site associated the of Fabricius is with chickens.

enterocytes of as in several acid fatty the digestion chain cells by butyrate deacetylases. inﬂuence of anaerobic energy carbohydrates short produced abundantly histone host acting commensals ways, as intestine source in and that A can an for inhibitor an by

composed of first C1r complement complex classical proteases of of the C1 step the and as pathway the to C1s. complex, molecules in bound activated two C1 C1q Protein each activation, activates C1r, cleaves and activates or C1q C4 antibody which C2. to a pathogen and Binding of which C1s, cleaves

An inhibitor C1r:C1s for inhibitor binds inactivates C1 C1 (C1INH) and protein that activity. enzymatic C1INH in of Deficiency peptides and cause through subcutaneous causes swelling. laryngeal that hereditary angioedema vasoactive production

the cleaved protein and lectin is pathways Complement the and complex by C1 of that C2a. yield C2 to C2b classical forms that active of C4bC2a. C2a part classical protease is an the C3 convertase

complement C3 all converge. protein which on activation pathways Complement it promotes phagocytes. bind destruction can surfaces, C3b, microbial forms cleavage by which covalently to C3 where

C3b surface complex and C3a that of the a cleaves convertase to on pathogen. C3 Enzyme C3 pathways is formed C4b C3 from with C2a. complexed of lectin membrane-bound The the and convertase classical the protease The with pathway formed protease alternative C3b membrane-bound from is C3 convertase Bb. the complexed

fluid-phase C3(H2O)Bb C3 convertase. See

anaphylatoxins. See C3a

See C3b C3.

C5 alternative convertase pathway complement activation. of the C3b2Bb The of

C3bBb pathway The complement alternative of activation. the of convertase C3

microbial that can Breakdown attached complement product to of bind C3dg iC3b the receptor remains CR2. where it surface,

fragment small I iC3b removed MCP C3b the to is A and C3f by that on microbial of leave surface. factor

lectin pathways. of C4 the protein Complement and classical the forms cleaved is part C1s C4 which to of C3 by classical C4b, convertase.

formed protein C2a A the that complex. pathway cells convertase on C4bC2a classical protein C4b-binding displacing the host by from C3 (C4BP) inactivates complement-regulatory C4b binds C4BP cannot attached host C4b to cells, to attached pathogens. but bind

lectin of complement and the of C3 classical activation. C4b2a convertase pathways

classical the convertase of of complement activation. C5 C4b2a3b and pathways lectin

that and to C5a C5 cleaves complex Enzyme convertase C5b. C5

C5a anaphylatoxins. See

and cell-surface of receptor macrophages fragment for The receptor neutrophils. complement, present pro-inﬂammatory C5a C5a the on

the the that formation Fragment of membrane-attack initiates complex C5b C5 (MAC). of

Non-signaling expressed phagocytes. for receptor (GPR77) C5L2 decoy by C5a

of the C9 that C5b to leads lysis that complex, act membrane-attack C7, C6, proteins target to a the C8, pore form producing with Complement cell.

the crucial via T-cell phosphatase A in with cytosolic signaling a receptor. calcineurin role serine/threonine cyclosporin immunosuppressive responses. T-cell drugs tacrolimus inactivate suppressing A The calcineurin, and

the to of variety wide Calcium-binding bind to enzymes. protein calmodulin activated activity and regulate a binding that is is Ca2+; then of able by it

the folded in is of the immunoglobulin retains reticulum (ER) the ER to binds in them calnexin that and endoplasmic members of complete. folding partly until A chaperone proteins superfamily protein

of manganese peptides calprotectin antimicrobial heterodimers the from which sequester S100A8 of and zinc complex microbes. S100A9, A and lesser by neutrophils, in in and epithelial abundance by cells. amounts macrophages Produced and

A peptides MHC endoplasmic newly protein molecules. class with complex onto together in loads reticulum chaperone that, forms and the peptide-loading ERp57 synthesized the calreticulin that I tapasin,

survival that occurs acquiring and cancer that growth. cancer are of responses, escape is for these process such immunoediting cancer A that favor when during from cells the mutations a immune development with mutations it selected its survival and

cells male cancer normally by cancer-testis in the are only antigens Proteins germ cells in expressed expressed testis. that

5ʹ the is to nucleus purine modified the 7-methylguanosine the of A process phosphate nucleotide transcript. occurring added in which of the RNA capping in the first

bacteria. polysaccharides capsulated capsular See

capsulated by of phagocytes, resists resulting pus a the actions to bacteria that shell in site at surrounded of polysaccharide Referring formation bacteria infection. called bacteria. pyogenic Also (pus-forming)

C5a. A metalloproteinase inactivates and carboxypeptidase (CPN) C3a N that condition recurrent deficiency angioedema. of CPN causes a

ligand a in found bacteria mitochondrial that cardiolipin and is some lipid in T inner human by γ:δ A recognized many the membrane cells.

An of caspase by process caspase initiator activated the 8 apoptosis. that various activates receptors

to caspase 4 caspase capsase This 11 is human 5. and homologous signaling. by Its TLR is expression induced can directly activate it, pyroptosis. leading to LPS Intracellular

signaling some protein (CARD) A CARD-domain-containing other caspase dimerize in recruitment tails present receptor including with them into that thus domain proteins, caspases, pathways. domain recruiting can

that acid at cleave A aspartic residues. of cysteine family proteins proteases caspases apoptosis cytokine important of the have roles They processing and in pro-polypeptides. in

one peptides antimicrobial Family humans of cathelicidins member. that has in

inhibitor. A cathepsin cathelin L

in function into antigens that their vesicular using site the proteases of family cysteine taken at A processing frequently pathway. active cathepsins

chemokines CC chemokines, of One by the near cysteines distinguished two adjacent (C) the main of classes amino terminus. two CCL1, They CCL2, have names etc. Appendix list chemokines. of IV individual a See for

cells cells into binds follicle-associated activated B CCR6, dendritic GALT. and and recruiting made T cells, cells, by (MIP-1γ) epithelial Chemokine CCL9 NK and

Chemokine lymph cells. dendritic T that CCL19 made cells functions to stromal T-cell by nodes attract zones binds in of and cells naive and CCR7

Chemokine by T cells, follicle-associated into binds NK GALT. recruiting CCL20 epithelial made CCR6, B and activated and dendritic cells cells, cells and

functions to zones cell and Chemokine CCL21 nodes cells binds stromal cells that T dendritic T cells. naive in lymph by made of attract CCR7 and

small-intestinal cells binds that Chemokine CCR9 by recruit epithelial (TECK) and B cells. CCL25 gut-homing to T made

IgA CCR10 producing that binds gland into B CCL28 lymphocytes and intestinal recruit mucosal gland, Chemokine to mammary cells lactating tissues. cells, epithelial salivary (MEC, by these chemokine) colonic made

monocytes, dendritic and expressed cells, CCL6 receptor several B CCR1 binds cells, and including neutrophils, Chemokine chemokines, by that CCL9.

receptor binds expressed cells that CCR6 Chemokine dendritic cells by B follicular marginal and and zone CCL20.

T CCR7 by cells, receptor T some Chemokine and dendritic memory expressed cells, T central B memory all and lymphoid and CCL21 such and B that cells as binds and in by cells, tissues. made naive stromal cells CCL19

and binds by receptor dendritic gut-homing mediates CCL25 some cells, thymocytes, of T γ:δT expressed and that recruitment cells, that Chemokine CCR9 cells. cells,

recruitment lymphocytes. B IgA-producing binds Chemokine many CCL28 cells CCR10 by that of receptor and mediates that expressed intestinal CCL27

the are CD1 that can T not to MHC cells. antigens in and proteins family class of CD4 encoded present Small I-like glycolipid MHC

which δ, invariant the chains, form ε, ζ and CD3γ, signaling of proteins dimeric the receptor. complex the T-cell CD3 complex and The more contains tails. in of cytoplasmic them or motifs signaling their one Each ITAM

molecules. that II T-cell receptors for bound CD4 antigens class recognize MHC The to peptide co-receptor MHC of binds the face molecule. lateral It to the

co-receptor The recognize MHC that for antigens peptide bound T-cell receptors class CD8 molecules. to I lateral face MHC to binds It molecule. the the of

macrophages Integrin and (CD18) that β2 functions receptor with expressed dendritic complement (CR3). integrin) by cells integrin CD11b 3 (αM as some

co-receptor. See CD19 B-cell

Another receptor (CR2). for name complement CD21 2 also co-receptor. See B-cell

that and mammalian An binds glycoproteins commonly receptor contains cells tail. found acid-modified on its CD22 cytoplasmic on inhibitory motif an ITIM B in cells sialic

receptor CD23 for IgE. Fc low-affinity The

Also receptorα also known component IL-2 chain. (IL-2Rα), high-affinity which IL-2 CD25 the is as γ receptor, common includes and the IL-2Rβ this the of is confer activated upregulated constitutively cells expressed is by Treg to IL-2. It by and T cells to responsiveness

T early T cells CD27 on cells dendritic delivers expressed that on constitutively TNF receptor-family in binds the to potent protein activation signal A CD70 co-stimulatory cells naive and process. a

the binds such co-stimulatory molecules receptor antigen-presenting that on B7 as cells. cells An activating cells CD28 T to present specialized dendritic on CD28 naive receptor major co-stimulatory cells. the T is on

antigen-activated of in on CD30, proliferation on the B ligand (CD30L) CD30 cells helper CD30 cells are co-stimulatory naive CD30 B ligand T molecules and cells. involved stimulating

CD31 on lymphocytes at molecule endothelial cell and cell-adhesion both junctions. found A blood CD31–CD31 leukocytes interactions leave and thought to are vessels enable tissues. to enter

CD40 CD40 switching co-stimulatory of activated the T are B cells. and ligand CD40, interaction ligand molecules class (CD40L, B for naive is activated on on CD154) helper and proliferation required antigen cells whose cells CD40 CD40 is by to cells. expressed here the also CD40–CD40L provides signals co-stimulatory T cells, naive dendritic interaction and

An in deficiency IgM responses little is immunodeficiency serum IgE, IgA antibody IgG, disease high. produced deficient, but levels or are normal even to no are CD40 which or ligand IgM and CD40 prevents which the class due gene in to a switching defect ligand It from (CD154), is encoding occurring. elevated phenotype as immunoglobulins. syndrome, of Also the other encodes of hyper X-linked known gene relative and IgM chromosome to on CD40L X that reﬂecting location IgM antibody

CD44 a expressed known phagocytic on cells. lymphocytes T as upregulated activated Also cell-surface glycoprotein is (Pgp1), glycoprotein-1 naive by CD44 and cell–cell It functions and is for acid and cell–extracellular adhesion. in matrix receptor a hyaluronic used effector of a marker and expression CD44 is for memory High T cells. as

CD45 all tyrosine A leukocytes. found on phosphatase transmembrane subtypes expressed different of It different is the including cells. in isoforms cell types, T different on of marker the erythrocytes. is generic cells, Also antigen, a derived leukocyte exception called hematopoietically with for common it

that serves for CD45RO marker of alternatively spliced variant T cells. as a memory CD45 An

See CD48 2B4.

host C9 thus complement damage binding protectin formation. MAC protein preventing from blocking to complex, protects the by of C5b678 that CD59, cells Cell-surface

protein rapidly T A antigen-activated expressed CD69 is by cell-surface that cells. retaining cells. 1 the of acts they T sphingosine within down-modulate to into receptor cells T 1 divide thereby secondary (S1PR1), tissues It effector zones as and T-cell phosphate of expression differentiate the lymphoid activated

signal is and for cells cells T on the expressed activation in process. to CD70 The that delivers dendritic a CD27 activated co-stimulatory ligand potent early

See co-receptor. CD81 B-cell

SLAM See molecule). lymphocyte CD84 (signaling activation

expressed cells CD86 T is that antigen-presenting binds on A immunoglobulin transmembrane to superfamily cells. protein expressed and CD28 by the (B7-2) of

A that cells. of subunit receptors is CD94 KLR-type NK of a the lectin C-type

the microbiota. food in inducing tolerance a involved and αE:β7, of Integrin in the dendritic subset from on antigens commensal are cells that cell-surface CD103 a tract gastrointestinal to marker

family IL-2 the α of receptor CD127 chain common γ IL-7 as receptor pairs known to with (IL-7Rα), receptor. the the form which IL-7 Also to T is subset and support expressed cells by of memory T It their a naive survival. cells

oats, the gluten, intestine present in response caused celiac wheat, immune directed by and A of a chronic condition of small complex disease an upper at barley. proteins destroyed, and chronically gut villi compromised. wall to inﬂamed, are the gut’s The nutrients is absorb becomes the ability

binding cell-adhesion that molecules types extracellular of proteins to mediate cells several of the or different other to cell one matrix Cell-surface proteins. selectins, immunoglobulin important (such operation the gene ICAM-1) Integrins, the among of of immune in members system. and superfamily the are cell-adhesion as the molecules

effector adaptive main response cell-mediated responses antigen-specific role. cells which immune immune in T the An have by called such infection The a is immunity conferred immunity. to response cell-mediated the the time response antigen cell-mediated encountered. is first A is primary particular a T-cell occurs response immune that

mediated T antigen-specific reaction largely cellular by lymphocytes. hypersensitivity reactions A hypersensitivity

immunity. of of study cellular immunology cellular the basis The

The thymus. of lymphoid are organs, lymphoid humans, the bone lymphocyte tissues development; and in central these sites marrow central marrow, T bone lymphocytes within thymus develop B progenitors. in develop the lymphocytes whereas from bone marrow-derived organs. called lymphoid Also primary the

T CCR7 central T and that lymphocytes memory cells secondary tissues (TCM) Memory recirculate lymphoid express cells. to naive blood between similarly and cells. T effector become in They fully lymphoid require tissues secondary to mature restimulation

are tolerance in antigens Immunological central established lymphocytes central while to self developing organs. is lymphoid that tolerance Cf. peripheral tolerance.

rapidly in peripheral centroblasts present Large, follicles cells organs. dividing of the zone of dark lymphoid B in centers germinal activated

Small populate the organs; follicles centers derive in centroblasts light the of cells they centrocytes germinal zone the from center. lymphoid B in peripheral of germinal that

cytosolic by cyclic cGAS is A guanosine form enzyme activated to that DNA monophoshate. (cyclic double-stranded GAMP monophosphate-adenosine synthase) (CDNs). See cyclic dinucleotides

checkpoint Approach tumor regulate attempts that signals to therapy blockade lymphocytes. inhibitory normal that with the to interfere

by defect a syndrome caused a Chediak–Higashi phagocytic vesicle A in in involved in function intracellular protein defect fusion. cell and of phagosomes, with fail properly Lysosomes is ingested to fuse killing impaired. bacteria

of chemoattractant protein phagocytic and cells, the that Small chemokines activation migration stimulates lymphocytes. cells and especially role have a Chemokines inﬂammatory central responses. in Appendix listed in are IV. individual Properties chemokines of

response signals chemotaxis in environment. to Cellular the movement chemical occurring in

co-stimulate, of composed domains that antigen-specific T cells single-chain fusion in antibody) immunotherapy. activate antigen and cancer and expressed extracellular chimeric in Engineered use receptors (CAR) intracellular signaling receptor proteins for (e.g.,

can organs. that failure lead transplanted chronic Chronic late allograft of damage vasculopathy to vessels and its Arteriosclerosis to and of eventual the leads atrophy. graft of graft blood fibrosis hypoperfusion

granulomas which disease result a An immunodeficiency bacteria by elimination of multiple of cells. (CGD) phagocytic in chronic defective granulomatous form as of the involved bacterial radical It caused killing. oxidase enzymes superoxide system is defects generate the that NADPH in by in

in components to one inﬂammasome. autoinﬂammatory the defects gene of of the disease An due the NLRP3,

or transplanted a which causes. nonimmunological failure chronic rejection due be immunological of organ, to can Late

MHC cells. dendritic An molecules compartment endocytic class CIIV II early containing in

receptors receptors the I A group for cytokines. of superfamily class of hematopoietin cytokine chain These β receptors IL-5. GM-CSF, IL-7, the IL-3, IL-21, and using and a common γ chain include and common IL-2, IL-4, for IL-15, for

chain from peptide class variable A II-associated proteases. cleaved (CLIP) invariant invariant by length (Ii) chain peptide of the MHC class the it associated form remains removed by molecule is unstable the until in with HLA-DM protein. It an II

that receptors IFN-β, interferon family heterodimeric and (IFN)-α, includes of a cytokine cytokines II A for group of IFN-γ, IL-10. receptors class

replaces somatic one class one the heavy-chain switching, a IgA, IgM recombination constant isotype, antibodies of cells different with gene in to production or region class B IgG, of switching recombination IgE. that switch the of from A isotype activated process the their affects antibody effector but not antigen specificity. This functions as Also isotype switching. known Cf. somatic hypermutation.

classes of type by contains. of defined is antibody class it The chain heavy the an IgA, and chains five respectively. IgM, IgG, heavy classes: δ, are IgE, containing μ, ε, antibody There main α, IgD, γ, and several class The IgG subclasses. has isotypes. See also

surfaces The of activation. C3b complement classical C3 classical C4b2a, C3 the pathogen of complement components activated complex cleaves which to on in pathway convertase

antigens classical MHC proteins I peptide function for T by whose by I class presenting class MHC genes recognition genes cells. Cf. nonclassical MHC class Ib.

and inﬂammation classical into monocyte macrophages. of capable form to of monocyte circulation major sites recruitment The of in differentiation

thus bacterial the that pathway either as the is complement-activation by binding to foreign. bacteria, or The to pathway to classical surfaces initiated bound antibody C1 directly bacteria ﬂagging also lectin pathway, pathway. alternative See

See macrophages. macrophage classically activated M1

polyadenine involved RNA modification A in 3ʹ end the cleavage the (polyA) complex the the protein tail. of of multi-subunit for addition pre-messenger stimulation factor of

adaptive to to of theory tolerance selection self of antigens, immature The self when which as deletion clonal they immunity. lymphocytes the elimination clonal by produces bind required tolerance. Clonal and in occur is deletion tolerance peripheral mechanism the also can of central main

proliferation precedes of that in effector lymphocytes response their expansion into to stimulation differentiation The antigenic antigen-specific cells. clonal essential in number can It so to rare response. immunity, step cells elicited that combat is increase in antigen-specific pathogen adaptive that allowing effectively they the an the

adaptive paradigm clonal central selection of The immunity. theory that adaptive states derive responses that are self-tolerant. immune from individual antigen-specific lymphocytes It lymphocytes to eliminate effector immunity. pathogen, antigen-specific in cells to sustain that response specific and memory the into cells differentiate into eliciting proliferate and These antigen Talmage. Jerne by Burnet theory formulated David The in by was earlier and and Niels forms Macfarlane

of the population same A all progenitor from clone cell. cells derived

feature clonotypic members a Describes to clone. a unique of is For receptors identical all given in have be of clone to the distribution of clonotypic, as the a cells the population antigen antigen example, receptors. said lymphocyte

Gram-positive treatment associated colitis bacterium broad-spectrum anaerobic severe with following difficile toxogenic with certain frequently antibiotics. spore-forming Clostridium

of TFH acting in c-Maf development transcription A factor the cells.

vessels blood other damaged. and clotting trigger that in proteins the collection proteases A system when are coagulation blood blood of

V recombination a genes. T-cell by gene segment joining DNA immunoglobulin during the gene segment of a or joint to formed coding (D)J the of join receptor imprecise retained the is It in the gene. joint rearranged Cf. signal joint.

in situation expressed amounts gene roughly of equal are a alleles the the which two the Describes in in heterozygote. codominant Most polymorphic highly property, including show this genes MHC the genes.

collagen-like of proteins family containing sequences. A sugar-binding (lectins) collectins calcium-dependent is mannose-binding (MBL). example An lectin

information, generated receptors diversity comprising units genetic among two separate combining The types. antigen combinatorial of diversity by receptor different segments site. combined receptor different are antigen-recognition in to receptor β, α and combinations light the and immunoglobulins; First, receptors) and chains; are or joined in gene two T-cell δ, generate (heavy chains to make γ second, in many diverse

(for with live humans other bacteria) that bacteria commensal gut host (predominantly harmlessly example commensal the normally in animals). their microorganisms Microorganisms in and microbiota, symbiosis on a host way. in some positive their benefit commensals confer Many

cytokines that A receptor subunit of and (CD131) IL-3, is IL-5, a β GM-CSF. chain for the transmembrane polypeptide common common

of A to common common that a (CD132) receptors. chain is subgroup polypeptide γ chain transmembrane cytokine (γc)

with (ILCs). of the can exception lymphoid to rise give innate cell lymphoid of all cells Stem the (CLP) that types lymphocytes progenitor common

whole, name of other primed lymphocytes can immune common mucosal system mucosal as of system a that the been have the cells part reﬂecting The immune system recirculate one that fact as mucosal the to effector system. mucosal the parts in

granulocytes, give dendritic progenitor and the mast Stem (CMP) cells cells, immune of cells of immune cells myeloid system. myeloid system—macrophages, the rise can innate to common that the cells. stem gives rise This also red to blood cell megakaryocytes and

are which relatively common or a few one isotypes production immunodeficiencies (CVIDs) A common only affected. antibody variable deficiency in in be can of defects. variety genetic to a It due

defense complement a A against together pathogens proteins as in spaces. of that extracellular set plasma act coated proteins directly. removal phagocytes complement becomes that by certain pathogen also kill and that facilitate with pathogens The can its system can several of in Activation different be the initiated complement ways. lectin pathway. See classical pathway, pathway, alternative

activation complement activation infection. inactive the system The of of that proteins occurs the normally complement on pathway, lectin See pathway. classical pathway, alternative

See proteins C1, C3, etc.. C2, complement

have an bound to of that become complement such (CRs) a Cell-surface pathogen. bind complement receptors antigen and proteins proteins types as recognize various that receptors and bind pathogens identify enable to coated destroy and complement proteins, them. with to Complement on ingest phagocytes them and CR2, CR4, CR1, See complex. and CR3, the CRIg, C1

Proteins complement activated and on cells. of from regulatory host the complement activity control surfaces prevent being that complement proteins

plasma pathogens set in defense proteins spaces. extracellular as act that a against system of complement together A certain kill pathogen by coated with and also that directly. complement phagocytes The can becomes that proteins pathogens its removal facilitate can system several Activation the initiated in be of ways. different complement alternative classical pathway. See lectin pathway, pathway,

the the ligand. domains make determine complementarity-determining regions of Parts (CDRs) contact V of specificity T-cell and immunoglobulins receptors their and with that specific antigen proteins. CDRs the receptor, the of to are The most these antigen diversity variable contribute part of and are three domain. in each There and V CDR2, CDR3) such regions (CDR1,

folding. the epitopes that in epitopes, by antigen brought structure protein conformational Antigenic the is protein separate protein of discontinuous several from formed sequence regions on together a (epitope) native epitopes folded conformational that proteins. only bind bind Antibodies

toxoid. of to made capsular polysaccharides proteins tetanus immunogenicity, conjugate known vaccines from vaccines bacterial as such Antibacterial bound

domains the (C Ig constant protein of domain Type an domains) up makes immunoglobulin constant molecule. chain regions of that each of

in a that C region, constant different part is between constant relatively That immunoglobulin molecules. region receptor or amino sequence acid of an T-cell known the Fc in antibodies. region as Also The function. determines of antibody effector particular constant region an its Cf. region. variable

structure (epitope) amino is region acid of by that a continuous a epitope sequence. formed linear epitope, in Antigenic small single protein the bind Antibodies that bind denatured epitopes continuous to protein. can are detected The cells T by continuous. epitopes called linear a epitope. Also

and in classical) presentation antigen T activation (or of, that mainly (cDCs) The participates to, conventional cells. cells of naive dendritic lineage dendritic cells Cf. plasmacytoid dendritic cells.

by participating a in to associated sensitivity increases protein and binding ligands signaling. receptor co-receptors to that ligand of the its Cell-surface on cells. B with which is on The B which are cells and receptors one in antigen of either co-receptors, act cells the T receptor on conjunction three a of co-receptor CR2, CD8 complex CD4 and cells, or proteins, T complement

a which organ; by cortex the to refers or of The follicles, nodes cells. are in lymph populated outer mainly tissue it part B

corticosteroids Family such steroids to natural cortisone. drugs related of as thymocytes, cell Corticosteroids kill death. apoptotic developing can especially lymphocytes, inducing They are medically immunosuppressive agents. anti-inﬂammatory and useful

T co-stimulatory Cell-surface naive on cells cells. deliver co-stimulatory signals to molecules that proteins antigen-presenting on are are which ligands dendritic molecules Examples T CD28 naive B7 cells, cells. on for the

receptors which lymphocyte. receptors through naive which of lymphocytes additional receive antigen full Cell-surface receptor, the to co-stimulatory those received the signals cells through necessary and the are for activation the on cells. and on and and on CD40 Examples cells, B T are CD27 CD28 CD30

CR1 C3b. by A binds to cells expressed receptor (CD35) phagocytic that It convertase stimulates formation and on phagocytosis host-cell surfaces. C3 inhibits

complex. B-cell of the that (CD21) receptor Complement part CR2 is co-receptor receptor, coated to with binds enhances It by C3dg, least the and, breakdown antigens cross-linking B-cell especially sensitivity of products C3b, to antigen at 100-fold. also used to It by cells. receptor the the Epstein–Barr infect virus is B

3. (CD11b:CD18) Complement receptor CR3 both acts as that adhesion receptor. β2 and integrin A molecule a complement as an C3b a on surfaces, CR3 and of product on phagocytes breakdown phagocytosis. pathogen stimulates iC3b, binds

an a and integrin as acts adhesion molecule A β2 CR4 both receptor. as that complement (CD11c:CD18) and iC3b, phagocytosis. a on breakdown product phagocytes on CR4 of stimulates surfaces, C3b binds pathogen

in calcium of to during cell let the to antigen. ﬂow the channel response open lymphocyte CRAC that plasma Channels the the into cell membrane calcium endoplasmic from Channel release is the opening by induced of reticulum.

bacteria, protein C-polysaccharide pneumoniae many phosphocholine, of surface uptake acute-phase of phagocytes. protein binds C-reactive opsonizing for them constituent thus the the that by a to Streptococcus An and bacterium of other

receptor the immunoglobulin of family) CRIg (complement

to forms of inactivated binds receptor that C3b. A complement

gut to disease the Crohn’s commensal overresponsiveness disease abnormal inﬂammatory thought microbiota. Chronic bowel to an from result

donor cells against to with interfere successful used typing test that other’s antibodies typing transfusion in blood grafting. and determine A each and recipient have or histocompatibility might whether cross-matching

peptides molecules. dendritic presented I cross-presentation cells up The give taken extracellular class by can which proteins to process MHC by by rise enables class T MHC to CD8 extracellular antigens be I sources and activate It from cells. presented by molecules

MHC I protein the CD8 presented than T in molecules an class cells antigenic Activation (i.e., exogenous dendritic directly. cells rather by of from is which peptide within cross-presentation), produced by derived dendritic the cells cross-priming by Cf. direct presentation.

by cells of small α-Defensins Paneth cryptdins the peptides) the intestine. (antimicrobial made

the a has Any been epitope until broken antigen receptor down lymphocyte cannot epitopes cryptic processed. be by that recognized and

are wall tissue rise Aggregates isolated lymphoid lymphoid gut to follicles. in the that give to thought of cryptopatches

of pAS CstF-64 that of the stimulation secreted form to favors leading factor cleavage polyadenylation IgM. at Subunit

kinase phosphorylates Src kinases Src-family that kinase them. lymphocytes, A C-terminal inactivating C-terminal of (Csk) in thus the tyrosine

activation. on A CTLA-4 its B7 cells T-cell inhibitory inhibits T for high-affinity receptor molecules; binding

that innate carbohydrate-binding many lectins that for Large require class including Ca2+ proteins of function in C-type immunity. binding,

humans. to involved skin that cutaneous is antigen molecule lymphocyte in in A homing cell-surface (CLA) lymphocyte the

immunodeficiencies. common CVIDs See variable

macrophages, Chemokine and cells, T CX3CR1 by expressed receptor NK binds that cells activated monocytes, CXCL1 (Fractalkine).

(CXC) terminus. amino distinguished main of classes motif chemokines, near One two the a of CXC chemokines by Cys-X-Cys the have etc. names CXCL1, They CXCL2, Appendix list IV See a for chemokines. individual of

the the that (SDF-1) cells zone dark stromal expressed germinal by by center CXCR4 centroblasts. in Chemokine of produced CXCL12 binds

that Chemokine binds and of germinal center and follicle in cells produced centrocytes. light the the B expressed on zone CXCR5 the circulating CXCL13

and B cells A the CXCL13 T migration by circulating the activated cell and that chemokine receptor into chemokine binds directs follicle. cells expressed CXCR5

are adenylate produced and/or by Cyclic second various messengers (CDNs) cyclic by dinucleotides STING. and that monophosphate bacteria guanylate as of detected dimers

See monophosphate guanosine monophosphate-adenosine GMP-AMP (CDNs). cyclic or (cyclic cGAMP) cyclic dinucleotides

21 numbers days. cycle of approximate with very normal absent, ﬂuctuate which near to time from an neutropenia cyclic disease inherited in neutrophil low or A dominantly which persistently This inherited neutrophil (SCN), is in contrast the congenital in low to numbers. defect results severe in neutropenia

in An activated the the to behavior that and the of light cells from of zone reentry back explanation model lose chemokine germinal under centers receptor inﬂuence again the expression gain zone B B proposing in of thus lymphoid CXCR4 of move the dark the CXCL12. cyclic and follicles, and cells chemokine

that a cyclosporin folding, associates calcineurin, A of to by complex with affect its that preventing that bind calmodulin. A protein cyclophilins prolylisomerases produce family also activation

cyclophosphamide agent immunosuppressive alkylating is that drug. A an DNA as used by response It including in lymphocytes rapidly dividing proliferating antigen. cells, to killing acts

A immunosuppressive drug the and noncytotoxic receptor, preventing inhibits T-cell cyclosporin that T-cell activation from function. A signaling powerful effector (CsA) formed the to to cyclophilin, It and binds the binds and phosphatase inactivates calcineurin. complex

of cystic and gene, mucus defect infections thick fibrosis CFTR recurrent lung. the caused leading abnormally causing by to in serious Disease

enzymatic AID-APOBEC that proteins assembly mediate and complete VLR rearrangement An by genes. activity deaminase exhibited species of family of (CDA) cytidine may agnathan activity

that cells, Proteins behavior cell made cytokines affect other a cells. immune the by particularly of often lymphocytes by called Cytokines are IL). interleukins (abbreviated made their in and Cytokines listed III. are Appendix receptors Cf. chemokines.

receptors innate UL16 is that cells. A of protein by nonessential recognized cytomegalovirus expressed NK cytomegalovirus by glycoprotein

by major of cytoskeleton, separated vesicular such within from membranes and and compartments One the system. mitochondria, nucleus such cells the containing as distinct compartments several cytosol and elements as

other that some that in cells. cells CD8 cytotoxic also in typically cells, T live against T reproduce T but the intracellular can cytosol, kill pathogens cells cases CD4 or defending T cells

to in rejection in human transplantation. renal used treatment cells IL-2 block T Antibody for daclizumab of to CD25 signaling receptor

See DAG diacylglycerol.

(DAMPs) See patterns pathogen-associated molecular patterns molecular damage-associated (PAMPs).

receptors the with containing activating cells. that chains some ITAMS DAP10, DAP12 of are NK on Signaling associated tails

center. zone See dark germinal

with that ICAM-3 surface dendritic-cell DC-SIGN lectin affinity. A the binds high on

DDX41 DNA that box pathway. family to (DEAD 41) A appears the polypeptide signal RLR candidate the sensor through STING of

cell death (DED) effector or discovered originally involved in apoptosis. Protein-interaction domain death domain in programmed proteins proteins, and/or the pro-apoptotic domains in signals. are involved some death domains of adaptor of As transmitting pro-inﬂammatory intracellular part

that receptor’ complex ‘death through multi-protein members (DISC) is formed signaling A of as death-inducing cellular of by such signaling complex the family receptors, Fas. apoptosis-inducing cascade to It apoptosis. caspase activates the induce

that protein from cell-surface A (DAF protects cells CD55) decay-accelerating lysis or complement. factor by causes disease Its the hemoglobinuria. paroxysmal nocturnal absence

walls. recognizes that fungal of neutrophils which glucans, common and A are macrophages β-1,3-linked on receptor cell phagocytic components Dectin-1

frameshifts, folded improperly spliced by improperly for ribosomal products proteins, defective Peptides by translations which are translated tagged ubiquitin recognized of the in degradation proteasome. (DRiPs) or introns mRNAs, and from

defensins See β-defensins. α-defensins,

antigen cell-mediated form A Th1 and immunity in stimulating lymphocytes CD4 CD8 the delayed-type sensitized of by skin lymphocytes. elicited hypersensitivity reactions appears injected. days to called is because the It is antigen after reaction delayed-type hours hypersensitivity type Coombs to and hypersensitivity in as Referred historic the Gell IV classification.

dendritic cells Bone including cells tissues. marrow-derived most in tissues, found lymphoid are main functional two subsets. There take the T-cell peripheral they of the dendritic to organs, with activated lymphoid peripheral Conventional most travel are up potent contact antigen pathogens, responses. are where by cells tissues, and stimulators in to as antiviral produce as receptors the a and up dendritic function of interferons main antigen, through amounts TLRs. recognition Plasmacytoid cells also their can infection present large but is an such pathogen of result take in dendritic from in these dendritic presents cells types follicles. Both of follicular the antigen to B cell lymphoid are that distinct cells

cells A epidermal skin specialized dendritic other mice class not humans. species, (dETCs) of of found but T the cells γ:δ some in and T keratinocytes. such They as expressed Skint-1 express with by ligands interact and Vγ5:Vδ1 may

usually phosphate a from The dephosphorylation removal of molecule, group protein. a a

Immunosuppressive vivo. that lymphocytes antibodies monoclonal trigger the in of destruction antibodies depleting acute of treating episodes graft used are They rejection. for

diacyl triacyl receptors Toll-like the and TLR2:TLR6. TLR1:TLR2 for and Ligands lipoproteins

from molecule membrane are diacylglycerol formed the after that of C-γ inositol phospholipase different signaling many A lipid cleaved activation the intracellular by receptors. of phospholipids action the kinase and activates C membrane propagate the RasGRP, and diacylglycerol further stays in The which protein signal.

blood across of particularly The from blood tissues. into movement vessel the cells, blood diapedesis walls leukocytes,

restricted with antigens be cancers. that differentiation as a antigens immunotherapies expression genes category treatment Referring of can patterns by of in targeted to

thymic immunodeficiency a which failure DiGeorge epithelium. Recessive genetic to there develop is syndrome in disease absent blood there anomalies glands and Parathyroid are vessels. the are in large also

bearing allorecognition cells cells regional antigen-presenting recognition activating T tissue and the grafted T-cell nodes, a host donor involves direct of to that lymph the the lymph migrating via Host corresponding receptors. leaving graft,

by cell peptides a I to The given molecules. produced rise presented proteins class MHC by presentation direct give process which within as that become refer or cells, dendritic will cells to targets This the CTLs. to may of antigen-presenting such nonimmune cells,

reference synthesized viral degradation MHC dislocation In of mechanisms, to viral molecules proteins. I class defense the newly by

appropriately. cannot of clotting TNF-α, consumption leads vessels so response clotting the that the intravascular massive coagulation blood throughout Blood occurring in which proteins, small disseminated to the simultaneously to in (DIC) clot patient’s body disseminated septic in Seen shock.

intestinal of following of surgical enterocytes and from fatty ﬂow short-chain resulting microbiota. impaired diversion acids of to loss necrosis of contents from normal Inﬂammation metabolism fecal due derived colitis diversion

between immunoglobulin sequences and segment in the join V rearranged DNA (DH) and gene segments a δ-chain heavy-chain J T-cell receptor in that gene genes. βand diversity form genes Short See gene segments.

the Substages development CD4+CD8+ DN2, thymus. cells in DN4 double-positive of in T DN1, the DN3, DN2 TCRβ-chain the and locus by of starts at is Rearrangement completed DN4.

and Protein T-cell DNA-dependent protein the rearrangement in repair involved genes. DNA immunoglobulin pathway (DNA-PK) in receptor kinase of the kinase

joint recombination. ends DNA responsible the V(D)J for to the Enzyme during DNA IV produce coding ligase joining

excise DNA of a into the elements transposons from can host. and encoding Genetic insert transposase genomes that their themselves DNA own themselves

Vaccination then DNA antigen; encoding by of expressed elicit the and introduction and DNA protein can skin vaccination muscle the responses. antibody desired into T-cell

cells) (DLI) (i.e., infusion marrow treatment transplantation patients residual help cancer donor eliminate during into Transfer of donor lymphocytes for from bone tumor. T to lymphocyte mature

and T Immature CD4 the thymus. thymocytes and T expression cells lack represent thymus of in remaining developing CD8 the double-negative progenitors cells the the to the two in that co-receptors a about 5% these of normal thymocytes. thymus, represent In

thymocytes by the in expression and proteins. both cells co-receptor CD8 CD4 the double-positive are the characterized T Immature of that thymus are of the and cells. to mature T majority thymocytes They and the 80%) CD8 represent progenitors (about CD4 the

repair isotype (DSBR) switching. in the completion repair of DNA joining end double-strand used of pathway nonhomologous break A

is double-stranded recognized A replicative RNA many viruses that is intermediate (dsRNA) TLR-3. by chemical that of a structure

cell adhesion Dscam. See syndrome Down (Dscam) molecule

expressed Members cell TRAIL that many by can by activated types the apoptosis. TNFR DR4, the induce superfamily DR5 of to be

microbes a lymph site system. and site the from via downstream the nodes that receives antigens lymphatic of draining lymph infection node A of during often enlarge be an they were and lymph called response nodes can immune originally glands. enormously palpated; swollen Draining

of phagocytes. opsonize is immunoglobulin invading member A by their superfamily insects bacteria Dscam to and the engulfment thought in aid that forms result can alternative made multiplicity splicing. different a of a as It of be in

such pathogenic of as from resulting of and causes microbiota of Clostridium balance difficile. dysbiosis Altered comprising a species (e.g., variety frequently antibiotics, outgrowth the disorders) microbial organisms genetic associated with

Refers dysregulated innate self in that receptors can alter malignant that system. the expression take or infected place cells to that of detected by changes immune surface various be

enzymatic protein E3 of target. transfer enzyme onto directs An that activity ubiquitin molecule a ubiquitin-conjugating the ligase specific an from E2 a

Disease activating NOD2 sarcoidosis as in mutations with liver. such characterized inﬂammation associated early-onset tissues by

See early pro-B cells. cell pro-B

lymphoid (GPR183) A that B-cell tissues. phases regulates follicular B-cell to regions of receptor outer binds and during and early activation EBI2 interfollicular chemokine the in oxysterols movement

in Integrin cells. the adherens epithelial adjacent E-cadherin important expressed by between junctions cells forming

ﬂuid the from one into it and the blood by features of inﬂammation. the caused cardinal Swelling is tissues; the of of cells entry edema

signal an changes are cellular apoptosis. that effector mediate caspases apoptotic as and the proteases Intracellular with activated a result of associated be to caspase caspases which from the of caspases, initiator act initiate cascade. To distinguished upstream effector

cells TH1, regulatory cells T CD4 effector T the the carrying TH17, effector co-receptor The subset which cells. CD4 T includes TH2, and differentiated of molecule,

without pathogens of The naive lymphocytes from then differentiation. the body can mediate that cells antigen further differentiate the by activation from initial effector lymphocytes and removal after memory distinct from lymphocytes. are which lymphocytes, They further effector must to become undergo differentiation

which processes by body. effector Those from and mechanisms pathogens are cleared destroyed the and pathogens. adaptive use to immune responses eliminate most effector of same Innate mechanisms the

with memory tissues blood T cells and and cells lymphocytes that T restimulation antigen specialized rapid Memory peripheral (TEM) tissues. are after effector between for non-lymphoid effector maturation recirculate into in

effector refers particular This in innate elimination immune pathogen. cell-mediated together category term modules and to that either mechanisms, set a the of of of humoral, act adaptive, or a

the such cells clear cell perform the that as killing activation, the body. infectious cell agent T The functions lymphocytes that and T an response, effector of from immune a subsets, an immune specific are response. with role There several each different in

amino bridge. electrostatic atoms, ion occurring and as Chemical an interaction chains side in between charged a charged acid interactions salt the in

eliminates immune Stage immune response surveillance. anti-tumor and also called cells, phase that of elimination detects cancer

antiretroviral who undetectable non-progressors A HIV-infected therapy. subset levels of without clinically of controllers long-term virus elite have

factor pAS IgM. favors form of ELL2 to at secreted the leading transcription elongation polyadenylation that the A

tissue. or a active secreted of distant the a endocrine as acts hormone is by one Describes biologically on such the into molecule tissue a cytokine action blood that and Cf. paracrine. autocrine,

pyrogens that can induce Cytokines body in rise endogenous a temperature.

processing which (ERAAP) to at size endoplasmic bind endoplasmic Enzyme they MHC a polypeptides trims aminopeptidase the reticulum I can to associated antigen that class reticulum with molecules. in

their recognizes eventual system proteins degradation. and incompletely or misfolded A that in of assures the enzymes reticulum endoplasmic

located to marrow region of adjacent The in the bone; are cells there. stem hematopoietic inner bone endosteum initially the surface

small increased molecules vessels activation changes of production that cell-adhesion endothelial of of permeability inﬂammation, and the walls endothelial the The increased in a occur result such and blood cytokines. as as

forms of that a Cell blood the epithelium endothelial endothelium, cell wall. type vessel the

coagulation that XIV (protein the can (EPCR) endothelial γ:δ MHC A endothelial T interact by receptor cells recognized protein factor can cells. induced class and blood with nonclassical protein on C) I be some C

epithelium endothelium and walls vessels. larger of the lining blood the The blood that of forms capillaries

released from damaged cell Toxins derived by endotoxins cells. bacterial walls cause and induce in potently shock can They can endotoxic a reaction cytokine systemic amounts large called or septic shock. synthesis

capable the microvilli, of destruction Escherichia diarrheagenic of and attachment intestinal of to, to cells infection diseases. and colitis and causing coli of enteroadherent multiple E. coli strains Referring

factor A T development cells, NK cells. CD8 and types certain function of in ILCs, and transcription eomesodermin of involved

the of eosinophils in An abnormally eosinophilia large blood. number

with blood eosinophils stain white type that A cell eosin. granules containing of important be effector is is allergic to in but also chieﬂy It thought medically infections, against important an reactions. cell as defense in parasitic

CCL26 3). CCL24 (eotaxin chemokines CC that and on 1), (eotaxin including eotaxins 2), act predominantly CCL11 (eotaxin eosinophils,

A an antigen or antigen receptor. an by antibody an site on recognized epitope epitopes bound short are molecules. peptide T-cell to MHC of antigen. the are epitopes structural on typically motifs the B-cell surface determinant. an antigenic Also called

responses diversity of the result epitopes persists, a made responses being one. epitope Increase to as other the of than original to in response as autoantigens spreading

equilibrium Stage of the immunoediting shape cells. when antigenic of the phase response continuously anti-tumor character immune to immune allows cancer response

pathway. a the that MAPK kinase, one signaling kinase protein the T-cell is for of receptor Erk module Extracellular signal-related other functions cell types. in in also Erk receptors other

involved loading chaperone in peptide ERp57 endoplasmic onto reticulum. I MHC in A protein molecules class the

strand. into nucleotides lesion during which can operates ‘translesion’ DNA Polη polymerases basic a formed newly DNA such repair, polymerase as repair DNA incorporating A by error-prone untemplated DNA the

can that a Mutants escape that immune against pathogen. original response pathogens evade they way in changed are the the of mutants such

anti-tumor antigenic the such when removed are system. loner Final cancer immunoediting no immune expression by response of of has cells the stage the immune escape phase detected targets that

E-selectin See selectins.

Fc TNF-α TNF receptor fusion p75 for inﬂammatory protein the that and of etanercept the diseases. treatment used arthritis other containing neutralizes subunit rheumatoid of

begins eukaryotic translation that initiation of factor protein preinitiation Subunit 2 mRNA. complex (eIF2α) initiation form from the helps factor eukaryotic that PKR, is phosphorylated suppressed. it protein is translation by When

complex that factor the Multisubunit eukaryotic 43S acts 3 (eIF3) initiation preinitiation of complex. in formation transmembrane interferon-induced bind translation viral suppress can (IFIT) of proteins. thereby It proteins which

pyrogen exogenous that the substance the Any outside lipopolysaccharide induce such can bacterial body originating fever, as LPS. Cf. pyrogens. endogenous

exotoxins A secreted a and by bacterium. toxin produced protein

(EAE) strong autoimmune with disease are adjuvant. neural antigens a An system mice inﬂammatory of experimental encephalomyelitis central nervous immunized that develops the after in

chromosomes, DNA as same circular cell. DNA the contained RSSs the occurring lost and is in such from extrachromosomal orientation not within between produced DNA the by eventually V(D)J chromosomal recombination

blood the tissues. The from extravasation ﬂuid of movement or into surrounding vessels within cells

extracellular undergo cell extrinsic of to A specific cell-surface binding pathway that by signal apoptosis triggered programmed to death receptors ligands (death receptors) pathway the cell (apoptosis).

without composed arm Antibody IgG antibody papain. fragment of by single by Fab region, fragment of the the produced Fc enzyme a antigen-binding of cleavage an constant the plus complete held the It by together amino-terminal bond. and chain variable chain, the first contains region an region light interchain of heavy disulfide

pepsin. (Fab regions, cleavage composed Fc enzyme produced fragment by antigen-binding of of IgG the Antibody two fragments) with the F(abʹ)2 without arms linked fragment

protease, and it alternative Ba activation, binding form the alternative of cleaved an the active factor C3b which to convertase, in pathway to C3bBb. B Protein in to is latter pathway Bb, C3 the complement

B complement in factor serine alternative protease and pathway Bb. of activation, Ba into factor D the cleaves which A

Complement-regulatory and C3b the to B competes with in binds convertase. protein displace Bb factor that plasma from factor H

and H A evading deposited surface, by protein complement. destruction Neisseria binding that produced inactivating meningitidis the factor its factor by thereby (fHbp) pathogen on protein H C3b to membrane, its recruits

convertase. Complement-regulatory derivative inactive I protease factor thus cleaves C3 iC3b, preventing C3b of plasma in that the formation a the to

genetically determined factor of I. factor protein deficiency A complement-regulatory the I lack This proteins depleted. in complement uncontrolled complement so become activation, results that rapidly the Those repeated especially ubiquitous bacterial with pyogenic with deficiency bacteria. suffer infections,

the pathway. that convertase alternative neutrophils protein Plasma the of C3 P activated stabilizes by released factor C3bBb

episodic in the NLRP3, NLRP3, a by inﬂammasome. receptor disease a cold syndrome An the component encoding autoinflammatory (FCAS) gene caused of NOD-like member family of familial mutations autoinﬂammatory the and cold. to exposure induced The are symptoms by

progressive familial of family of lymphohistiocytosis proteins inherited the involved or of cytolytic in deficiency several granules. an diseases inﬂammatory caused formation by of potentially hemophagocytic lethal A (FHL) one release and activated polyclonal CD8-positive lymphoid that and other and T of blood leukocytes. phagocytose erythrocytes cells, in numbers accumulate with cells and including organs, this associated macrophages is Large

severe disorder. disease, autoinﬂammatory (FMF) autosomal fever Mediterranean recessive A an as inherited familial the protein mutation encodes caused granulocytes and (MEFV) that is in It expressed pyrin, the gene which in by is monocytes. defective disorder, activate to thought spontaneously In this pyrin patients inﬂammasomes. is with

alveolar the inﬂammation wall of and farmer’s causing A gas alveolar of hypersensitivity the of large caused IgG lung wall in antibodies with an disease the amounts by respiratory interaction lung, inhaled compromising antigen exchange.

to hinge molecule two by Fc heavy disulfide-bonded The an other carboxy-terminal of region residual the IgG the of region. each Fc fragment, chains halves papain. of It by is by cleavage IgG produced this the the often called Fc complete is portion In region. antibody

receptors bind example, receptors receptors immunoglobulins: the different cell-surface that for bind IgG, portions Family Fcγ Fc of Fc IgE. bind and Fcε of receptors

cold syndrome. FCAS See autoinflammatory familial

the Fc high for region FcεRI affinity receptor of IgE. The of cells primarily Expressed and on mast surface basophils. the interacts that to causes receptors, receptor-bearing bound cell. When activation FcεRI cross-links of antigen nearby with is multivalent the it and IgE

has receptor receptors monocytes Fc that IgG. expressed by highly Fc macrophages (CD64) the and affinity FcγR1 highest for the of

antibodies. recognizes IgG An the receptor on inhibitory B FcγRIIB-1 portion that of cells Fc in motif FcγRIIB-1 an cytoplasmic tail. contains ITIM its

the Cell-surface IgG FcγRIII bind of molecules. receptors that portion Fc aggregated discriminate from them IgG, receptors allowing bind Most only Fcγ antibody free IgG. bound to dendritic variously in functions. role a receptors linking have humoral cell immunity, binding cells, effector cells, Expressed NK to key Fcγ B the on lymphocytes, follicular and antibody phagocytes,

other placenta, Fc the the gut. from (neonatal of as FcRn a mother across fetus such receptor receptor) the to receptor, epithelium IgG that Neonatal transports and across Fc epithelia

hemophagocytic familial FHL lymphohistiocytosis. See

proteins the Biomphalaria a (FREPs) Members fibrinogen-related thought have freshwater that to role the are in of innate in glabrata. immunity superfamily snail immunoglobulin

proteins can the lectin ficolins Carbohydrate-binding of pathway complement initiate that activation. pathogens. on N-acetylglucosamine collectin of are the bind members of family the They and the present to some surface

the interferes sphingosine, organs. that of to lymphoid retention Small-molecule with T fingolimod leading drug effector immunosuppressive of in actions cells

FK506 tacrolimus. See

the of prolyl the and proteins Group (tacrolimus). FK-binding (FKBPs) isomerases immunosuppressive bind to FK506 drug cyclophilins related

used the the is in protein locomotion. the major tail-like that of bacterial A structure constituent flagellin ﬂagellum, protein ﬂagellin dissociated has ﬂagellum. from intact that recognizes the TLR-5

fluid-phase initiate convertase, in pathway the level continually complement. C3 the plasma that that at C3 C3(H20)Bb, is convertase alternative Short-lived can of alternative pathway a activation low of produced

specific macrophages. A receptor pattern is bacteria, receptor recognition neutrophils and peptide which for on fMet-Leu-Phe, fMet-Leu-Phe the (fMLF) to chemoattractant. fMet-Leu-Phe a acts as

folic by cells. for Ib B by recognition bound can of nonclassical MR1 A produced folic the bacteria derivatives acid class by vitamin, acid MAIT various be protein MHC

lymphoid tissues separating Specialized follicle-associated epithelium intestinal wall from gut the the epithelium the of lumen. enter gut. cells, as lymphoid antigens which As the it contains microfold from enterocytes the well organs through

area follicles a organ, which such in An node, also peripheral lymphoid as of predominantly B lymph a contains cells. dendritic follicular cells

cells recirculating follicular spleen, B cells found blood, population in The lymph and long-lived the of the the majority nodes. conventional B known B-2 B cells. Also as

processing peripheral antigen:antibody captures internalization A origin during organs of the dendritic follicles to type that receptors presents follicular cell Fc B and in cell center germinal reaction. them (FDC) cells lymphoid of complexes non-internalized uncertain and B-cell using for

cell (TFH) for resides that lymphoid provides cells follicular cell production. in and to Type T follicles T B help CD4 of helper antibody effector

invariant immunoglobulins framework a regions that and regions regions V of for the Relatively scaffold T-cell protein hypervariable receptors. in the domains provide

and responses to to adjuvant mycobacteria experimental killed oil used enhance Freund’s Emulsion containing water complete of immune antigens.

eukaryotic diseases. of molds, the and and multicellular that cause single-celled yeasts fungi kingdom A a variety including of can organisms, Immunity and fungi cell-mediated both involves is to complex humoral and responses.

tyrosine See Src-family kinases. Fyn

heterodimer. γ the chains, of and lymphocytes in antigen-recognition δ, receptor γ:δ γ:δ composed Subset T of a assembled bearing a cells T-cell T

receptors by γ:δ a T from receptor. the α:βT-cell receptor that T-cell carried subset distinct of is Antigen lymphocytes chain, from that a and rearrangement. of δ undergo γ gene a are genes which is produced It composed

Gram-negative bacteria. peptidoglycan degradation product of (iE-DAP) A of of diaminopimelic the γ-glutamyl acid by sensed NOD1. It is

GAP See proteins. GTPase-activating

exchange factors. nucleotide GEFs See guanine

gene. process somatic of produce in immunoglobulin of to segments gene the recombination gene receptor T-cell The and loci a genetic functional rearrangement diversity regions. process and in T-cell generates receptor variable found This immunoglobulin the

the of DNA of variable and that regions gene the of segments short receptors. domains encode different T-cell loci antigen sequences at receptor Sets immunoglobulin exon. Gene segments complete variable-domain are a to recombination somatic type of each joined form together by There chain about segments are the gene domain. 5 heavy-chain the only) (in the 95 last gene first amino three types gene 10–15 segments amino segments: encode acids of TCRα loci variable encode encode and amino J acids, D V of acids, segments and gene the There is multiple the each germline of to of one copies form together type joined only are variable segment type of in gene DNA, domain. but each

chromosome. locus a gene of site The genetic on a of C-region for of segments gene genes the chains, collection the the receptor chain. refers and term for the the given case immunoglobulin genes complete the locus T-cell and In to

population the single-nucleotide (GWASs) for presence and scanning (SNPs). for the people informative general genome-wide frequency studies correlation in of by between look a the alleles polymorphisms association Genetic of that studies genomes many variant association disease

mice other raised that Mice are absence intestinal of microorganisms. in complete the germ-free and provided is virtually a normally respond Such mice any have but strong specific to antigen, they depleted can very adjuvant. immune mixed systems, with it

Sites center follicles adaptive germinal and during of immune intense an lymphoid develop that response. proliferation differentiation in B-cell germinal hypermutation centers. and in occur switching Somatic class

rearranged in the have most An each that antibody, regions although gene germline vertebrates, to not a true some germline. known do V was encoded theory by separate hypothesis for excluded be antibody germline for fishes cartilaginous diversity

of requirement without can attachment a modification to tail proteins (GPI) A protein membranes domain. host allow glycolipid of that transmembrane the glycosylphosphatidylinositol

mammals. and of class vertebrates all fish comprising The jawed most gnathostomes recombination. These based on the possess V(D)J an immunity RAG-mediated adaptive

gnotobiotic germ-free See mice. mice

for goblet epithelial mucus many protection the epithelium. throughout cells production; in located in important body responsible the sites Specialized of cells

in produced, lungs. causing in are basement which autoimmune against An in membranes) (found IV collagen disease inﬂammation and type extensive syndrome Goodpasture’s kidneys autoantibodies

caused deposited urate by the monosodium tissues causing Disease crystals in of joints, inﬂammation. gout cartilaginous crystals inﬂammasome, Urate the activate NLRP3 cytokines. inﬂammatory which induces

molecular Intracellular act as G switches signaling GTPases pathways. that in proteins GDP. to is GTO They which is GTP active bind induce lost conformation, when their to hydrolyzed subunits) β, the proteins: proteins, which There proteins, of G G Raf, downstream are signaling receptor-associated many heterotrimeric (α, γ transmembrane small Ras two kinds as G the and and act such events. of

by intracellular heterotrimeric signal binding, of A of transmembrane G G-protein-coupled after (GPCRs) ligand large that cell-surface receptors and G with the activation proteins associate receptors protein. seven-span class chemokine examples the receptors. are Important

tetrads. tetrad, guanine of A guanine structure or formed from G-quadruplex G-rich DNA network, stack that further other a which planar guanine form four can on in regions bases hydrogen-bonded switch target region processed regions isotype during RNA the G-quadruplexes switching. to switch intronic back may AID from

rejection. graft See allograft rejection

nonidentical disease attack recipient variety marrow which T of these graft-versus-host can cause severe. a graft in tissues a mature sometimes of are donor, from bone on by cells the An symptoms; (GVHD) the a

antigens mature on bone treat tumor-specific them. the cells minor antigens recipient’s attack graft histocompatibility beneficial effect or of the leukemia, leukemic side-effect and given cells A grafts marrow recognize in graft-versus-leukemia which in T to

bacteria violet Bacteria layer. to alcohol fail that Gram-negative following thin to peptidoglycan due stain a retain wash crystal

pathway in as Proteins immune the proteins (GNBPs) pathogen-recognition in Toll that Drosophila. act defense proteins of binding the Gram-negative

(GM-CSF) tissue cells growth myeloid monocytes granulocytes. the factor of in involved including and cytokine granulocyte-macrophage lineage, of dendritic and and differentiation macrophages, stimulating the A cells,

granulocytes blood White with and granules. cells cytoplasmic multilobed nuclei They basophils. the and eosinophils, comprise neutrophils, polymorphonuclear as known leukocytes. Also

triggered body. or A as agents nondegradable by mycobacteria foreign such chronic granuloma persistent site a by usually infectious of inﬂammation multinucleate into cells, macrophages, a often Granulomas giant central lymphocytes. fused T have area of surrounded by

initiate of peptidoglycan-recognition and proteins Drosophila proteolytic to to binding (PGRPs) Gram-negative downstream of activation. proteins (GNBPs) the leading A Grass protease that Toll serine functions cascade

hormone which thus An and antibodies receptor Graves’ cause against hyperthyroidism. of autoimmune overproduction thyroid-stimulating in the disease thyroid hormone disease

the disease syndrome An secretion that affects lysosomes. pathway immunodeficiency for inherited of Griscelli of GTPase by the in a within movement It Rab27a, caused cells. is vesicles which mutations small controls

by cells innate IFN-γ production. group The ILCs characterized subtype lymphoid 1 of (ILCs) (ILC1s)

of inactive GTPase proteins of to thus proteins state accelerate G (GTP-bound) the conversion that GTPase-activating from active (GAP) the intrinsic Regulatory proteins state. and the the facilitate (GDP-bound) G activity proteins

allowing that bound the and proteins, to Proteins (GEFs) remove G GDP bind nucleotide can activate thus exchange guanine GTP protein. G factors the from

lymphatics patches, nodes. the the lymph with by appendix, isolated lymphoid gut-associated where in immune and found Peyer’s (GALT) lymphoid associated and tissues adaptive the tract, responses intestinal comprising are tissues initiated, wall, to Lymphoid mesenteric follicles gastrointestinal

graft-versus-host See disease. GVHD

locus, complex genes major the The of H-2 mouse. H-2 histocompatibility Haplotypes H-2b. are as designated lower-case superscript, in a by

H-2DM HLA-DM. See

See H-2O HLA-DO.

cells. that amino T N-formylated an H2-M3 nonclassical can having for present by MHC in recognition protein bind terminus A mice Ib and CD8 class peptides

inﬂuenza pathogenic avian ‘bird H5N1 ﬂu’. subtype A for highly responsible flu

which normal situation of the normal one gene for of in a only is function. Describes presence not sufficient allele haploinsufficient the

a its carrier been an hapten following has hapten, response which attachment chemical for protein group, immune against Antibody generated. a effect the small carrier production to

by small immune Any cannot specific a recognized be but haptens an that elicit can molecule response. by antibody itself and must be elicit T-cell antibody responses. chemically a to molecule linked protein to hapten A

of thyroiditis high Hashimoto’s against persistent thyroid-specific by characterized antibody An levels disease autoimmune antigens. to damage to cells antibodies and These NK recruit inﬂammation. leading thyroid, the

two of One chain types other an the the the chain, immunoglobulin protein of chain heavy chain. molecule, light called being H in of isotypes, confers heavy and chain γ, molecule. on different antibody each classes, of are activity distinctive several functional μ), There a which or (α,δ, ε, the identical immunoglobulin molecule contains Each heavy chains. two

associated composed retain without heavy-chain dimers IgGs antigen light an Antibodies species produced of capacity. (hcIgGs) that chain by some camelid heavy-chain-only binding

V region immunoglobulin. to an (VH) variable of chain region Referring the heavy-chain heavy the of

MDA-5. See helicard

Effector stimulate or response cells, that make in T CD4 cells B ‘help’ antibody cells helper T helper challenge. cells T antigenic CD4 to to TH1, of perform can and T cells subsets function. the TFH TH2, CD4 this effector

that hemagglutination, (HA) can Substances virus glycoprotein cells, that as that with blood red blood hemagglutinin, a functions cause the the antigens recognize or human on inﬂuenza in membranes. antibodies hemagglutinin endosome viral ABO such fusion group

give blood that all cell stem of rise hematopoietic (HSCs) marrow different the can in cell cells to bone pluripotent Type types. the

that of with related growth superfamily Large interleukins in and hematopoietin factors cytokines and roles family adaptive both many innate includes immunity. structurally

transport and to transferrin regulates transferrin. receptor protein interacting intestinal hemochromatosis decrease affinity cells protein by A with iron expressed its by that the iron-loaded epithelial for uptake

newborn anti-Rh and anemia the hemolytic blood. a of of disease peripheral maternal the which form the in mainly produces erythroblasts hemolytic immature A severe fetus severe has so antibody that disease in hemolytic fetus the Rh enters

CD8-positive that A lymphohistiocytic expansion (HLH) activation. with lymphocytes is macrophage associated hemophagocytic syndrome of dysregulated macrophages cells, blood erythrocytes leukocytes. including and phagocytose The activated

duct mucosally portal by the transcytosis. the hepatobiliary liver, transported reaches dimeric lamina veins bile whereby route in IgA to propria, Route and produced is the the enters pathway not This of significance in great humans. is

DNA recombination signal gene and the receptor T-cell sequence in ﬂanking immunoglobulin (RSSs) in seven-nucleotide conserved loci. the The sequences segments heptamer

that (Herceptin) used the particularly HER-2/neu of is A overexpressed breast tyrosine in its target treatment. many cancers, kinase in receptor cancer, trastuzumab

unvaccinated in by herd vaccination in immunity a population and for reduction infection. individuals Protection reservoir of the natural others to conferred produced

angioedema the hereditary of system. A (HAE) inhibitor genetic C1 the complement of deficiency leakage leading cause system C1 most blood of larynx, of diffuse is swelling absence from ﬂuid vessels, the of which spontaneous activation inhibitor, to the suffocation. In the the complement can consequence of serious

abnormally caused of the organs. retention A disease and hereditary gene defects liver in hemochromatosis by HFE by other the characterized high in iron

molecule lymphocyte attenuator. and virus (HVEM) entry See herpes B T

against conferred to protection inﬂuenza with reference a pathogen typically Immune a by with serotypes. different strain, heterosubtypic immunity A infection distinct

G See heterotrimeric proteins. G proteins

that of given mother Describes and one different heterozygous from two gene, father. alleles the individuals one a the from inherited have

See protein. HFE hemochromatosis

tissues. vessels blood Specialized lymphoid cells, venules high venous (HEV) endothelial high endothelial small in to the them. lymphoid migrate the high by tissues venules in and attaching from Lymphocytes of walls squeezing the endothelial the cells blood into between

highly drugs A active that is antiretroviral HIV combination used to therapy (HAART) of infection. control inhibit that nucleoside drugs protease. that analogs viral transcription, reverse It and prevent the comprises

to arms in region ﬂexible joins domain immunoglobulin. that Fc hinge piece an Fab The the the a and arms in the binding epitopes of The variable hinge to apart. adopt molecules allows ﬂexibility angles, distances wide the of IgG IgA Fab region to range spaced permitting

antimicrobial C-type by humans. HIP/PAP secreted An intestinal cells in lectin RegIIIα. known Also as

granules. in vasoactive amine stored A mast-cell histamine Histamine the antigen producing allergic to of the bound released dilation some the local of antibodies mast of vessels binding and to contraction symptoms reactions. IgE IgE-mediated muscle, by blood smooth cells causes of drugs counter that action. Antihistamines histamine are

the cavity. histatins and sublingual, constitutively glands the Antimicrobial in produced peptides parotid, by submandibular oral and albicans. Active Candida neoformans against fungi Cryptococcus pathogenic as such

virus. HIV See immunodeficiency human

The human HLA for genetic designation the MHC. HLA-A, upper-case as designated designated and in in HLA-A*0201. Individual are are letters, numbers, by by alleles as loci

MHC HLA-DM loading resembling MHC II that class II in onto An protein is invariant in MHC humans peptides involved molecules. class protein in sometimes H2-DM. or is H-2M, mice called A homologous

in molecule binds II II molecules vesicles. the HLA-DO class MHC An CLIP from MHC intracellular release inhibiting that invariant class HLA-DM, of called in H2-DO. homologous A is H-2O or protein mice

produced Chemokines lymphoid at immune of cells chemokines tissues. that localization the homeostatic direct are steady-state to to

tissue. lymphocyte homing The of particular a direction a into

chemokines, tissue. receptors adhesion specific and lymphocytes cytokines, enable and Receptors that to tissues, molecules lymphocyte homing the to particular enter which on for

from separately alleles identical have given a gene, Describes each that two parent. of homozygous inherited individuals

for the reaction. (HVGD) allograft Another disease rejection host-versus-graft name and term hematopoietic the cells relation or of recognize destroy stem transplantation cells is mainly marrow used host transplanted (HSCs). immune bone marrow when in to The bone

syndrome the causative The agent acquired of virus deficiency (AIDS). (HIV) human immunodeficiency immune cells, lentivirus of selectively T results their retrovirus HIV is that immunodeficiency. which family in and to CD4 macrophages depletion, a infects eventually leading the slow two There of and major causes which HIV-1 are HIV-1 the most HIV-2, virus, worldwide. of strains disease Africa but spreading. HIV-2 to is is West endemic

See antigen leukocyte human (HLA) HLA.

genetic hypervariable into human of use therapeutic otherwise a for loops humanization mouse desired antibodies agents. of engineering specificity The as cause treated people Such them antibodies are to wholly in are than mouse an antibodies. likely immune response with less

such proteins immunity. proteins Referring in antibodies in humoral immunity, ﬂuids, as or in blood adaptive or innate complement to body effector the

humoral immune innate immunity). complement (in antibodies such due (in in response as immunity) humoral the blood, or adaptive Immunity to proteins immunity, circulating humoral transferred serum recipients containing to unimmunized the Adaptive can transfer immunity specific of by antibody. be

HVGD host-versus-graft disease. See

nearby moieties water hydrophobic between interaction occurring interaction Chemical typically excluding hydrophobic molecules.

function locus non-immune An 21-hydroxylase normal the encoded MHC the required synthesis for but in cortisol enzyme of adrenal gland. by

the cholesterol-lowering Rate-limiting of enzyme target drugs the a A 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-co-enzyme as cholesterol (HMG-CoA) statins. such reductase of production and in

hygiene a with A proposed the hypothesis of in frequency century. to microorganisms course of late-20th over allergies first the environmental increased ubiquitous patients was reduced exposure the cause hypothesis midto observed that 1989 of

called (HIES) syndrome hyper Also IgE syndrome. Job’s recurrent characterized skin IgE. concentrations serum A and and of by high disease infections pulmonary

antibody, symptoms. syndrome IgM diseases IgM of which A in genetic there hyper other among is group of overproduction switching enzyme such to They various AID. class and are as the due CD40 in involved defects proteins for genes in ligand cytidine deaminase, See deficiency. ligand CD40 activation-induced

IgM immunodeficiency activation-induced See hyper type deaminase. 2 cytidine

react hyperacute Immediate transplanted reaction preformed natural against rejection antigens caused by rejection the that on antibodies graft organ. and to and of the to ischemic trigger the antibodies blood-clotting leading an bind cascade, endothelium graft death The organ. engorged, rapid

hypereosinophilic an syndrome Disease eosinophils. overproduction associated of with

hypervariable complementarity-determining regions. regions See

Applied gene in hypomorphic reduced that function. mutations result to mutations

cytoplasmic homodimer, protein constitutively that p65 subunits. the A of and composed NFκB p50 IκB with associates by IKK (IκB the becomes be allows activated phosphorylated transcription factor. released dimer kinase), to IκB When active and as IκB degraded an is NFκB

See kinase (IKK) IκB IKK.

iC3b produced C3b. cleavage fragment complement by of Inactive

ICAM-3. ICAMs ICAM-1, ICAM-2, to immunoglobulin the CD11a:CD18 of that integrin molecules (LFA-1). leukocyte superfamily bind Cell-adhesion the other crucial are in cells lymphocytes leukocytes to antigen-presenting and and endothelial cells. the They binding of

ICOS CD28-related T-cell induced is co-stimulatory responses. (inducible cells A enhance activated on T and that can receptor co-stimulatory) ICOSL which (ICOS the binds is distinct ligand), It from co-stimulatory as a ligand known molecules. B7

ICOSL ICOS. See

an (IFN-γ-inducible of of family PYHIN receptor) IFI16 (NOD-like A NLR member 16) subfamily containing domain. N-terminal HIN the protein response to in the STING DNA. double-stranded It activates pathway

by interferons with repeats) IFIT with (IFN-induced protein part induced infection during that host interactions eIF3. in family tetratricoid proteins regulate by of translation protein small A

small the steps in function host (interferon-induced interferons IFITM in replication. of cell's restrain transmembrane transmembrane to family various compartment by A protein) viral vesicular proteins that induced

response by infection also viral IFN-β produced IFN-α, wide variety infection. of healthy virus, Antiviral which in resist a help and cells to cells by a cytokines receptor, the kinase. tyrosine Janus-family which signals same They through a through act type as interferons. the known I Also

cells, IFN-γ by NK T structural family and the produced cytokine cells, CD8 TH1 CD4 A of effector interferon cells. is that a and interferons. macrophages, primary type Its the different from through it of function I activation of the receptor acts

and bonds cells degradation disulfide reductase the enzyme denatures lysosomal many in (GILT) of An that IFN-γ-induced antigen-presenting proteins. present facilitate of the to thiol endosomal processing compartment

includes a a this interferons, of type IL-29, expressed III epithelial by family IFN-λ called Also bind which receptor IL-28B, set limited tissues. common and IL-28A,

IL-29. IL-28B, a that subunit of the IL-10 composed and β IL-28Rα Receptor unique IL-28A, recognizes receptor the of IFN-λ subunit and receptor

Igα, B-cell Igβ See receptor.

class in a chains form. (mainly can occur dimeric) composed α IgA and heavy that of polymeric Immunoglobulin monomeric a by Polymeric main is tissues. mucosal IgA the antibody secreted lymphoid

heavy The of immunoglobulin by class deficiency chains. characterized IgA α of common the type most is It immunodeficiency. occur and a can a monomeric (mainly in polymeric It form. dimeric) by antibody IgA secreted tissues. is lymphoid Polymeric main the mucosal

on class as IgD of chains B δ immunoglobulin Immunoglobulin cells. composed heavy mature appears that surface

defense IgE in acts that in composed chains Immunoglobulin parasite reactions. class allergic of heavy against and ε infections

class γ is plasma. composed abundant of most heavy immunoglobulin IgG chains class the of in the that Immunoglobulin

the chains to first IgM composed Immunoglobulin cells μ appear that of heavy first class B the and is to be on secreted.

new receptor. IgNAR See immunoglobulin antigen

six immunoglobulin present composed heavy-chain domains. Type of isotype in fishes of cartilaginous IgW

IKK kinase, IKK, a The of NEMO). is IKKα, and IKKβ, IKKγ protein (or IkB multisubunit complex composed

interacts with signaling. of the of TLR-3 phosphorylation (TANK-binding IKKε kinase IRF3 in kinase TBK1 1) that downstream A

largely four function. family of of major 11 IL-1 IL-1α, are contains One in cytokines pro-inﬂammatory structurally and that cytokines, family this similar are families to

endothelium, cytokine IL-1β response, has lymphocytes, in and activation induction by of including of immune the macrophages effects the of many A vascular produced the activation fever. that active

induction including activation, a the many has and of of macrophages fever. production, cytokine produced activated stimulation and by lymphocyte which IL-6 the effects, antibody Interleukin-6,

receptor (IL-7Rα) CD127. IL-7 See

activates and cells) IL-21 promotes cytokine survival (e.g.,TFH proliferation, by germinal produced cells. B T center that cells particularly A and STAT3

ILC1 of of by cells characterized IFN-γ. lymphoid subset production innate A

innate overlapping ILCs cells) T are lymphoid These class antigen cells having a lacking with immune of cells (innate an receptor. characteristics but exhibit and ILC2, TH17, to NK groups, They cells. and ILC1, arise similar TH2, ILC3, properties T several CD8 cells, in which TH1, roughly

antimicrobial against diptericin, signaling of pathway the insects peptides that as and defense such cecropin. results (immunodeficiency) in attacin, Imd in Gram-negative production A bacteria

genital approved approved keratoses known basal an TLR-7, and to actinic Drug vaccines. imiquimod warts, treatment not for (aldara) although for of cell adjuvant activate as carcinoma,

but express sufficiently that rearranged well. not B gene to V-region surface heavyand have light-chain a matured a and B IgM, IgD immature cells have as cells surface yet express

by of occur seconds basophils. Allergic reactions that largely or caused of antigen, minutes activation hypersensitivity immediate to mast cells encounter with reactions within

the complexes antibody antigen. to formed cognate its immune Complexes of by binding are complement bound Activated often complexes. especially immune C3b, in proteins, of complexes by form antibody these Fc cross-link cells bear Large is available reticuloendothelial multivalent when the sufficient receptors and are cleared system receptors. that immune antigen; to complement when antigen and Small, in complexes these can is be immune blood them. deposited small form excess; damage soluble in vessels

immune or to elimination defenses. by pathogens used host avoid Mechanisms immune evasion detection by and/

dominance. TH1 The an response, the the to immune deliberate attempt altering example change by of for TH2 immune toward or bias course modulation

and they detectable. clinically the cases some of before the immune The immune recognition, elimination, surveillance by in become tumor cells system

and The and system in cells, immunity. immune immunity involved innate molecules adaptive tissues,

in Any acquired absent of diseases which defense or inherited immunodeficiency or host are functionally or defective. aspects aspect some disorder

immunodominant T those are in recognized such immune the antigen Describes that by specific an dominate come that preferentially cells, to for response. cells epitopes epitopes T

preventing cell, recognition T complexes the thus the class appearance prevent cytotoxic I that of infected peptide:MHC cells by the of immunoevasins Viral on proteins virus-infected cells.

response a its on an adaptive into immunogenic molecule is to or that, own, person able injection Any immune animal. elicit on

The belong. family antibodies and to B-cell protein immunoglobulin receptors (Ig) which

See immunoglobulin (IgA) IgA. A

(IgD) immunoglobulin IgD. D See

many domain first domain described proteins. Protein present immunoglobulin but molecules antibody in in

IgE. See E immunoglobulin (IgE)

bond. of held comprising fold of immunoglobulin tertiary a sandwich immunoglobulin domain, a together disulfide two β sheets The structure by an

G IgG. (IgG) immunoglobulin See

immunoglobulin-like related immunoglobulin domain (Ig-like to domain. structurally the domain domain) Protein

Proteins immunoglobulin-like structurally which domains, immunoglobulin-like proteins more immunoglobulins. are protein or similar to of containing one those domains

See M (IgM) IgM. immunoglobulin

by shark molecule made heavy-chainonly of receptor (IgNAR) immunoglobulin form A Ig species. new antigen

immunoglobulin variety antigen-specific repertoire and The B-cell present individual. in of receptors) (antibodies an immunoglobulins as repertoire. Also the known antibody

recognition antigen in are other superfamily immunoglobulin and system of involved cell many one proteins or Ig biological domain, in the which at immune cell– with Ig-like least Large and systems. of interaction family

reactive detectable self-tolerance within of in both attack are occurs. A an immunological no and yet individual, form autoimmune their which target ignorance lymphocytes antigen

rapidly second effectively with on an system more encounter ability antigen. of a The more the immune memory immunological to respond and is long-lived. a is specific Immunological particular memory antigen and for

immunological with, to cell-adhesion molecules a The and the and T-cell formed their in binding binding the is develops it synapse cell interface on counterparts to target two cells. cell between T by that highly contact organized antigen receptors adhesion complex. the Also supramolecular known as

See tolerance tolerance. immunological

privileged the an immunologically such mount do brain, Certain tissue the as body, allografts. that in sites against not sites immune response cytokines. due physical and migration can the to of and be barriers to presence cell both to Immunological immunosuppressive antigen privilege

of of adverse the all of study immune immunology The against infection host aspects defense and also responses. consequences of

prevent a or in Treatments for that therapy modify beneficial response example to to seek immune autoimmune allergic or way, reduce an response. an immunomodulatory

FK-binding cyclophilins, See proteins. immunophilins

in cells form A proteasome found exposed immunoproteasome interferons. to of three contains from different are the subunits It proteasome. normal that

chains lymphocytes, immunoreceptor motif phosphorylation the after in activation, other receptors, motifs tyrosine receptors receptor of (ITAM) the site of recruitment on are that Sequence signaling such to as tyrosine-based antigen proteins. activation signaling of leading

tyrosine groups as immunoreceptor signaling, recruitment inhibitory through inhibitory motif in such receptors phosphatases tyrosine-based chains that (ITIM) are added leading that kinases. phosphorylation, motifs of by Sequence the phosphate sites inhibition to remove of of tyrosine signaling

motif tails cytoplasmic A some tyrosine-based inhibitor immunoreceptor in (ITSM) receptors. sequence present switch motif the of

derived or usually microbes. immunotoxin Antibodies that toxic proteins from coupled are plants chemically to targets required the moiety toxin The antibody the to cells.

recipient’s presentation the a antigen-presenting self molecules. cells T the cells Recognition by involves MHC uptake allogeneic indirect of to of grafted and by tissue their proteins that allorecognition

that into (IDO) some indoleamine can immunosuppressive by functions. expressed that 2,3-dioxygenase catabolizes immune tryptophan tumors kynurenine have metabolites cells and Enzyme

that introduction from cells cocktail of Pluripotent (iPS by transcription factors. a induced derived stem cells cells) cells pluripotent stem adult somatic of are the

with common virus. of The infectious Epstein–Barr infection the mononucleosis form malaise, lymph nodes. and of fever, consists It swollen called glandular Also fever.

complex intracellular inflammasome A pro-inﬂammatory protein stimulation that formed after of receptors. is the NOD-like proproteins in processes active an into active cytokine caspase of the complex Production cytokines.

accumulation white local a initiated and response. proteins, for infection, term is immune of ﬂuid, by local blood cells the inflammation or injury, plasma General physical that

and colitis, name component. as an of the a disease immunological Crohn’s gut, General (IBD) for such that inflammatory in disease bowel set have inﬂammatory conditions

neutrophils, lymphocytes as Cells contribute and inﬂammation. inﬂamed TH1 such and to effector that cells invade inflammatory the macrophages, tissues

of the that produced to inflammatory cells Chemokines injury sites in of immune response direct are to chemokines infection or to inﬂammation. localization

such cellular or Chemical inflammatory structures urate invading of as that or presence damage, the ATP, microbes bacterial lipopolysaccharides, indicate extracellular crystals. inducers

that cells immune mediators microbes. cytokines target against cells promote produced such on inflammatory to as Chemicals defense by act

of monocytes form inflammatory pro-inﬂammatory variety An a producing of cytokines. activated monocyte

response inflammation. inflammatory See

antibody infliximab to inﬂammatory arthritis. Chimeric used such TNF-α diseases, disease as the Crohn's rheumatoid and in treatment of

See inherited immunodeficiency diseases primary immunodeficiencies.

cytotoxic of activity. receptors receptors suppression On stimulation inhibitory results cell’s the NK in cells, whose

caspases that cleaving Proteases caspases. apoptosis promote activating and other initiator by

cells. invariant NKT See iNKT

and receptors. macrophages innate complement antimicrobial anatomical pathogen-recognition innate the resistance barriers, mechanisms adaptive first by as before immunity induced, a various are system, and nonspecific that peptides, The carrying immunity is pathogen, neutrophils encountered such between a increase and times, groups particular exposure rather to pathogen. a discriminates repeated pathogens, of all all responding with Innate does in is given not present pathogen, than to similar individuals at immunity Cf. adaptive immunity.

See (ILCs) ILCs. cells lymphoid innate

cells do recognition to be group inducers somatic are recognize gene General large innate inﬂammatory that the need in many term for rearrangement and a that expressed. proteins not in encoded receptors different germline of and

inositol inositol second cleavage by 1,4,5-trisphosphate membrane by soluble C-γ. A produced messenger phospholipase (IP3) of the phospholipids Ca2+ in receptors stored resulting It acts endoplasmic the of the into the cytosol. in membrane, release reticulum on

Heterodimeric cell–matrix cell-surface and integrin interactions. cell–cell involved in proteins blood migration interactions and tissues. important leukocyte walls vessel and and in and They antigen-presenting cells to are lymphocyte in adhesive adherence into between lymphocytes

and lamina traffic integrin various binding and VCAM-1, by fibronectin as such Integrin to intestinal MAdCAM-1, cells, expressed propria. α4:β7 IELs, to that

(ICAMs) ICAMs. intercellular See molecules adhesion

See interdigitating dendritic dendritic cells. cells

a factors A regulatory factor interferon nine of responses. family variety that of immune regulate (IRF) transcription IRF7 IRF3 as signaling are activated from result TLRs. a of some and example, For Several I IRFs the of interferons. genes type expression promote for

which innate interferon IFITM gene of as (ISGs) proteins. genes by many A category synthetase, that and promote such defense oligoadenylate PKR, Mx, include stimulated induced and interferons, IFITs, pathogens, the against

to receptor IFN-α expression STAT1 ISGs. and and This STAT2 of many receptor activate recognizes (IFNAR) IFN-β induce interferon-α and

transmembrane interferon-induced See IFITM. (IFITM) protein

interferon-producing plasmacytoid cells. cells dendritic (IPCs) See

replication. related interference named for their families Several interferons (IFNs) viral of originally of cytokines IFN-γ in are has in IFN-α immune system. the and IFN-β antiviral roles other their effects;

proteins. interactions genes and that by expression non-coding Sites in their regions rearrangement intergenic of chromatin-modifying factors transcription with control control regions and

A name leukocytes. (IL) interleukin produced cytokines generic for by interleukin used in the in naming is more term cytokine as such but IL-2. specific the of used term cytokines book, this is general The names, abbreviated and under IL-1β in example the listed key are interleukins for glossary Some their IL-2. in Appendix III. Cytokines listed are

intraepithelial epithelium Lymphocytes in as present of mucosal the lymphocytes gut. surfaces such (IELs) the T T and predominantly gut are are the cells. They predominantly cells, CD8 in

See cells dendritic cells. dendritic intrathymic

the Signaling noxious factors stimuli UV drugs, to starvation, growth in pathway required irradiation, chemotherapeutic of mediates response apoptosis apoptosis intrinsic lack of or that pathway survival. for including is damage. It mitochondrial initiated by of mitochondrial called the Also apoptosis. pathway

invariant II A of there. MHC blocks that peptide-binding chain from synthesized in the in proteins and reticulum binds other (Ii, peptides binding CD74) newly cleft the class polypeptide endoplasmic endosome, there. of loading is antigenic the peptides allowing in It for degraded

type receptor (iNKT chain MHC a carries innate-like recognizes Ib chain molecules. class T-cell β diversity antigens lymphocyte cells invariant an cells) A invariant of of that and limited α with that glycolipid NKT CD1 presented a by which type the associated NK1.1, carries marker is surface also NK with usually This cell cells.

Immune enteropathy, IPEX syndrome. polyendocrinopathy, X-linked) (immune dysregulation, dysregulation, enteropathy, X-linked polyendocrinopathy, FoxP3, gene are to regulatory transcription A leading lacking inherited for which cells in condition the the very of autoimmunity. result of rare a the T as CD4 CD25 factor mutation a in development

human CTLA-4 used immunotherapy. to Antibody melanoma, first treat to ipilimumab blockade and checkpoint

molecules, response intensity (immune the known in the polymorphisms archaic molecules, of to binding for inﬂuence from allelic that genes now to class immune term II peptides. result particular antigen, especially MHC particular MHC genetic Ir controlling An differences response) of a

of that are leading signaling kinases IRAK1, pathways Protein part IRAK4 intracellular from TLRs. the

by characterized An deficiency recurrent signaling. result the inactivating by infections, in mutations TLR IRAK4 IRAK4 in that bacterial in caused block gene a immunodeficiency

ISGs. induces of transcription member form IRF A to complex of STAT2 factors interacts which many family STAT1 of called IRF9 and ISGF3, the transcription that with the activated

in of in A association functions with in adipose neutral IRGM3 many of that maintenance protein. and protein related types droplets storage differentiation lipid cells the

defects such DNA that V(D)J combined in of severe recombination. mutations due in A to repair sensitivity proteins, ionizing (IR-SCID) irradiation-sensitive abnormal and causes Artemis, to immunodeficiency radiation SCID type as

IRF9. See ISGF3

encoded by forms different the different example gene. alleles forms same Different isoforms for of of protein, the same the

of mainly that lymphoid composed wall is the isolated lymphoid (ILF) follicles A cells. type of tissue gut B organized in

isolation See phagophore. membrane

in The of it chain of region the of has. an immunoglobulin type designation isotype constant respect either be isotype. chains or Light can of λ κ isotype. be of can δ, ε α, μ, chains or γ, Heavy respectively). determine and IgD, IgA, isotypes (IgM, class of The different have heavy-chain IgE, effector antibodies the and functions and functional different properties IgG,

switching switching. class See isotype

λ, or cell of antibody. κ or of or use the given light-chain one Describes a the B exclusion isotypic by isotypes, other

inhibitors inhibitors JAK kinase the more kinases. relative (Jakinibs) molecule one selectivity Small of for with JAK or

signaling that pathways with receptors JAK–STAT transcription the (JAK) in gene family Enzymes kinase intracellular cytokine link the Janus of nucleus. many The the kinases to in the genes. variety of nucleus a move proteins activate and cytosol, phosphorylate STAT then which

for disulfide J polypeptide receptor. for by and by the IgM attaches chain polymeric immunoglobulin formation IgA B to site binding essential of made cells bonds, is Small and immunoglobulins chain that polymeric the

See Jun JNK kinase.

IgE syndrome. Job’s See syndrome hyper

Short domains. J segment DNA sequences joining variable encode T-cell of J receptor the segment, gene regions immunoglobulin that and gene genes, is V a gene to TCRα, gene light-chain, In the rearranged a TCRγ or segment. segment J joined TCRδ In gene segment. TCRβ, a gene joined heavy-chain, to or segment a J D is locus, rearranged a

the to factor. to the form phosphorylates factor transcription protein c-Jun, bind A it transcription to AP-1 Jun c-Fos kinase that enabling kinase

junctional joins J to which between at segments. joining and present The due D, insertion nucleotides of V, sequence the is gene in that is process in variability the and receptors diversity antigen-specific of gene imprecise segments nontemplated created joining during and

of the two or κ isotypes of chains. light chain One classes immunoglobulin

a K63-linkages of of ubiquitin the terminus with protein amino ligation lysine one 63 chains, ubiquitin. covalent second carboxy group the of polyubiquitin In with of by most recognized This linkage activation type associated scaffold as signaling signaling of TAB1/2. is formation a by adaptors of such

through family present which cell is receptors (KIRs) cells’ immunoglobulin-like activity killer receptors cells, of on the NK cytotoxic Large controlled. inhibitory family contains and receptors. The activating both

Large controlled. family the receptors cells, through is NK of cytotoxic receptors lectin-like cell present (KLRs) cells’ killer on which activity contains both family and The inhibitory receptors. activating

signaling that antigen to Ras receptor in the A MAPkinase suppressor to all Raf–MEK1–Erk accelerate and scaffold of binds three their following members signaling interactions facilitate the to protein cascade kinase cascade.

several by including is damage the mediators, peptide kinin plasma vasoactive of enzymatic inﬂammatory triggered An proteins to tissue bradykinin. that cascade produce system

neutrophil inherited disease neutropenia, low. is condition count congenital of the Kostmann’s an severe A which form in leads a to protein deficiency of persistent apoptosis developing this the is disease, which to and neutropenia. In due of myeloid mitochondrial Kostmann’s HAX1, cells

of suppressor KSR See Ras. kinase

gene receptor repair DNA protein for and rearrangement. T-cell immunoglobulin required A Ku

lining blood, to the but remove dying and hepatic debris from Phagocytes not Kupffer elicit they sinusoids; cells are cells immune known the responses.

or (TDO) expressed compounds metabolites various derived or cells Various kynurenine the of liver. from tryptophan-2,3-dioxygenase immune indolamine-2,3-dioxygenase the in enzymes the through tryptophan (IDO) actions

chain of of classes light two the immunoglobulin chains. One or isotypes λ

chain. λ5 surrogate See light

lymphocytes. family selectin on the Adhesion of L-selectin molecule found tissue. CD34 binds venules migration of into initiate naive lymphoid endothelial and high L-selectin GlyCAM-1 lymphocytes to on to the

space. release lung bodies Lipid-rich pneumocytes keratinocytes lamellar organelles β-defensins in into and extracellular the secretory that

epithelium. a propria mucosal underlying tissue connective lamina of A layer and contains It other immune-system cells. lymphocytes

pro-B of development the the B-cell in cell Stage cell after and immediately rounds the of cell, pre-B-cell undergoes division. expresses receptor pre-B large several which

activation linker of for LAT See cells. T

initial several after Allergic hours reaction late-phase an that with antigen. occurs reactions encounter subsets to allergen Thought manifestations recruitment exposure. the leukocyte multiple to site of be of of

late occurs. Stage to in DJH B-cell in which development cell pro-B joining VH

latency infects which state a in virus but not does replicate. A a cell

antigen bound. Lck tails receptor from that the Src-family cytoplasmic chains, An of with signaling cytoplasmic once has T-cell CD8 signaling receptor CD4 of the associates kinase activate complex to the tails helping and T-cell tyrosine and phosphorylates thus the

carbohydrate-binding protein. lectin A

triggered (MBLs) pathway bacteria. to activation mannose-binding by is lectin pathway lectins bound Complement ficolins that or

HIV-1. retroviruses immunodeficiency virus, that human group A of lentiviruses the include a after They long period. cause disease incubation

anthracis within cell, NLRP1, lethal that factor by inducing Bacillus macrophage. endopeptidase typically death An cleaves a the infected cell produced

for example, portions repeat Protein leucine-rich receptors. repeated series that motifs Toll-like extracellular form, (LRR) of are in to the

cell. leukocyte blood white A lymphocytes, monocytes. leukocytes, Leukocytes and polymorphonuclear include

of sites immunodeficiency leukocyte imparing adhesion to affected, is ability by deficiencies of A in leukocytes infection. elimination enter extracellular (LADs) pathogens class which diseases infected the of are common including deficiency different several of There leukocyte the β of chain integrins. causes, the a

Disease sialyl-LewisX the that ability in neutrophils production eliminating to of E-selectin, migrate to sulfated properly from defects infection. 2 type by interacting with their adhesion leukocyte of deficiency Pand causes prevent sites

functional Cell-adhesion were antibodies. leukocytes leukocyte using monoclonal on (LFAs) antigens that initially molecules defined LFA-1 usually a as of integrin; β2 (now is called member is immunoglobulin CD2) called the is LFA-3 a CD58). (now superfamily, LFA-2 antigen-presenting cells to T-cell cells. LFA-1 in and important endothelial is adhesion particularly

immunoglobulin-like genes includes killer of complex immunoglobulin-like (KIR) the receptor genes. receptor cluster leukocyte A (LRC) that cell receptor large

in the The leukocytes presence blood. increased numbers leukocytosis of of seen It acute is commonly in infection.

leukotrienes arachidonic derived that acid. Lipid inﬂammation are from mediators of and macrophages are cells. other by produced They

See antigens. leukocyte functional LFA-1

recognition LGP2 with A of family, member it RNA. cooperates viral RIG-I RLR the in and MDA-5 of the

to dendritic them. of present T a cell it activate to naive is able cells that antigen licensing The so and activation

that chain the types of molecule. smaller make L immunoglobulin up light chains of polypeptide chain, two The an of domain, one the C and V It disulfide-bonded consists to and is one heavy chain. separate are from κ two produced genetic chain, and isotypes, are loci. of There or which classes, λ, as known light

of light-chain chain of (VL) to immunoglobulin. an the Referring variable V light region region the

germinal See zone center. light

masses the lingual lymphoid of be initiated. at the organized of which immune tonsils situated can Paired in adaptive peripheral base responses tongue, tissue They system. part immune are of mucosal the See also palatine tonsils.

been be by the same to T and linked activate linked). derived rule originally to the B The that from recognition able for B cell cell cell, antigen cell T to have recognized they a have helper helper is, the physically epitopes (that must a be the

become with protein phosphorylated activation by cytoplasmic linker ZAP-70. for tyrosines the kinase T cells several of A adaptor tyrosine that activation. downstream T-cell It to events in signaling helps coordinate

bound the complex that target cleaved MHC helps proteins the to endosome. chain remains transmembrane and class fragment segments the invariant retaining II LIP10 A of to

invariant of MHC chain initial II bound cleaved class to molecules. fragment The LIP22

within lipid bodies in organelles Storage rich the neutral lipids cytoplasm.

availability An by by and bacterial produced and limiting that neutrophils mucosal abundance antimicrobial in fungal growth inhibits iron. peptide of epithelial cells lipocalin-2

Ib such to nonclassical lipopeptide MHC lipids antigens class populations, including T-cell cells. as derived set iNKT diverse invariant microbial molecules molecules antigens typically by CD1 from A presented of

and TLR-4 lipopolysaccharide bacteria, cells. which macrophages The of surface Gram-negative dendritic on (LPS) lipopolysaccharide stimulates

lipoteichoic recognized cell bacterial walls Components acids of receptors. by Toll-like that are

not do they AIDS therapy. such absence that loads the viral mount response immune to antiretroviral individuals progress non-progressors of HIV-infected an that controls despite long-term who also See elite controllers.

shed that Protein and LPS-binding blood extracellular (LPS) from protein ﬂuid in bacteria. binds lipopolysaccharide bacterial

cells. by NK human, lectins C-type family but A not Ly49 expressed of receptors mouse, function. either in can be or inhibitory activating These

Ly49a Ly49 See receptors.

receptors. Ly49 See Ly49H

SLAM. Ly108 See

lymph through in carry vessels that is by tissues system it the and drained to which lymphatic the it to extracellular The lymphatic accumulates duct, returns the that thoracic ﬂuid blood.

type of A locations lymphatic many nodes lymph vessels organ present throughout body converge. in peripheral where lymphoid the

The system duct. system which is vessels tissues extracellular through from and the lymph-carrying via peripheral blood before it tissues returned lymphoid passes lymphatic ﬂuid of the thoracic to

vessels, lymphatics lymphatic that lymph. vessels Thin-walled carry

RNA activation has has but fully rate after lymphocyte not that enlarged is differentiated. protein its and yet synthesis, A of and increased lymphoblast

for A lymphocyte antigen receptors and of for variable blood adaptive that are white class immune bear cell-surface cells responses. responsible There cell-mediated mediate and cells)—which types—B two immunity, respectively. and main (B T lymphocytes are humoral cells) lymphocytes (T and form a to On differentiates then enlarges cell. effector recognition, antigen-specific and an antigen a lymphocyte proliferates lymphoblast into

T lymphocyte by B receptors the All antigen repertoire lymphocytes. variable and carried highly receptor

composed tissues Describes of lymphocytes. mainly lymphoid

stroma. tissues interacting characterized lymphoid a organs by numbers of nonlymphoid large with Organized lymphocytes very thymus where or lymphoid lymphocytes The central, the organs, generated, bone primary, are marrow. and are The which mucosa-associated lymph and peripheral, are the lymphoid tonsils main are in as patches. Peyer’s organs immune adaptive or nodes, initiated, secondary, lymphoid spleen, responses and organs, such

large numbers Tissue tissue of composed lymphocytes. of lymphoid

the in carried inducer the organs. blood other lymphoid peripheral tissue are of arise will and and to lymphoid they nodes lineage, where cells blood sites form in fetal (LTi) lymph which the liver Cells

of lymphocytes blood. the in levels low Abnormally lymphopenia

lymphoid lymphoid of from a progenitor. lymphopoiesis differentiation common cells The

are of that lymphotoxins tumor some the factor necrosis cells. (TNF) family cytotoxic for Cytokines (LTs) directly They LT-α heterotrimers as and of (LT-α3) LT-β and chains chains trimers (LT-α2:β1). LT-α of occur

into the host avoid the cell employing virus phase The life host. cycle remains but its to lysogenic destroying phase integrates mechanisms of cellular dormant, which in genome viral genome the

that Antimicrobial cell enzyme lysozyme walls. degrades bacterial

is cell cycle of phase, the phase the new escapes active lytic cells. infected to destruction followed phase host infect in The virus by productive life the viral replication target of which as there viral

macrophages name ‘classically’ properties. develop macrophages, in to sometimes 1 given and responses which have pro-inﬂammatory activated of type The the M1 context

‘alternatively’ activated 2 remodeling infection) and responses macrophages repair. tissue macrophages, type The the given in promote develop context in of M2 to parasite which (e.g., sometimes name and

then delivered which The own large for macroautophagy lysosomes engulfment by degradation. to of a is of the cytoplasm, quantities cell its

such have macrophages mononuclear cells, that as present pro-inﬂammatory pathogen-recognition functions, cells cells, in most production of phagocytic tissues cytokines. Large many scavenger and Macrophages from bone life. both arise marrow embryonically throughout precursors

which macropinocytosis A of amounts ﬂuid vesicle. are large an extracellular up intracellular taken in process into dendritic variety of take is can their way from one in a cells which antigens up wide surroundings. This

cell-adhesion molecule-1. Mucosal MAdCAM-1 tissues. of addressin is L-selectin the proteins by the lymphocytes surface enabling VLA-4, lymphocyte and specific A homing mucosal that to mucosal recognized

cells. associated See T MAIT mucosal invariant cells

and basic protein activated that their cells mast to major basophils on released eosinophils by Protein acts degranulation. cause

MHC a on chromosome genes the glycoproteins 6 cluster human of of that molecules. called histocompatibility membrane major (MHC) A encodes set complex processing proteins antigen involved encodes MHC of The aspects host and defense. in other also polymorphic alleles of loci. at MHC human the the large genes the numbers various The having most the genome, in for are molecules

protein signaling by MyD88 in adaptor that TLR-2/6, TLR-2/1, with and MAL TLR-4. associates An

lectin mannose-binding (MBL) in blood. the protein present Mannose-binding bearing innate opsonize surfaces and immunity. activate important It mannose an the their pathogens on can complement pathway, part can lectin via system of the

mannose-containing on the on mannose receptor for cells. not specific but carbohydrates macrophages that that on pathogens is receptor of A (MR) occur host surfaces

rim follicles. lymphoid of lymphocytes surrounds mantle A B zone that

A test later. bacilli the extract in sterile-filtered Mantoux a glycerol tuberculosis for hours of 48–72 injected and screening result is read (Tb) tuberculosis is which test Mycobacterium intradermally previous to tuberculosis. of skin into infection infiltration Induration, swelling prior can caused vaccination firm indicate current M. of the either cells, exposure or Tb, by inﬂammatory mm than 10 induration indicates infection tests present. to is for with of the at whether diameter Generally, site assess Tb additional the greater injection in need

kinase MAP kinase. protein See mitogen-activated (MAPK)

a with receptor structure) (macrophage scavenger See receptor). MARCO collagenous

pulp blood-filled spleen. the each of area the in sinus network vascular A and central that demarcates white branches marginal arteriole from

of tissue lymphoid lying spleen. pulp the the Area the in at of border white zone marginal

spleen cells set B cells unique marginal and B distinguished do A in a conventional of population of are found zones; not they zone surface cells from by marginal the proteins. circulate distinct B

classical of activation and to bind C4. complement mannosebinding that C1q, their pathway proteases activation Serine and MASP-1, lectin of the MASP-3 to cleave lectin, MASP-2, function ficolins, in and

abundantly throughout tissues mast body, A large cells and connective in granule-rich the most submucosal the cell the dermis. in found tissues bioactive granules activation. store on including The molecules vasoactive are histamine, mast-cell which the released amine crucial have role in to cells are be defenses parasites against thought a they reactions. allergic and in involved Mast

overproduction cells. mast The of mastocytosis

B surface mature that its to ability IgM and B expresses and the on antigen. cell respond IgD cell gained to has

protein signals downstream to A infection. RIG-I NFκB mitochondrial and that MAVS of outer viral protein) IRF3 adaptor antiviral to the CARD-containing and response attached MDA-5 activate signaling in (mitochondrial to membrane

MASP-1, MASP-2, MASP-3. serine proteases MBL-associated See

through and M over cell epithelium Peyer’s gut. antigens type patches, which in from pathogens the epithelial the intestinal enter cells Specialized

MD-2 Accessory protein TLR-4 activity. for

and contains helicard) protein helicase-like an senses for (melanoma similar to infections. RIG-I, MDA-5 This RNA differentiation-associated 5, viral also intracellular double-stranded RNA detection of domain

The point medulla central of an collecting organ. or distinctive in marrow-derived is medulla antigen-presenting of medullary epithelium. the bone thymic of a area each rich cells The central lobe, cells the and thymic the efferent and node site concentration medulla to on lymph the is through way a which macrophage cell of ﬂows The lymphatics. lymph plasma its the of

MEK1 signaling the of is kinase in in lymphocytes signaling to transcription module, MAPK AP-1. factor which A a a activation pathway the of part Raf–MEK1–Erk leading

restricted (i.e., melanoma) characterized Heterogeneous cells. by diverse melanoma-associated of limited or germ of or functions testis (MAGE) group proteins tumors unknown to expression antigens

ring An dendritic 1, expressed membrane cells, of steady-state their induces associated that in ligase B macrophages MARCH-1 cells, MHC and II expression. constitutive degradation the E3 class (C3HC4) molecules, regulating finger

on complement membrane of complex formation of attack (MAC). based membrane-attack the Effector pathway

Protein hydrophilic surfaces, that a complex cell on pore composed C9 complex membrane-spanning causing membrane-attack C5b (MAC) assembles to pathogen of lysis.

formation. inactive iC3b A host-cell thus with proteolysis membrane a to in that membrane regulatory factor to I prevent or C3b complement protein CD46) and convertase cofactor its (MCP protein, conjunction derivative of cleave acts

the cells; it Transmembrane antigen. present (mIg) membrane on immunoglobulin is immunoglobulin for receptor B B-cell

cells. cells See memory B memory

lymphocytes and B immunological memory memory. mediate cells T that and on They that them. more antigen respond sensitive than lymphocytes rapidly to originally naive the induced reexposure antigen are to

to the nodes in wall located the mesenteric lymph Lymph the of that abdomen. tethers rear tissue the (mesentery) connective nodes intestine GALT. drain They the

the direct Spread tumor of through organs lymphatics by of by original location distant body its from blood the a to or or traveling extension. metastasis

to the the ribose hydroxyl mRNA. 2ʹ-O-methyltransferase of 2ʹ (MTase) methyl An that a and first enzyme transfers in second group groups evade transcripts and cap-2 Viruses IFIT1. acquire produce by on MTase their and thereby restriction can that cap-1

Canada Europe on water and squaline used proprietary vaccine. conjunction in inﬂuenza with in based A MF-59 adjuvant and

See MHC molecules. class I MHC I class

cell disease or present inherited immunodeficiency An in on of molecules a I surface, result an the either MHC are as MHC class I TAP-1 not usually deficiency which deficiency TAP-2. class of

cells. on locus in expressed class proteins and encoded cell-surface most I MHC molecules Polymorphic MHC the CD8. cells, the They in and co-receptor cytosol CD8 peptides also T bind present generated antigenic to the

class See molecules. MHC class MHC II II

(MIIC) compartment accumulate, of II bind MHC in MHC to encounter which surface peptides, cell. The migrating vesicles class the HLA-DM, molecules II antigenic class and before the cellular

MHC defects. a as cells on are disease present in A not various MHC rare of class II immunodeficiency inherited II class molecules deficiency which result immunodeficient severely have few and CD4 T cells. Patients are

Polymorphic II on class in molecules expressed are cell-surface encoded antigen-presenting cells. MHC primarily proteins the locus MHC specialized bind cells They internalized CD4. extracellular to the derived co-receptor and pathogens peptides T CD4 from antigenic present also

(CIITA) transcription II MHC class Protein activates genes. of MHC class that transactivator II gene one cause of MHC in deficiency. class the are Defects II CIITA

the one recombination) is A haplotype from unchanged inherited in parent. without is, set MHC that alleles MHC of (that

molecules proteins cell-surface Highly MHC peptide and I MHC class of polymorphic antigens T genes encoded presentation cells. involved by to in II MHC class antigens. histocompatibility as also known are They

only given T antigen particular it cell bound peptide fact can a to recognized The by MHC a be if restriction self MHC a molecule. that is is a during consequence restriction that occur T-cell MHC of events development.

or types many MIC-A, are that by are NKG2D. by cell induced class recognized infection, proteins MHC transformation MIC-B Ib stress, in and

of microautophagy continuous into cytosol system. vesicular internalization the The the

iNKT cells. to microbial glycolipids frequently presented CD1 by class antigens molecules Diverse of

microorganisms. commensal See microbiome

See commensal microorganisms. microbiota

that initiation Assemblies in T be numbers antigen naive microclusters cells. involved of small in of receptor the may of by T-cell receptors T-cell activation

See cells microfold cells. M

embryonically dependent macrophage tissue system An throughout for of in IL-34 self-renewal on nervous derived life. form microglial cells local that is central the

when molecules bound polymorphic graft they recognized by to can histocompatibility Peptides that rejection are minor T to lead cellular of proteins cells. MHC antigens

mice, encoded by strong An antigens be retroviruses. lymphocyte for responsible minor endogenous superantigens strains different to T to (Mls) known cell non-MHC referring term of cells from unusually responses old stimulating to now antigens

type and mismatch DNA switching class cells. in repair somatic B causes that of is and repair in A involved mutations hypermutation

NK-cell to Refers molecules activation. receptors of self in loss cells, that missing resulting on with engage NK cell-surface inhibitory the

of kinases that transcription by key kinases gene of and activated become phosphorylating mitogen-activated cellular factors. ligands, variety phosphorylated lead new on stimulation and by expression to a (MAPKs) A protein series protein signaling in to and different organisms. are names many different especially pathways, have proliferation, those The of leading cell part MAPKs

to lead of to which in the joints mixed as complexes infections immune production (cold-precipitable Disease essential deposition tissues. response sometimes and chronic of cryoglobulinemia to cryoglobulins in the can such C, immunoglobulins), hepatitis due

cultured are from in mixed lymphocytes histocompatibility lymphocyte and donor A which recipient for (MLR) together. reaction test on cells allogeneic donor histoincompatible, MHC molecules are recognize proliferate. ‘foreign’ the the and the of T If the other as recipient’s people the two cells

host against such mimicry produced antibodies pathogen the similarity between antigens, also T react that The host and against molecular former and tissues. some cells antigens may some This be the similarity cause of autoimmunity.

lymphocytes, by B of antibodies produced single are a monoclonal all Antibodies they identical. that so clone

blood tissue nucleus; a monocyte bean-shaped cell it precursor is white Type with macrophages. of a of

in a form. monomorphic Describes gene that only one occurs Cf. polymorphic.

such NK cells, of motheaten including as protein various over-activation in the some that resulting Ly49, A in the receptors, cells. mutation inhibitory of function phosphatase impairs SHP-1 chronic due have 'motheaten' with appearance to this mutation Mice a inﬂammation.

A by MHC by certain recognition bacteria for 'non-classical' produced invariant molecule metabolites folic that mucosal class MR1 cells. acid Ib T associated binds (MAIT)

that and also recognizes dsDNA 11 homolog in a) protein damage cytoplasmic recombination and pathway. repair STING DNA mechanisms activate A MRE11A involved can (meitotic the

proteins the detect uridine adjacent repair to that several recruit remove nucleotides. and damaged MSH6 and nucleases Mismatch MSH2,

regulating functions in target of that numerous regulatory or aspects Serine/threonine cell metabolism rapamycin) with proteins function (mammalian and of Raptor Rictor. kinase complex mTOR in complex drug (mTORC1) The is Raptor/mTOR immunosuppressive rapamycin. by inhibited the

mTOR complexes formed of mTORC1, regulatory Active proteins mTORC2 Rictor, with respectively. and Raptor the

cell-surface Highly mucins glycosylated proteins. homing. Mucin-like molecules bound are lymphocyte by L-selectin in

gene encoding caused An a NLRP3, syndrome inﬂammasome. the the component by disease of episodic Muckle–Wells inherited autoinﬂammatory mutations in

folate invariant immune nonclassical mucosal that by present diversity to class γ:δT MHC the (MAIT) Ib T Primarily derived limited mucosal system cells in bacterially associated presented cells molecule with respond derivates the MR1.

which adaptive tissue at an in can mucosa-associated all response lymphoid immune organized (MALT) Generic initiated. be lymphoid tissue surfaces, for found term mucosal BALT and NALT, GALT, comprises It (when present).

as lining epithelia (such mucosal epithelia body’s the the the internal connect that and Mucus-coated airways, gut, outside cavities vaginal tract). with

entry mucosal protects internal virtually as immune antigens. surfaces which the mucosal linings (such system are all The immune pathogens the urogenital site other of tracts), respiratory for and and tract, that gut, of the system also lymphoid mucosa-associated tissue. See

mucosa. mucosal in present cells mast mast cells Specialized large and histamine They prostaglandins of leukotrienes. little amounts produce but

an same of specific to tolerance antigen a responses suppression of by The the administration the mucosal previous systemic immune by route. antigen mucosal

epithelia, solution cells secreted (mucins) a goblet of on epithelial layer of Sticky mucus protective forming surface. proteins internal by the

focal central infiltration a neurological progressive multiple chronic autoimmune lymphocytic characterized by brain, A the the system, nervous in course. sclerosis demyelination in disease and

rise cells cells. and longer but give to lymphoid can progenitor Bone multipotent both that self-renewing myeloid cells marrow no stem (MPPs) are cells

of the A intracellular most the (MDP) of is component sensor peptidoglycan that recognized NOD2. dipeptide by muramyl bacteria

drug against was as antibody a antibody to treat in humans. mouse transplant approved monoclonal rejection; used the muromomab this first A CD3 human

microorganisms. between in the normal its two which human relationship relationship such a symbiotic benefit, organisms resident gut both as A between mutualism and (commensal)

to Mx resistance Interferon-inducible replication. virus (myxoma proteins for cellular inﬂuenza proteins resistant) required

against autoantibodies weakness on gravis progressive and junctions, to the An disease a death. muscle block cells in neuromuscular myasthenia leading receptor which cause eventually autoimmune skeletal acetylcholine in

the immunosuppressive of monophosphate as synthesis a of cytotoxic acts mycophenolate inhibitor that drug. guanosine An response dividing lymphocytes acts It including to by rapidly cells, killing proliferating antigen. in

cancer inhibitor monophosphate, inosine of mycophenolate, monophosphate thus treatment that is impairing Pro-drug mofetil synthesis. guanosine metabolized to DNA, in mycophenolate and thereby dehydrogenase, and used

TLR protein MyD88 functions by TLR3. proteins that except signaling adaptor all in An

cells lineage that all except includes myeloid lymphocytes. of the leukocytes blood Refers to

that in (MDSCs) tumors the can inhibit tumor. Cells suppressor T-cell within cells activation myeloid-derived

and Innate cells. precursors, marrow series cells eosinophils, myelomonocytic neutrophils, derived from bone monocytes, myelomonocytic immune dendritic basophils, including

membrane enzyme oxidase assembled activated in in stimulated is that phagocytes. and NADPH complex the phagolysosome Multicomponent oxygen-requiring reaction in It burst. generates called the superoxide respiratory an

NAIP2 an infection. PrgJ inﬂammasome An to together type response pathway recognizes III protein activate NLR the system of protein that, the to injection in typhimurium Salmonella NLRC4, with

NAIP5 that, protein to NLR An intracellular inﬂammasome recognizes an infection. NLRC4, response with together ﬂagellin activate in pathway to

B (or naive marrow in normal antigens. activated development foreign or not the lymphocytes been that but have self) undergone cells T the have bone cells by yet thymus or

it, antigen Lymphocytes naive that as their specific and have lymphocytes. have T from responded memory and encountered never distinct cells thus effector to never

tissue in lymphoid tissues lymphoid found tract. nasal-associated upper respiratory the Organized (NALT) ring, located Waldeyer’s pharynx. adenoids, includes of organized which plus around palatine, tissue the humans, consists lymphoid NALT other lingual similarly In and tonsils, the system. It immune part of mucosal the is

Crohn's to disease sclerosis. used natalizumab multiple and integrin to Humanized α4 treat antibody endothelium, migration lymphocytes' blocks It to into adhesion tissues. their impairing

in any by the apparent absence system infection. Antibodies the antibodies produced immune natural of react broad pathogens, They have with antigens, can specificity and complement. microbial can a many for and self activate

receptors natural recognize Activating that (NCRs) cells NK and NK cells receptors cell infected cell. cytotoxicity on by killing stimulate the

cells dendritic plasmacytoid cells. See natural interferon-producing

immunity and is type in intracellular antibody-dependent that (NK) other viruses natural cytotoxicity of important cell-mediated (ADCC). to ILC A innate in and cell killer pathogens, NK B T the activating cells of receptors cells. and but antigen-specific or not inhibitory receptors, express

deprivation, in The as or death process physical to cell necrosis occurs such noxious stimuli, nutrient that of response infection. injury, immune activates as cells of deficiency the from distinguished cell such an program signals. cell intrinsic, as of occurs a be in in of survival or death, apoptosis, To which result internal,

repertoire thymocytes the process negative The which by during development thymus. the deleted from are T-cell in selection self-reactive process B bone undergo in Autoreactive marrow. cells similar a

See IKK. NEMO

ectodermal hypohidrotic deficiency X-linked dysplasia immunodeficiency. See and NEMO

by can neoepitopes to Type presented be created of mutations cells. protein rejection antigen in molecules self-MHC that T tumor by

See receptor FcRn. Fc (FcRn) neonatal

virus and that neuraminidase inhibitors. from of An target detachment, inﬂuenza a cleaves determinant, allow sialic acid neuraminidase antigenic host protein common antiviral cells viral to

infectivity or virus the the by Inhibition a of of binding antibodies. a of toxin the neutralization of toxicity molecule

or Antibodies toxin. neutralizing the toxicity virus that a antibodies infectivity the of a inhibit of

of levels Abnormally neutropenia neutrophils the blood. in low

most numerous blood blood. The white in type of peripheral cell human neutrophil Neutrophils multilobed that stains. are phagocytic with a stain granules neutral and cells with nucleus kill and engulf tissues pathogens. They enter extracellular and infected

granules neutrophils enzyme the involved processing in peptides. is stored in of neutrophil that elastase Proteolytic of the antimicrobial

enhance space by the extracellular is of traps by sites traps their A apoptosis meshwork chromatin phagocytes. extracellular extracellular to released serving bacteria neutrophil that as other a neutrophils scaffold (NETs) undergoing phagocytosis into nuclear infection, of that at

p50 stimulation composed the antigen Toll-like NFκB of factor heterodimeric receptor also by subunits. transcription p65 activated receptors A by of signaling and and

NFAT activated of See cells. factor T nuclear

important types the Nfil3 NK development immune of A of of transcription types factor cells cells. during including several certain

NHEJ nonhomologous See end joining.

cells— that macrophages—during intracellular molecular species toxic produced particularly nitric to gas A and oxide microbes. reactive by bacteria is infection,

checkpoint Human treatment blockade used for melanoma. metastatic of in antibody anti-PD-1 nivolumab

of family on genes that cluster NK NK receptors of complex cells. a receptor A encode (NKC)

Family NKG2 of receptors that KLR-family of cells. NK the of C-type on one supply subunits lectins

that γ:δT Activating stress-response and receptor MIC-A MIC-B. NKG2D on cells, NK recognizes cytotoxic and proteins the C-type cells T cells, lectin

and NLR NAIP5. An family NAIP2 cooperates with NLRC4 that member

formation of the in contain the receptor complex family NOD-like a called inﬂammasome. proteins that A pyrin 14 a (NLR) and of domain NLRP function group signaling

member A have intracellular of family proteins domains. pyrin the of NOD-like NLRP3 receptor that as It and cellular of a the part damage acts of inﬂammasome. is sensor NALP3. Sometimes called

inserted deoxynucleotidyl N-nucleotides segments gene Nontemplated V joining. immunoglobulin T-cell into regions nucleotides receptor during the by and gene heavy-chain the of enzyme terminal transferase junctions segment between of of N-regions receptor markedly these increases chains. diversity these Translation the

subfamily contain a signaling. of CARD NOD is domain which downstream NLR subgroup that of activation for used proteins A

to bacterial of that proteins components activate (LRR) contain a walls of and domain subfamily cell NOD the leucine-rich inﬂammatory initiate NFκB responses. the Intracellular NOD2 that repeat pathway binds NOD1,

microbes is of receptors other function general proteins containing NOD-like (NLRs) domains, cellular whose (NOD) stress. of a associated the and detection family with of nucleotide-oligomerization and domain various Large

gene in nonamer immunoglobulin Conserved recombination DNA signal the and receptor the segments in sequence sequences T-cell (RSSs) nine-nucleotide ﬂanking loci.

An is 5 11 (human). non-canonical relies caspases inﬂammasome but or 4 or alternate independent caspase inflammasome (mice) instead on form of the of that caspase 1,

the one A stimulation. distinct activation receptor that by non-canonical antigen is for pathway pathway NFκB from activated NFκB protein activation of p100 kinase leads the p52 This pathway the NIK, kinase, subunit. which form NFκB-inducing to and phosphorylates IκB to active NFκB precursor cleavage inducing (IKKα) the activates of α

proteins antigens. class related not of I but within A nonclassical polymorphic MHC are MHC present class genes to Ib that the highly the a molecules of are and MHC restricted encoded set class

the cells be on that block proteins causing function Immunosuppressive to antibodies target non-depleting the without antibodies destroyed. of cells

breaks end nonhomologous DNA DNA (NHEJ) ligates without a template. joining homologous use pathway double-stranded of directly repair that

T-cell that the immunoglobulin encode because of Rearrangements coding sequences nonproductive frame. are gene wrong reading translational protein receptor or segments a the rearrangements cannot in

protein kinase tails of of nonreceptor generate not associate signaling signal the are intracellular receptors intrinsic part kinases Cytoplasmic help receptor and the but itself. that an with the

RIG-I downstream sensors protein protein protein virus innate evasion MDA-5, that of of immunity. non-structural promoting inhibits A inﬂuenza signaling An TRIM25, (NS1) and intermediate 1 thereby the an viral

cytoplasmic cells to lymphocytes. A receptor in activated family calcium activated transcription that of response are increased of following factor signaling antigen in T nuclear factors

in also (ABC) conserved originally number a A domain domain present of nucleotide-binding (NOD) ATP-binding large which proteins, mediates present type in recognized but of protein transporters homooligomerization. oligomerization cassette

mutation the this for hairlessness results mature A cells. and of no mutation nude T defective that mice that stroma, homozygous so in formation have thymic mice in

by immunogenic of A cancer-testis expressed antigen NY-ESO-1 types highly many particular including melanoma. tumors human

their allergic work. allergies occupational induced to someone An habitually an which exposed to in allergen reaction is

interferon. oligoadenylate of to stimulation by synthetase cells in response produced Enzyme nucleotide synthesizes It viral turn unusual activate which degrades in a RNA. polymers, that ribonuclease

RAG severe syndrome by the immunodeficiency defects genes. disease of either in Omenn A characterized amounts individuals V(D)J recombination. allowing make of protein, amount of small a RAG Affected functional small

easily complement of ingested by pathogen makes by more coating surface of and/or that a the opsonization it antibody phagocytes. The

immune systemic responses of prior (enteric) antigen of an oral suppression antigen the same to the the by specific oral route. by administration The tolerance

encounter The shared immunogenic while viruses, highly responses and and tendency sin to the they related between subsequent those humans make of first antigenic other antibody epitopes strain second to original subsequent the of ignoring virus on a epitopes viruses.

See p50 NFκB.

p65 See NFκB.

by the peptides complex the exiting multisubunit place takes proteasome 19S proteasome-activator PA28 increases that the protein core. catalytic induced of cap interferon-γ from complex of of rate the proteasome the regulatory A and

organized immune side generated. located Paired be tissues which tonsils each can masses of peripheral lymphoid an adaptive of on response in throat, and palatine the the mucosal are They of part system. immune

the in crypts cells antimicrobial Paneth that the peptides. epithelial small of base cells at Specialized secrete the intestine

two the amino-terminal antibody fragment. one Fc of papain that side cleaves Fab A linkages, protease producing the disulfide IgG molecule and fragments on

paracortical T-cell of areas area nodes. The lymph

that a cells paracrine Describes near acting other produce it. to cytokine active or molecule those on biologically

a parasites Organisms host. from obtain live that sustenance parasitology. In to matter the immunology, refers it subject worms of protozoa, and

of hemoglobinuria are which in to A binding activation complement to spontaneous defective, disease nocturnal that episodes of leads so regulatory cells paroxysmal hemolysis. blood proteins complement red

to serum of antibody passive into a specific immunological naive provide injection protection. recipient immunization immune The or Cf. active immunization.

when it a causes pathogen typically infects that host. disease Microorganism

molecular that specifically cells are the pathogen-associated of immune patterns groups of (PAMPs) pathogens Molecules innate system. recognized associated with by

disease. or of origin The cause of a pathology pathogenesis the

a pathogenic causes that when typically Microorganism host. it microorganisms infects disease

that the monocyte from Ly6C. and monocytes by classical low patrolling of of circulating distinguished vascular endothelium, expression surveys to monocyte adheres A its form

the surfaces. of immune recognize (PRRs) common system pathogen on innate receptors pattern that patterns Receptors recognition molecular

and ligands, PD-L2, a bound PD-L1 PD-1 death-1, T that signaling its cells on receptor. antigen from when receptor inhibits the Programmed by its tail. contains an cytoplasmic motif PD-1 in ITIM Target aimed of stimulating responses T-cell to cancer tumors. therapies at

to binds death receptor B7-H1) PD-1. (programmed inhibitory receptor the that ligand-1, Transmembrane PD-L1 on PD-L1 types by many is upregulated cell expressed inﬂammatory and is cytokines.

the binds expressed death receptor ligand-2, that to PD-1; B7-DC) mainly Transmembrane PD-L2 receptor on inhibitory cells. dendritic (programmed

CD31. PECAM See

melanoma. antibody for anti-PD-1 blockade checkpoint in used pembrolizumab metastatic of treatment Human

and by severe the mucosal An blistering characterized autoimmune disease membranes. pemphigus skin of vulgaris

pentameric chain antigens. action the antibodies of resulting IgM J higher the of form IgM in avidity by for produced Major

formed to protein identical family C-reactive amyloid A which five subunits, acute-phase protein belong. and serum pentraxin proteins of of

producing side pepsin linkages, region. F(abʹ)2 disulfide and on of A several Fc the that fragments sites the protease several the carboxy-terminal the fragment cleaves of

cleft the antigenic is in peptide-binding bound. peptide which into cleft an molecule longitudinal The the surface top MHC of the groove. peptide-binding Sometimes called

HLA-DM. editing class unstably II processing of and MHC context In by peptide antigen peptides molecules of bound from presentation, the the removal

I loads (PLC) in A peptides molecules. reticulum MHC complex that peptide-loading complex class the onto protein endoplasmic

molecule specific cells. Four bound T populations tetramers of peptide:MHC labeled single identify to are to ﬂuorescently streptavidin, which peptide:MHC complexes used of antigen-specific a

by walls certain A the cell system. of that recognized is of immune bacterial component receptors peptidoglycan innate

proteins bacterial that proteins walls the serve from peptidoglycans family Drosophila initiate of of TOLL bind cell proteolytic (PGRPs) the A pathway. to that peptidoglycan-recognition cascade

inner T pulp lymphoid of of cells. the mainly region the it the sheath Part of white contains (PALS) periarteriolar spleen;

peripheral organs, and as which develop. tissues, organs, nodes, to mucosa-associated immune are The tissues in peripheral induced, the lymphoid which in spleen, lymph responses central lymphoid lymphocytes opposed adaptive lymphoid lymphoid tissues. They secondary called organs also are lymphoid and

which acquired immature peripheral lymphocytes is tolerance lymphocytes acquired as Tolerance development. tolerance, by mature tissues, central during in the to opposed peripheral their by

lymphoid be especially intestine, ileum, which response under the initiated. peripheral can epithelium organs patches immune in Peyer’s Organized an the adaptive the in small and T-cell They areas. contain lymphoid follicles and gut-associated are (GALT). part tissues the They of lymphoid

oxidase. See oxidase NADPH phagocyte

See phagocytic glycoprotein-1 (Pgp1) CD44.

vesicle the forming The process of internalization membrane material. intracellular the cells an a of in engulfment, by phagocytosis containing matter by which the cell material, surrounds particulate eventually (phagosome) ingested

phagolysosome material) (containing formed and which material by ingested fusion ingested in the and a is phagosome broken of Intracellular a the lysosome, vesicle down.

structure. phagophore double-membrane A cytoplasmic crescent-shaped

by Intracellular formed material vesicle particulate when is phagocyte. a ingested phagosome

phosphatidylinositol (PI 3-kinase) involved 3-kinase pathways. intracellular in signaling Enzyme phosphatidylinositol phosphorylates to the form 3,4-bisphosphate recruit homology to proteins pleckstrin (PIP3), It phosphatidylinositol domains (PH) (PIP2) lipid membrane. containing the 3,4,5-trisphosphate membrane which can signaling

that on phosphatidylinositol phosphorylated produce phosphorylate that inositol headgroup derivatives membrane Enzymes signaling. variety in the of kinases lipids a to functions have intracellular

C-γ phospholipase receptors. signaling leading intracellular from (PLC-γ) Key many different pathways enzyme in following cleaves recruitment and receptor into trisphosphate ligation, inositol by and diacylglycerol. activated membrane phospholipids is It phosphorylation membrane inositol tyrosine and

protein, a called Addition kinases. enzymes phosphate of group by phosphorylation usually to catalyzed a molecule, a

by a light γ:δ it be recognized protein can conjunction ligand A receptors. made some phycoerythrin used with ﬂow in by also harvesting cytometry, T-cell and pigment as algae

of healthy intestine, normal state the lymphocytes of large effector inflammation other cells. whose numbers physiological contains The wall and food commensal continual organisms result stimulation is to be by thought and It antigens. the of

of between interaction system cation aromatic Chemical and interactions a pi-cation Na+) an moiety. (e.g., the pi-electron

adhesin Neisseria cells and of pilin of An allowing attachment of reproductive gonorrhoeae tracts. epithelial infection to and urinary

PIP3. the to a generate 3,4-bisphosphate, diacylglycerol inositol membrane-associated signaling PIP2 trisphosphate PI3-kinase is molecules give to and that phospholipid by C-γ by and phospholipase phosphorylated Phosphatidylinositol cleaved is

molecules recruit 3,4,5-trisphosphate, membrane. PIP3 Phosphatidylinositol domains can to a the homology that containing phospholipid intracellular signaling (PH) membrane-associated pleckstrin

PKR IFN-β. kinase activated Serine/threonine and by IFN-α contributing initiation It the inhibiting eIF-2, factor to phosphorylates translation protein viral and eukaryotic of synthesis the inhibition replication. thus

Terminally B lymphocytes. plasma differentiated cells activated body. are the of main Plasma cells cells antibody-secreting the They found the and marrow, tissues. in of are mucosal in nodes, the bone in in pulp, splenic lymph red medulla

in that cell. cell node plasmablasts plasma lymph already features A B a shows of a some

such of and pathogens interferon products distinct dendritic amounts receptors. their as lineage large by A secrete of cells plasmacytoid cells (pDCs) Toll-like via receptors dendritic activation on that Cf. dendritic cells. conventional

components A the immune of clotting the several platelet-activating factor that mediator activates (PAF) system. innate and other cascade lipid blood

all possible an pluripotent to the Typically progenitor system. capacity lineages cell a referring generate of to organ of

asymmetric intermediate V-region gene the gene rearranged nucleotide sequences rearrangement. formed the during P-nucleotides by of between generated segments of palindromic hairpin opening RAG-mediated the Short

repairing hypermutation. damage in Polη polymerase 'translesion', DNA somatic DNA and by error-prone, An UV involved radiation caused in

antigen specificity, multiple of of mitogen to specificities. lymphocytes a polyclonal leading activation lymphocytes clones by of activation the of regardless of The antigen activation

function; encoding polygenic applied several identical separate MHC. Containing proteins the to of loci Cf. polymorphic.

RNA the during of of and at a mechanisms to known locations isotype gene switching. process, be halting regulated transcription stalling of The involved polymerase locus, polymerase within gene the a in

transports receptor and IgA cells mucosal of polymeric basolateral surfaces IgM for (or on The immunoglobulin receptor immunoglobulins (pIgR) glandular that IgM) epithelial secretions. into IgA and polymeric

variety alleles. gene, of a a a to different variety in polymorphic forms; Existing of occurring applied different in

frequency Applied at occur 1%. all variants polymorphism variability a than a in genes, to at locus gene greater which

See polymorphonuclear granulocytes. leukocytes

cell macrophages by lies A polysaccharide and some the can direct without prevent that wall antibody or in complement. bacteria—both of Gram-positive—that outside distinct phagocytosis Gram-negative and aid capsules structure membrane cell

Polymers linked chains ubiquitin second residues monomer to the carboxy ubiquitin from lysine polyubiquitin of of ubiquitin. terminus within one covalently a

thereby meningitidis C3b that Neisseria binds deposited inactivating on protein membrane of surface. C4BP, PorA Outer its

the recognize antigens which self by presented those thymus can in occurring cells molecules A MHC mature. in process developing only positive selection can receptors T whose

become cells virus can (EBV) mutations post-transplant B-cell which driven B disorder the Epstein–Barr by in and undergo expansion malignant. lymphoproliferative immunosuppressed after, solid when organ This patients can for transplantation. example, occur are

and proteins, cells signaling as an immunoglobulin that includes Receptor Igβ heavy pre-B subnits. receptor as surrogate pre-B-cell produced well light-chain chain, Igα by to off cell proteins, the cell RAG cell expand pre-B the enter the to through the and RAG receptor this genes, several induces to degrade divisions. by turn cycle, Signaling to

produced receptor pre-T-cell stage. protein the at lymphocytes developing Receptor by T pre-T-cell is chains. of that surrogate associated the with (pre-T-cell composed chains signaling and called pair CD3 chain α), a It is pTα TCRβ α with cessation CD4 CD8, TCR expression induces Signaling and rearrangement. proliferation, of and of β receptor pre-T-cell chain through this

with used potent activity tumors. lymphoid graft A disease, synthetic treating autoimmune and in steroid and anti-inﬂammatory immunosuppressive rejection, prednisone acute

proteins C5a PREX1 GPCRs factor in activation downstream A small receptor. fMLP response or as such guanine of exchange (GEF) to G the activated of

of PrgJ Salmonella eukaryotic system III A to by bacterium inner typhimurium the rod infect type protein used cells. the component secretion detected by This is NAIP2 and NLR NLRC4. proteins protein

center nodes medullary of plasma that of of production in and antibody plasmablasts differentiation Site early focus cords lymph the reaction precedes germinal by cells. primary

that contain to other Granules such agents. lysosomes antimicrobial granules and primary neutrophils in antimicrobial defensins and correspond peptides as

that exposure immune response first response adaptive the a particular antigen. immune The primary to follows

priming. immunization See primary

A caused primary by lack immunodeficiencies genetic of that immune is function defect. a

lymphoid of organs. lymphoid primary in resting B lymphocytes follicles peripheral Aggregates Cf. lymphoid follicle. secondary

central lymphoid organs primary See organs. lymphoid

The adaptive which first the primary response. immune antigen, encounter priming a given generates with

pro-B marker rearrangement. stage development have completed surface cells A in have not B-cell displayed which yet heavy-chain in but gene cells B-lymphocyte proteins

1 part pro-form 1 caspase inﬂammasome. The of the of inactive pro-caspase is NLRP3 that

induce pro-inflammatory to Tending inﬂammation.

sequesters An actin. actin-binding protein that monomeric profilin Protozoan contain by TLR-12. sequences TLR-11 and recognized profilins

cell programmed death See apoptosis.

as infection of virus, leukoencephalopathy by a for consequence progressive example in immunotherapy. by Disease JC caused multifocal patients immunocompromised opportunisitic (PML)

requires active the which polypeptide peptide. Inactive peptide, precursor processing proteolytic propeptides a or of produce form to

properdin P. See factor

acid activities prostaglandins of inﬂammatory including on metabolism have arachidonic a as Lipid products that effects of tissues, the variety mediators. of

acid prostate as in used antigen expressed Enzyme cells Sipuleucel-T (PAP) vaccine phosphatase (Provenge). cancer rejection by tumor prostatic the

protease peptides. proteasome producing A intracellular multisubunit that large degrades proteins,

family inhibit small family of factors. A protein (PIAS) of proteins that STAT STAT activated transcription inhibitors

membrane modules proteins structures. binding sites themselves, specificity on domains, activity protein-interaction with particular tyrosines, cellular regions, phosphorylated usually enzymatic have other Protein proline-rich no for phospholipids) (such as or protein-interaction that domains, or

kinase kinase from the C-θ part in A activated serine/threonine diacylglycerol by (PKC-θ) antigen lymphocytes. as that signaling protein of receptor the pathways is

particular or groups proteins kinases add to protein threonine, amino Enzymes acid that tyrosine, at residues: phosphate serine.

Enzymes protein residues threonine, proteins serine groups phosphorylated phosphatases remove by tyrosine, phosphate protein that or on from kinases.

β5 the β2, β1, components catalytic of proteasome's proteolytic subunits Constitutive chamber.

retrovirus form integrated it host-cell inactive long periods. is the provirus a remain can transcriptionally for when where The of DNA into it genome,

See selectins. P-selectin

effector (PSGL-1) enter expressed ligand-1 numbers. Protein glycoprotein T endothelial tissues enable cells T in and may a activated P-selectin for that ligand to small cells activated by cells, all is P-selectin on

and peptide:MHC self the Hypothetical been molecule complexes to on initiate of activation. which one T-cell one molecule the containing proposed have pseudo-dimeric peptide:MHC complexes antigen surface cell, antigen-presenting peptide:MHC

ability that have to genome to retained continue normally. elements may the lost that but the functional and protein pseudogenes a transcribed Gene be are in encode

thought and also psoriasis arthropathy). by disease T cells be driven (psoriatic can but in manifested involve joints nails autoimmune to Chronic which skin,

See psoriasis. psoriatic arthropathy

See pTα receptor. pre-T-cell

severe nucleotide in purine that deficiency phosphorylase An results (PNP) combined defect enzyme immunodeficiency. of cells. PNP toxic an intracellular are which to purine causes developing of The deficiency T nucleosides, accumulation

allows potassium excessive efﬂux response ATP-activated channel purinergic inﬂammasome extracellular ion when can receptor from trigger that cells activation which to P2X7 activated, in ATP. An

types sites remains composed at of and which bacteria, of Thick liquid of neutrophils extracellular cells. is other pus typically dead of yellowish-white found some with the infection

result Capsulated infection. the bacteria formation at pus-forming in that of bacteria pus site called (pus-forming) Also bacteria. pyogenic

most intracellular found (HIN) proteins. A H other of inversion containing the in four proteins family NLR an PYHIN domain sensor domain in LRR place of cytoplasmic The in recognition of domain dsDNA. HIN functions Examples IFI16. AIM2 and are

acne pyogenic pyoderma arthritis, gangrenosum, (PAPA) and

a that mutations in protein pyrin. by caused interacts syndrome with is Autoinﬂammatory that

pus-forming See pyogenic bacteria. bacteria

of DD, CARD, pyrin domains, distinct interaction One and domains. from but DED to structurally protein TIR, related several

as such abundant pyroptosis activation. cytokines pro-inﬂammatory is produced programmed and IL-1β associated of death through cell IL-18 that form A inﬂammasome with

by can HLA murine HLA-E I the recognized from leader peptides NKG2A:CD94 human derived are Qa-1 A then peptides the of of receptor. inhibitory that modifiers proteins, determinant and and molecules class the (Qdm) be bound various class by Qa-1

viruses genetic that course different formed RNA during are of quasi-species The an by certain forms the mutation infection. of

family proteins. Rac Rho See small GTPase

SCID due perform cells DNA a to radiation-induced Severe unable and renders defect combined (RS-SCID) V(D)J in radiation-sensitive double-strand to unable recombination to repair repair breaks. pathways, which immunodeficiency

inducible class acid and proteins, protein orthologs 1) RAET1 and ligands RAE1 Several murine family for murine Ib proteins; family including are NKG2D. H60 (retinoic these MULT1, human early of are MHC

10 Ib are proteins NKG2D, A of UL16-binding family MHC for and several that ligands RAET1 proteins (ULBPs). includes class

protein first cascade kinase is the the Raf in Ras. kinase signaling in GTPase pathway, by small A and that the is activated the protein Raf–MEK1–Erk

that which RAG-2 and V(D)J Proteins form by RAG-2, the recombination. RAG-1 RAG-1, encoded recombination-activating a genes dimer initiates

apoptosis intracellular target the mammalian signaling kinase immunosuppressant rapamycin rapamycin pathways blocks drug and that for T-cell (mTOR) of of serine/threonine required involving the inhibition An expansion. sirolimus. Also called

mTORC1. See Raptor

important receptors. intracellular pathways, Ras those antigen A including roles GTPase in lymphocyte small from with signaling

of by and as kill macrophages (O2–) help after and the microbes. cells species oxygen which microbes, anion hydrogen (ROS) (H2O2), Superoxide peroxide produced reactive phagocytic and ingestion neutrophils ingested such

leading rearrangement recombination, gene an inversion having elements opposing in orientation, V(D)J by to retention. rearrangement segments the RSS of In

immature heavy receptor with of replacement on The not chain newly that cells B autoreactivity. a does self-reactive antigen light editing or confer rearranged a a of receptor chain

endosomes internalization cell-surface into molecules endocytosis receptors. to The of bound receptor-mediated

intrinsic kinases that serine/threonine Receptors have in kinase an their receptor tails. activity cytoplasmic serine/threonine

intrinsic that their tyrosine have tails. receptor tyrosine cytoplasmic kinase in an Receptors activity kinases

both sequences RAG-1:RAG-2 of the at by recognized segments are J D, recombinase. signal V, ends (RSSs) recombination one gene and sequences or that DNA and conserved heptamer nonamer of consist 12 or a pairs. They base 23 separated by element

red which pulp in nonlymphoid cells blood spleen the red down. of are area broken The

lectin Paneth An C-type mice. protein in produced in RegIIIγ of the gut cells by the family, antimicrobial

immune that and autoimmunity. CD4 T preventing cells Effector cells responses reactions T in T-cell involved inhibit regulatory are controlling and in from produced have different in cells T-cell CD4 regulatory naive is subsets periphery T Several thymus, cytokine and environments. distinguished, T notably been lineage the certain that the regulatory in that cells induced the natural differentiate the

actions regulatory cells. of tolerance Tolerance to due regulatory the T

distinct family induces the NFκB A response factor of of transcription bacteria. several antimicrobial that the expression to Relish Drosophila peptides Gram-negative member in

immune resistance eliminating at avoidance or compare strategy and tolerance. with general aimed A reducing pathogens;

and such up by macrophages antibody-coated complementor metabolic burst opsonized respiratory in change phagocytosis. have An particles, as neutrophils that oxygen-requiring taken bacteria, microorganisms. engulfed that to the It killing the leads involved of are production toxic in metabolites

a inhibit cell-autonomous the factors proteins act as Host HIV. such of in restriction to retroviruses replication that manner

in derived molecule A many vitamin Signaling acid from retinoic roles with the body. It of the immunological involved tolerance is thought to gut. the induction in be in

of The retrotranslocation endoplasmic to reticulum the cytosol. complex proteins return

viral that retrovirus intermediate transcribe viral host-cell DNA into integrates undergo the genome virus to enzyme uses the to replication. its single-stranded genome a RNA reverse that A transcriptase into

found polymerase that life the retroviruses viral transcriptase RNA DNA HIV). as retroviruses (such genomic DNA in transcribes of and into reverse is Viral the RNA-dependent cycle during

that when in A GTPase-activating activates (GAP) TSC1/2. small form, and complex by protein is its inactivated GTP-bound mTOR GTPase Rheb a

antibodies by with rheumatic fever some by Disease Streptococcus species. elicited infection caused antigens. joint, cross-react with heart antibodies These and kidney,

is (RA) probably arthritis autoimmune an response. A to rheumatoid inﬂammatory due common joint disease that

first the of individuals. is found in anti-IgG which class with IgM identified rheumatoid antibody An factor but in patients also healthy arthritis, rheumatoid

Rho GTPase family small proteins. Rho See

the various small GTPase members in Rho actin signaling family receptors. family proteins GTPase through cytoskeleton to response small that regulate Several distinct Cdc42. and Rac, Examples: Rho,

See mTORC2. Rictor

gene acid-inducible RIG-I-like I) receptors (retinoic (RLRs). See RIG-I

carboxy of family RNA. detection intracellular forms A of viral viral RIG-I-like a helicase-like receptors sensors use RNA terminal in (RLRs) of small that domain various These signal to through immunity. MAVS activate antiviral and include MDA-5, LGP2. Examples RIG-I,

activate serine-threonine proteins signaling A factor. the in functions NOD CARD domain NFκB kinase transcription that containing to RIP2 by

involved RIG-I in signaling by MAVS. and ubiquitin MDA-5 Riplet ligase for E3 activation An the of

used lymphoma. non-Hodgkin's treatment in antibody B to rituximab cells eliminate to of chimeric A CD20

switch formed immunoglobulin double the gene RNA displaces the nontemplate the R-loops transcribed helix in at strand constant-region A regions structure when of cluster. DNA switch are promote to recombination. R-loops class thought

processing RNA. exosome A in RNA of involved complex editing and multisubunit

JAK2 of inhibitor ruxolitinib JAK1 and approved myelofibrosis. An for treatment of

non-activated tissues which gradient promotes chemotactic the into chemotactic sphingosine of the phospholipid, that binds lymphatics efferent of G S1PR1 A expressed on lymphocytes secondary that forms lymphocytes receptor out 1-phosphate, blood. circulating and protein-coupled a egress the lymphoid CD69. also See

SAP lymphocyte molecule). (signaling involved adaptor protein) An signaling protein in SLAM activation intracellular (SLAM-associated by lymphoproliferative syndrome. (XLP) Inactivating X-linked mutations cause in gene this

with multiple signaling specific scaffolds into proteins a proteins bring Adaptor-type binding together which functional sites, complex.

blood. them cells ligands, and Receptors the components, as receptors such bind from cell-wall other remove scavenger bacterial that on macrophages and numerous to liver Kupffer rich particularly scavenger the receptors. in in are cells The and MARCO. SR-A II, SR-A Includes I,

severe causes scid Mutation in that combined mice immunodeficiency. repair It of eventually to to DNA-PK. be found the DNA protein mutation due was

combined severe immunodeficiency. SCID See

IgE-mediated antigens, allergic occurring conjunctivitis rhinoconjunctivitis or by to example exposure weed pollens. allergic grass seasonal for and caused specific rhinitis seasonally called hay Commonly fever.

A peptides ER endoplasmic into complex be protein the Sec61 pore multisubunit that from in the cytoplasm. and reticulum allows resides translocated lumen membrane the to the of transmembrane

amplify molecules response as and signal are signal; carry cell. (such Small next in they messengers stage produced to or that to ions second the act the a to within the Ca2+) it messengers act to activities generally of and enzymes. Second the modifying binding by

certain secondary of Type granules in that antimicrobial stores peptides. granule neutrophils

immune exposure secondary occurs immune second The antigen. a in response an that response to response to the with comparison sooner class-switched In of produces after greater starts exposure, it antibodies. produces primary levels antibody, and response, is by It the lymphocytes. generated reactivation of memory

given immunization or time injection of second antigen, some booster the an initial secondary immunization. A after a secondary stimulates response. It immune

immune in function (e.g., (e.g., of leukemia), Deficiencies consequence other HIV infection), a malnutrition, infection immunodeficiencies diseases are that etc.. secondary

adaptive a A containing lymphoid secondary proliferating ongoing of follicle cells activated response. germinal during follicle an B immune center

lymphoid peripheral organs See secondary organs. lymphoid

lymphoid lymphoid organs. See tissues peripheral secondary

Fragment cleavage secretory epithelial IgA that polymeric component after across receptor immunoglobulin cells. after of remains secreted attached transport and is the (SC) to

IgA Polymeric secretory chain antibody and dimeric) J (mainly IgA secretory containing bound component. (SIgA) It most in the human secretions. form of immunoglobulin predominant is

phospholipase by A2 Paneth secreted tears present and the Antimicrobial and also the enzyme of secretory gut. cells in saliva

Referring Gram-positive commensal and rodents to (SFB) of the IgA Clostridiaceae bacteria filamentous of that and species responses. TH17 members and to intestinal segmented family adhere wall species induce other Firmicute that the several

mucin-like and bind selectins leukocytes glycoproteins on to features. of molecules with sugar Family endothelial that cells specific moieties cell-adhesion on

tissues antigens usually an an on of The response antigens case autoimmunity. in except the self is not individual, immune made of the potential against which

own to self-tolerance response The make the failure an antigens. against body’s immune

first by on made acute to allergen. individuals sensitization exposure immune an adaptive susceptible response The allergen these reaction. an allergic to In exposure will individuals, of some provoke subsequent the

who IgE who initial describes encounter an environmental cells. has antigen B and manifests allergy, In individual with an made an IgE-producing response on sensitized memory response. an can Subsequent allergen exposure allergic elicit

Bacterial infection sepsis of bloodstream. the This is very frequently condition. a serious fatal and

of shock bacteria. Systemic reaction that Gram-negative with can septic shock endotoxin-producing follow infection bloodstream the It by other cytokines. and caused systemic TNF-α is release of the Also shock. endotoxic called

or acids of shared nucleotides sequence genes related often A by have proteins pattern different that amino functions. motif or

proteases, inhibitor specific that of (serpin) proteins protease those to originally proteases. various inhibit referring serine Class to serine

infecting phase first an of the agent The antibodies in when detectable infection are the seroconversion against blood.

or specific of species serotypes a strains same be the strain can other pathogen, that bacteria, by given to distinguished other antibodies. of from Name

most of the amounts hypersensitivity sickness immunological as by of of penicillin). injection serum drugs injection response seen usually serum originally foreign to A large reaction usually therapeutic in (now such the evoked self-limiting kidneys. the tissues, caused of the complexes formation formed antigen in the against the of and which become by deposited especially it, antibodies immune is the It

severe both are deficiency if (antibody) which immunodeficiency fatal (SCID) responses not (due treated. to B-cell various immune it T-cell and combined in Type lacking; is causes) of

which count (SCN) low. severe inherited congenital neutrophil neutropenia the condition extremely persistently in An is 21 to to contrast absent, time in from near neutropenia, days. very numbers cycle neutrophil This low cyclic approximate with in of or normal is an ﬂuctuate which

homology tyrosine See (Src domain SH2 protein Src-family 2) kinases.

rates under of extensions endothelium maintain shear—enabled attached ﬂow—or by capacity the to plasma membrane to neutrophils vascular The slings. rolling shear-resistant specialized called of high

shingles had is caused later chickenpox) that reactivated a zoster Disease (the chickenpox. who virus in virus causes person life herpes when has in

removes SH2-containing that PIP2. to (SH2-containing inositol produce An the phosphatase phosphate phosphatase) inositol PIP3 SHIP from

actions the circulatory collapse The fatal potentially such as by TNF-α. systemic of cytokines caused shock

phosphatase. phosphatase) An SHP protein (SH2-containing SH2-containing

the in formed joint DNA recombination of noncoding RSSs during V(D)J joint by signal The recombination. Cf. joint. coding

secretory the pathway. sequence peptide short peptide for into proteins directing responsible N-terminal synthesized The signal newly

activators (JAK) Janus of family. kinase (STATs) transcription and transducers See signal

configuration substrates. of modifications, ubiquitination, facilitates signaling and proteins that or scaffold binding various their such phosphorylation by A enzymes as signaling and

antibody by that conventional Referring or lack chain the single-chain shark in present IgGs antibodies. heavy-chain-only species light the to camelids produced

in individuals. (SNPs) between single the differ genome polymorphisms that single-nucleotide Positions by a base

or single-positive co-receptor, either thymocytes expresses that T the the A mature cell not but CD4 CD8 both.

in the parts present it is this molecular TLR-8, a when a normal RNA for life to Normally cycle. nucleus as TLR-7, as ligand TLR-9 single-stranded form during of serves and and endosomes, cytoplasm, viral confined (ssRNA)

patient's by immunotherapy phosphatase used dendritic combined derived cancer a from antigen sipuleucel-T presented that acid cells rejection monocytes. to prostate prostatic as a tumor (Provenge) Cell-based treat

rapamycin. See sirolimus

exocrine glands, the glands which mouth, the are lacrimal immune of damaged of the An the system. Sjögren’s salivary by in syndrome autoimmune disease eyes glands particularly and eyes dry in mouth. results and This

by of expressed which a dendritic development T of transmembrane and member cell. epidermal cells type T A required stromal superfamily the γ:δ are keratinocytes for Skint-1 immunoglobulin cells, that thymic is

of Ly9, 2B4, activation CRACC. SLAM, includes molecule) receptors CD84, lymphocyte lymphocytes, Ly106, mediate between cell-surface that and related family adhesion (signaling SLAM that A

rolling. shear-resistant slings See

proteins in signaling A intracellular that protein involved recruits SLP-65 the cells antigen receptor. pathway from in the B scaffold BLNK. called Also

lymphocytes. pathway in SLP-76 signaling the involved scaffold protein in antigen-receptor A

signaling act as such molecules transmembrane Ras, small intracellular proteins, G proteins G as events. signaling Single-subunit of that downstream many GTPases. called Also small

in which and the small development Stage in gene cell after pre-B commences. proliferation pre-B cell immediately cell ceases B-cell rearrangement large light-chain

number cells. of Gerenal diversified small in genes hypotheses that that repertoire immunoglobulin diversification theories formed V was a proposing somatic somatic the from Cf. theory. germline

somatic recombination distinguish somatic that gamete DNA takes (to place recombination and it DNA place from formation). meiosis during takes the in recombination that cells

of somatic The genes treat somatic cells into introduction therapy to gene functional disease.

somatic antigen V-region of DNA of a rearranged with bind immunoglobulins, produce Mutations higher that variant hypermutation in which genes affinity. some immunoglobulin These and cells inherited affect transmission. not germline mutations somatic through are only

rule. 12/23 See spacer

containing sphingolipids (2-amino4-octadecene-1,3-diole), A an with lipid chain. unsaturated class membrane amino sphingosine alcohol 18-hydrocarbon of

lymph cells the A controls egress T nodes. chemotactic of phospholipid 1-phosphate (S1P) activity that sphingosine from with

a lymphocytes regulates from into G-protein-coupled by naive (S1P1) blood mediator sphingosine that receptor receptor including A 1-phosphate, the of the sphingosine trafficking activated the tissues lipid blood. 1-phosphate physiologic several in processes,

in cells delivered to involved lymphoid spleen side containing organ antigens cavity the peritoneal pulp, a white to the cells, pulp senescent upper a the of left the spleen An respond and blood in of by blood. removing that red

MAC Plasma (vitronectin) S-protein protein host as incompletely complexes, preventing membranes. formed bystander complement binds damage such to C5b67, that

factor cells its transcription in polymerase associatioin B with elongation AID of in switching isotype that RNA enable A functions recruitment Spt5 required the genome. to targets in to for

II receptors. SR-A scavenger See SR-A I,

by SH3). characterized and protein kinases (SH1, tyrosine kinases protein protein domains Src-family tyrosine SH2, Receptor-associated Src-homology domain the can the bind with SH3 interact phosphotyrosine can SH2 domain kinase, residues, contains and SH1 other the The proline-rich domain proteins. in regions and antigen they are T signals cells In cells involved B from relaying the in receptor.

staphylococcal the complement C3 alternative classical inhibits destruction of evasion that protein by Staphylococcal and the the of (SCIN) inhibitor promoting complement. activity convertases,

Vβ receptors, of by staphylococci, some which and class II to molecules T-cell binding T staphylococcal also the many cause superantigens. food cells toxins stimulate produced Secreted and certain (SEs) as poisoning domain acting MHC enterotoxins by

activation. Staphylococcal (Spa) the preventing that A binding staphylococcal of protein protein antibody with blocks thereby the region Fc complement C1,

its to complement that cleaves surface, thereby activation. immunoglobulins protease Staphylococcal bound preventing staphylokinase

seven activated and (signal family many transducers growth activators STAT factors A by factor transcription) receptors. of cytokine and transcription of

See STAT3 STAT.

STAT6 STAT. See

reductase Drug cholesterol. inhibitors to of lower used statins HMG-CoA

sterile similar due ischemia, infection. immune many metabolic injury Damage or to to trauma, features tissues bearing autoimmunity, to stress,

eliminates pathogen. immune that An completely sterilizing immunity a response

STIM1 the that acts endoplasmic Ca2+ reticulum. a in sensor protein A as transmembrane of When depleted endoplasmic Ca2+ channels. CRAC is activated plasma reticulum, membrane and is induces from the opening STIM1

sensing functions protein in anchored dimeric intracellular interferon (stimulator ER STING the that infection. the cytoplasm for complex to of genes) in A membrane di-nucleotides induce IRF3 phosphorylates genes. TBK1, is transcription of interferon cyclic type by to I activated to It specific which activate

dysregulated self. stress-induced See self

and for organs stromal nonlymphoid The lymphoid provide and survival, peripheral development, in central and signals cells cell-bound migration. lymphocyte cells soluble that required

capture subcapsular which from in (SCS) draining phagocytes, of nodes in sinus lined lymph entry The site and opsonized tissues. lymphatic antigens macrophages including by particulate subcapsular

sulfated neutrophils, on the the proteins, surface binds as cells, tetrasaccharide that endothelium. to carbohydrate cell mediate such the surface sialyl-LewisX A of it many sulfated with interactions structure attached and molecules E-selectin P-selectin

(SOD) dismutase the enzyme ion into further metabolites. An substrate phagolysosome peroxide, superoxide hydrogen in that superoxide the for converts reactive antimicrobial produced a

protein signaling (SOCS) that suppressor by activated JAK cytokine Regulatory signaling with receptors. inhibit interacts kinases to of

that are Organized of (SMAC) which between and cell activation ligand-bound T signaling at with adhesion molecules. supramolecular and antigen a structure cell-surface target forms in cell, point the contact the co-localized its complex other receptors known supramolecular Also adhesion as complex.

immunoglobulin on that receptor as B the antigen immunoglobulin membrane-bound surface acts (sIg) The cells.

and (SP-A epithelial the help surfactant against lung of Acute-phase A the SP-D) D surfaces proteins protect that proteins infection. and

and heavy pre-B λ5, of up Igβ a and subunits, for pre-B-cell subunits A signaling that cells, protein light surrogate chain chain VpreB and can and in differentiation. signals full-length with Igα immunoglobulin two the made pair

C-region Cδ), positions heavy-chain located several function between and regions, JH repeated of recombination. of Genomic the hundreds in sequences (except length class upstream Cμ equivalent the other or in regions in switch each, region containing that switch G-rich genes genes, kilobases

signaling B-cell Syk that from cells tyrosine pathway in B cytoplasmic kinase found acts the A receptor. the in antigen

symbiotic typically diverse between species, agents, two Relationship benefits confers that both. to

sympathetic the that one is other occurs eye in damaged. Autoimmune ophthalmia eye after response

syngeneic identical graft A individuals. two graft between genetically is self. as accepted It

immune sometimes given to and the from immune the mucosal system to lymph system. them Name spleen distinguish systemic nodes

erythematosus acids blood immune the damage RNA, against in complexes small lupus that An in and proteins disease autoimmune especially autoantibodies kidney. vessels, associated which (SLE) systemic with DNA, nucleic form

lymphocytes of T a activated by class and MHC T10, cells. recognized by T22 expressed Murine genes Ib γ:δ subset

cell. T T cells) lymphocytes (T See

TAB2 complex adaptor An that polyubiquitin K63 linked chains. binds TAB1, phosphorylates TAB1/2 to IKKα. such complex TAK1, substrates TAK1 it as with targeting signaling where scaffolds

form of the soluble cleavage form for release responsible allowing membrane-associated TACE enzyme) can into (TNF-α-converting that A the systemic circulation. of enter protease cytokine its TNF-α,

pathway. on NFκB canonical B BAFF for activates receptor TACI A cells expressed the that

by and NFAT. inactivates activation tacrolimus blocking FKBPs drug that of polypeptide transcription factor immunosuppressant calcineurin, An cells thus T the binds inhibiting FK506. Also called

phosphorylation kinase by complex, the targets and IRAK activates activated such IKKβ TAK1 that by downstream MAPKs. serine-threonine as and A is that

vascular the neutrophils allow to in An in to integrins, talin and as the intracellular involved LFA-1, migration, linkage across diapedesis of activated cytoskeleton the changes of as cellular the such protein in endothelium. such motility

TAP2 Transporters associated with antigen processing. TAP1, where from I a of the are reticulum class heterodimeric that cassette molecules. MHC proteins ATP-binding endoplasmic the cytosol into endoplasmic the transported they the with in which complex lumen associate membrane, form through peptides short TAP-1:TAP-2 reticulum,

protein. TAP-associated tapasin MHC this cell MHC in class A cell surface. molecules the of key molecules; only a assembly on protein I class in has the deficient I unstable molecule

associated A in with but types most cell many Tbet and typically factor TH1 transcription ILC1 function. immune active

A IRF3 (TANK-binding signaling TLR-3 kinase) kinase and phosphorylate activate serving serine-threonine by interferon TBK1 gene for and activated I MAVS during of induction type expression. and to

the two responses, lymphocyte the T for of lymphocytes cell, immune the responsible T adaptive being of B antigen-specific other cells. One types

adaptive for the reactions. responsible cell-mediated are immune T cells bone the the most thymus. They marrow in their undergo but in development originate of antigen The T T-cell on receptor molecules variable cells peptide to bound surfaces. is antigen a and recognizes receptor of called complex highly on cell the MHC There T γ:δ of carrying cells: are carrying α:β receptors. those lineages main and those two receptors perform acting of always manner. by cell a in an T antigen-specific response, functions variety an in another interacting cells Effector immune with kill viruses and some other T with and infected produce activate intracellular macrophages, help B antibody, pathogens. cells Some cells cells some

receptor. T-cell T-cell antigen See receptor

cells Regions in are T-cell peripheral and that T of naive the areas organs are enriched follicles. lymphoid from distinct initiated. are They are adaptive responses which at immune the sites

subsets transcriptional or underpin those fixed developmental of in T-cell in T irreversibly Flexibility the function plasticity cells networks functions. that are their effector CD4 not the programming T-cell such that

receptor lymphocytes. on (TCR) antigen The for cell-surface T-cell T receptor ζ β function. consists a disulfide-linked in invariant which the variable α have of and chains complex signaling and of the a a highly with CD3 proteins, heterodimer It receptor are often this T carrying called cells of cells. α:βT type chains An of δ γ with and a receptor cells. subset CD3 expressed T made up on variable and of is ζ alternative

T-cell two chains receptor. α:β (TCRβ) The β α of (TCRα) the T-cell and receptor

the chromosome developing have during transiently recombination circles thymus. in thymoctytes excision fragments DNA from V(D)J are that the receptor (TRECs) recently cells that T T-cell left Circular in retained excised

areas. T-cell T-cell zones See

a with combining (Herceptin) drug used recurrent treated An conjugate. trastuzumab metastatic T-DM1 cancer antibody-drug trastuzumab breast conjugate different treat previously to with mertansine

terminal See deoxynucleotidyl transferase. TdT

TEPs See thioester-containing proteins.

during receptor into N-nucleotides deoxynucleotidyl (TdT) genes gene segments Enzyme V-region inserts transferase assembly. immunoglobulin nontemplated terminal between that the in T-cell and junctions their

injection provoked of response third antigen. responses immune same tertiary the immune by Adaptive a stronger It in and is response. onset than more primary rapid the

effector T antibody cells lymphoid in help production helper An and found provides (TFH) for B follicular follicles switching. T that class cell to cell

by produce. effector characterized subset TH1 of cytokines T CD4 cells the A they mainly B but to macrophages antibody. in produce They are help can cells also activating stimulate involved

cytokines they cells by produce. the subset effector are of CD4 that T A TH2 characterized CD4 are are and cells helper involved They stimulating T antibody, called often to B in produce cells.

production T are of A of CD4 TH17 subset the cells by cytokine IL-17. characterized that of neutrophils infection. help They recruit to sites

C3 to and are innate in have are thioester-containing found in some function complement that proteins component insects immunity. Homologs insect thought of

protein thioredoxininteracting (TXNIP). to set A of sensor proteins normally bound thioredoxin (TRX) TXNIP, mediate Oxidative thioredoxin stress causes actions. can downstream which to release

thioredoxin. (TXNIP) protein thioredoxin-interacting See

the thymus. Surgical of removal thymectomy

which from The tissue embryogenesis. anlage stroma during the develops thymic thymic

progenitor which in rearrange cortical thymic (thymocytes) lobule of thymic receptor selection their T-cell especially thymic each region and positive epithelial thymic on outer The thymic proliferate, cells undergo cells. selection, cortex genes,

development. the connective The cells stroma thymus the tissue thymic that form of and for T-cell essential epithelial microenvironment

lymphopoietin. (TSLP) stromal lymphopoietin thymic stroma-derived Thymic to the embryonic A in thought in development promoting be liver. cytokine B-cell involved type in its immune cells. epithelial promotes infections, and macrophages, and produced responses TH2 It also by is actions 2 to through response ILC2s, cells mucosal on helminthic

are in thymocytes when thymus. they cells T Developing the The protective majority T-cell unable responses. not are are mount mature and to functionally

form associates with in 2i 5t, replaces a and unique β composed of 1i and chamber. β catalytic β thymoproteasome β that the subunit, of Specialized proteasome 5i (LMP7) the

part central middle thymus the situated breastbone. organ, in the the A of which of the T develop, behind chest, cells in lymphoid just upper

antigens (TD) T elicit only that cells. in Antigens thymus-dependent individuals that responses have

without T antigens involvement (TI) that elicit of can thymus-independent cells. antibody production the Antigens TI activating antigens: There intrinsic and two antigens, have the which TI-1 which activate B-cell of activity, TI-2 by antigens, the types B are cells